So one of the things that's not very commonly discussed with deadwood is using the deadwood to estimate the age of the tree. A lot of times people develop these big large broad statements about trees in this area grow a millimeter a year because of the lack of rainfall but there's no possible way to actually say in this area every single tree grows a millimeter a year because a lot of that water delivery is based on how much soil is in the pocket that these trees are growing in in the Rockies, how much water is being fed to them via the contours of the rock, how much shelter do they have from intense exposure in the Sun and the wind and the elements that would be removing moisture from them. And so as opposed to using that rainfall as a guesstimate which gives us a very superficial and I would say oftentimes false concept of age, the best thing that I've found to estimate age and the most accurate thing that I've found to estimate age is the actual physical deterioration of the deadwood itself. So I'm going to go ahead and talk a little bit more about the deadwood and I'm going to go ahead and talk a little bit more about the deadwood and now we call this tree baby kraken it's been a very highly prized tree at Mirai now we call this tree baby kraken it's been a very highly prized tree at Mirai ever since it was brought here and this tree to my estimation is easily one of the top three oldest trees in the garden if not the singular oldest tree that we have here to date. And the reason that I say that is because you're seeing more deterioration, more desiccation, more exposure of the grains and you're seeing a more core remnant of the original vascular tissue that represented the full-size tree than almost any other tree in the garden. Now when I talk about that core remnant the original tree was probably somewhere around this big around and when we start to get into the very interior tissue you're seeing a very small amount of vascular system here in a very fine grain that isn't nearly as fine in other portions of the tree. What this is showing you is this is showing you those very first years of life where this tree was initially starting in that small little rock pocket where a little bit of dirt accumulated and a seed germinated and the conditions were just hospitable enough to allow life to exist but not thrive. And so when we say this was the core I'm assuming that the original trunk for this tree was actually somewhere over here. I'm assuming that the original apex and continuation of the trunk went out this way and I'm assuming that this is actually probably more like a branch or an offshoot of that original trunk that's still left and existing. So when we see this and we start to identify all of these pieces here it again is another branch or some form of existing tissue from this original core. You can see how that vascular system is very very small very fine very fine grain that shows that beginning of life as well. This is an extremely extremely old tree and the size is not representative of the age. That desiccation and that remnant that origin of that life is the best indicator on junipers to start to guesstimate. If I had to make a safe assumption I'm gonna estimate this tree at over a thousand years old. If I had to make a safe assumption I'm gonna estimate this tree at over a thousand years old. At least 800 years old possibly maxing out at somewhere between 12 and 1500 years old and I don't know that you could develop an estimate any closer to that because the original tissue that forms the core and the exterior is no longer present on this tree. 
