Finally the time has come to come back to our air layers that we've done over the previous two years. We tried an American hornbeam air layer, we revisited that with a piece of feature content where we analyzed the roots that were produced and recognized we could still improve upon that air layer and further enhance the quality and the success of the operation. This spring as the buds swelled and were ready to push we were finally able to separate it with a really impressive root base and a tremendous amount of roots established to allow that tree to be successful. In addition to that we come back to the blue rug juniper which is a part of our nursery stock series in the very beginnings of Mirai Live. This is a tree that had little potential in the nursery and we wanted to show what could be done with a little bit of creativity applied to nursery stock to maximize its quality as bonsai. It's produced a plentiful quantity of roots and we get to separate it now at this ideal time of year seeing the tree become active and ready for the separation process. Okay revisiting this tree, I'm going to go ahead and show you what we're going to do. So this is a tree that was planted in the American hornbeam air layer that we did two years ago. Last year we came back and took a look at how successful the initial air layer was and what we had noticed is although we had produced roots the parent roots of the plant were still functioning and carrying a large degree of the foliar load in terms of transport of moisture but beyond that we had sort of three select areas that had formed roots in the upper air layered section. We wanted to try and expand that. Now inside of this system I chose to take a little bit of a different route with this air layer. We re-wounded that section, went deeper into the vascular tissue and I left it exposed over the course of last season's growing period. In doing so, I wanted to be sure that the tissue dried out but I also wanted to just take a moment to do a little bit of an experiment and see how the callus formation would occur on this tree. And there's a lot of interesting things to note about how this project has panned out. Number one and the first thing that I want to note foremost in terms of that operation. The parent root system is now in extremely poor condition, very minimal amount of roots being produced down there this spring, and you see that the native root mass is virtually falling apart, no longer transporting water and supporting the tree. This is a very major step towards understanding that we can successfully separate this air layer and know that it's leaning on the new layered roots to supply the foliar mass with the moisture it needs to exist after the separation. Number two, we can track the formation of that scar tissue and notice that buttress that's formed in this area where we perform that air layer has given us a beautiful spread, but beyond that, even though we still only have this three structural areas that produce roots from the air layer, we've got all of this scar tissue and these really sharp points here along the scar tissue, which are actually root nodes where new roots are set up to emerge. When we eventually submerge this into a soil system and transition over to the air-layered section of the tree. Once we make this separation, we'll tease apart these roots, we'll re-wound that callus one more time, and then we'll allow that callus formation to turn into roots and give us that root spread, 360 degrees around the base that we were striving for when we did that operation last season and saw what we didn't necessarily think was a good air layer capable of supporting the tree. This has been a really easy process, and we're going to continue to do that. This is a really, really interesting project. I'm excited that we see the tree has transitioned. It's leaning on the new air-layered system, and it's shed the old parent system. Getting to separate it today is the beginning of this tree's new future. Let's go ahead and make the cut, and we'll break it down and get it re-potted. Let's go ahead and get just a solid piece of this. I just want to get this out of the way in the first place. We're going to go ahead and do a piece in here to protect so I don't pop through. Perfect indication. Boom. Save the roots, save the roots. Okay, one of the things to note in that separation process is I had inserted a chopstick with the hard side of the bamboo facing towards the trunk. I just broke off that lower piece, but I had inserted this at that point where my blade was going to come through that trunk. This is very hard to handle, so I'm not going to do the same thing. Now put this in a flat, straight, hollow section on the tip of the trunk. I'd better glue it in, and we'll make sure that we get a nice and flat lip of the twig. I'm going to cut this off right here. Let's go ahead and get this out of the way in the first place. through that trunk this is very hard wood it's very difficult to sort of put that pressure on the saw and stop it right when it goes through and the last thing i wanted to do was to go straight through the root system i just worked so hard to build it hit this chopstick and it stopped right when it hit the chopstick i was able to have an indicator really good to have those kinds of signs that you can trust and lean on when doing an operation like this and trying to prevent damage now that we've officially gotten through the entirety of the trunk you can see that the roots have actually entered the native soil of the original root system we're going to come back and we're going to tease out this native root system try to save as many of the roots that we can but interestingly because we used akadama the fineness of this root system is so compact and compressed we can handle it exactly as we would any other deciduous root system do some work to spread these out we'll come back and re-wound that callus to get root production moving forward in its new container we'll anchor it with that flush cut right up against that callus and then put that part back in and take that root and just keep filling that little gunk in there and this tree has a bright future as a bonsai. The way that we handle any type of air layer separation in terms of anchoring it into the container really hinges on what the tree is giving us in terms of its established root system. In the case of the hornbeam, in order to hold that position, and based on the fact that the new roots were still very thin and very fragile, we chose to mount a block to the bottom of the tree and actually drill into the block with screws to tie that block down. That really nice, clean cut that establishes the angle when we separate that hornbeam from its parent material holds that angle when we mount that square block of untreated wood to the base of that and creates a great anchor strategy for us to be able to facilitate stability in the container and establishment of that new root system. When we transition to the separation of the blue rug juniper, we're presented with an entirely different set of circumstances that we have to adapt to, to make sure that we make the best possible decisions and set that tree up for success. In the blue rug juniper, note the different techniques that are applied, and note the nuances that we utilize to really transition that tree from being an air layer to actually being an established bonsai on its own roots. The time has come now for the blue rug juniper to finally be separated. We've got a copious quantity of roots that have accumulated over the past two years in this plastic bag that we utilize moss to facilitate that balance of water and oxygen. We see a good, strong, healthy growth, and the key to the timing for this separation is as the buds are swelling and the tree becomes metabolically active. We wanna make sure that we actually have the tree photosynthesizing and taking those actions that can compartmentalize the separation of the cut, stimulating the root activity and allowing this tree to smoothly transition from the air layered portion into the production of its own roots and establishing itself inside of the bonsai container. Now, when we separate an air layer from the parent material where the roots have formed and connect with that original root base, we wanna try and separate it as close to those new roots as possible, and we wanna try to make that cut at that separation area as close to the angle that we're gonna be planting the tree up against that new root formation as we can possibly achieve. This means we don't have to go back in and keep trying to chew away that material. We get a nice, clean cut. We use that as the foundation for planting the tree in the new pot, and it sets us up for less work over the course of time to maximize that tree's capacity with that expansive root base and that new presence of those radial roots from the air layering process. We're gonna go ahead and pull away the plastic, take a look at how much we can tease those roots up and away from that site where the layer took place, and then we'll go about the strategy of cutting and separating to establish that angle and set ourselves up for success. Let's just take a look real quick and see how well we did with that radial distribution of roots on the juniper. Wow, wow, holy cow, look at that. So there's roots just built up at that point where the greatest amount of moisture accumulated at the bottom of that plastic bag, probably where the water was sort of accumulating. And as I look at the upper surface, I even have roots that were crawling into the sphagnum that was being pushed up and out of the bag and displaced by this root growth. Fascinating to see how well this air layer has done. And I'm really, really excited to tease these away. Now, when I start to tease these away, I've gotta be careful because these are still very soft roots. We've given it two years to establish some really strong connections and allow those roots to beef up so that we're not pushing the degree of success when we make this cut. If we do it too early, even if there are roots present, a lot of times those roots haven't established a firm vascular connection, they're still very soft, and we run the risk of breaking them off. That extra time really pays off, patience pays off, and now seeing the foliar mass producing flowers, producing growth tips, this is my indication that I'm at the correct time of year to be able to help this tree transition, not too early, metabolically active, not too late with a tremendous amount of new growth demanding that presence of those roots. We're right at that moment where we can go ahead and separate and feel confident. I'm just gonna slowly tease these away and see if I can get back to that base so that I can establish that cut that allows me to put this in the most shallow container to maximize this raft-style form that we've created. Wow, wow. It's very common in an air layer where we've got this very rich organic component of the sphagnum moss to have these water-loving grasses start to penetrate and occupy that root environment. Now we've done our best to remove these as much as we can, but if we start to pull them out, we really start to tear some of the roots out that are being developed around the juniper. At this time, when we come back to do this operation, we want to try to remove these fully from that system so they don't set up in the container and form a big, massive, expansive system that competes with the tree for water and nutrients. I'll be trying to tease those out as I feel through this process, but just in scraping away that surface layer of moss, I see this beautiful network of really fine feeder roots. This is exactly what I would ever do. what I would hope to see, maybe the best actual response to an air layer that I've gotten yet out of an air layering operation. So as we reduce this root mass we have to keep in mind what we're trying to accomplish. I'm trying to pull this upper surface layer down to that point where the callus formed around that air layered section and gives me that buttress. The worst thing we could do is leave this as a big mass of moss, have all of those roots grow up and around that area, entangle that trunk and lose that buttress in that base forever. Ultimately because we've left this for two years and allowed so many roots to establish themselves and we see that quantity of roots present, I'm handling this much like I would handle a normal repot in an established bonsai container where I'm pulling back the surface I am going to be cutting in and out of the�laria. some roots strategically and I'm really going to be opening the door to exposing that base. We can see and this is very typical of juniper that some roots have formed from some of these junctions up around the trunk actually budded from the trunk itself and not from the air layered location and they've moved down into the container and started to create this fine root system. These roots probably will not stay on but we want to positively identify that we have roots coming from that callus formation of the air layer before we remove these coming from the trunk. It's super intense. Because of the prevalence of roots and I honestly I've never experienced this before to this degree I'm literally having to break through that matted amount of roots as if it were grown in a container I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to trim off all of the unnecessary parts of the parent material and I'm going to go ahead and cut this with a fairly long piece piece of trunk so that I have a solid mass to grab to once I get through that root system. At least that'll bring it down to a point where I can work on this and have a little bit of mobility. So I'm going to go ahead and make these severing cuts now. And use some of this as that stability. I want to leave myself enough length that I have that stability to grab to when I come back to make that clean cut. Ultimately, making that cut, I wanted to use this. We're just going to change our operation to adapt to the immense amount of roots that we're dealing with. All right, it begins. Now we're starting to part the ways. You can see how I've gotten this nice and separated. It's hanging on to those roots that formed around the layer. They're thick enough to touch the roots. I'm going to and I'm just going to leave that that they can hold. I'm not worried about damaging them because of the time frame. I'm having to be quite strong and aggressive to get through all of this but this is exactly what we want with an air layer. We don't want to have to tread with such delicacy. We want to make sure those roots really establish before we separate. Now you can see why. One of the reasons that an air layer would create a piece of material that's not necessarily as high quality is because we try to separate it too soon. It either doesn't thrive, portions of the tree die, or the roots are so delicate that we don't have that connection point that we need for them to really survive that operation. This is definitely not the case here. There it is. There's our root mass. Okay here's our angle. Here's those roots flared up and we're just starting to get to that point where the layer took. I can feel it with my fingers underneath the moss. I know that I'm really really close and I'm getting into that shallow container that's going to maximize the aesthetic of the tree. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to work a little bit harder to lift those up. I want to be very careful now because I have reduced a lot of the integrity of the root mass. They're strong, they're established, but still very capable of being damaged. Once I get these flattened out to a degree that I can get a nice clean close cut I'm going to go ahead and have somebody come in and help me while I make that concise cut to set that planting angle at that cut and establish my ability to really cultivate this tree with a lot of quality moving forward. Perfection. Perfection. In the creation of that cut when we separate the air layered piece from its parent material we really want to be sure that we get that angle of the cut dialed in so that that flat section and the bottom of the trunk is capable of sitting on the bottom of the container and establishing that planting angle. In order to do this we want to make sure that cut is as close to the new roots that have formed as possible and sometimes we need to use wire and tease those roots up around that air layered section to lift them up get that cut very close and get the angle that we desire. As we perform this separation of the air layered piece from the stock plant it's very critical that we make sure we touch every single point of detail and proactively head off damaging those roots that have been produced via the air layering model. This is a great illustration of all of the techniques you can apply to make sure that you maximize this critical point in the operation. Pretty close a little bit off not too bad we're leaning on the roots on the front side we can pull these roots down on the back side but we're almost in the ballpark. I feel very confident that we've just set ourselves up for success. I'm going to go through and just do a little bit of work on the roots to establish that angle that we've now cut this into. And then we'll prepare it to insert it into a container. Okay so now that I've gotten the roots work down on the top I'm just going to clean up any roots that were damaged in the process of separating this root mass from the base so that in those damaged areas I've got a nice clean cut for new rootlets to form. One of the other things that's going to lead to the success of this separation is you'll notice that the tree is extremely overgrown. I'm going to give you a little bit of a look here. I'm going to use this foliage mass to perpetuate the root growth and really fuel its occupation of a bonsai container. At this point in the operation I don't want to go any further to reducing the quantity of sphagnum that exists in the root zone but in the second repotting after it's fully occupied a bonsai container over the course of three or four years we'll come back in and we'll take out that sphagnum much like we would take out the core organic components of that intermediate soil zone underneath the trunk in a second repot of a collected tree. We'll see these roots occupy that domesticated soil. The sphagnum will come out very easy in that second repot and after that second repot we'll really have set the tree up to be its very best root system it can possibly be for its future development and evolution. Okay so now that we've gotten the roots prepared the tree's been cut and we've established the angle we now have to go about container selection. Now obviously every air layer is going to have a different style that we create via the location we choose to layer it at and the characteristics of the material that we're going to capture by the performance of that air layer. This tree was designed to be a raft and with that raft style to really maximize the presence of that elongated sort of multi-trunk crawling into that soil we generally tend to go with a shallow wide container. I can see an oval working very well for this tree however we don't have the ideal oval. We've got this beautiful rectangle from our collaborators me and Ramondi in Sylvania and this is an awesome current sort of temporary container to help the tree re-establish, give us some of that elongated aesthetic and let us build our notion of the eventual container that we would ideally like to put the tree in while the tree recovers, establishes its root system and we continue to elevate its aesthetic. I do see in the eventual future an oval container underneath this tree. It is a slender tree, it is a more delicate raft style form and the oval would much better fit and complement that style but for what we have available this rectangle is a perfect intermediate container that gives us all of the things that we want. We want to help us continue evolving the shape and design. The other aspect about treating an air layer once we've separated it is we don't typically want to put that air layer in a really deep container because those roots are already laterally growing around that air layered section moving away from that central trunk that we have to sever to separate that air layer. If we want to continue to perpetuate and promote that expansive base that an air layer gives us the opportunity to create then putting it in a shallow container that does drive that lateral separation into the air layer only furthers the improvement of that material and the establishment of an abari that really maximizes the material we're taking off of that air layered section. We're going to go ahead and prepare the container, get it set up and show you guys how to anchor the air layer without any of those thick prominent roots so that it's stable in the container and we facilitate that growth and expansion of the root system after the separation process. Okay so we've got our container prepared. Now tie down strategy for an air layer separation is just making sure that you have the same amount of root mass as you have the whatever number of roots you see here. Now when you have whatever number of roots you've got you're going to want to make sure you have enough root mass to hold it in. It's going to be very difficult because you're going to have a lot of roots and it's going to be harder and difficult to achieve because we don't have that established root system to utilize as an anchor point. Obviously our blue rug juniper here has formed a significant enough mass of roots layering method is to take a block of wood screw it to this base that we've cut and actually put screws or tie that block of wood into the container as the anchor strategy we applied this to the American hornbeam that we separated the air layer on and it worked to perfection that tree did not have near the root mass that this blue rug juniper has so because we have this root mass we're going to be using this root mass in instances where we don't have a solid significant root mass we can mount a block to the bottom of the tree that has a wider footprint that we can anchor that block itself to the container and stabilize the position of the tree I've also prepared this container with a very high central mound of soil because I've got this big flat area and I've got a lot of spacing in between all of this sphagnum and the roots that are exposed I want to make sure that I fill this region with as much soil as I can to get good root to soil contact that big high cone is going to allow me to distribute that soil mass across this abundance of roots make sure there's no air spaces good soil to root contact and set the tree up for success let's go ahead and settle this into the container tie it down and then insert the soil to set it up for success now my initial cone wasn't quite big enough even though i thought i had given just enough to be able to fill that space not quite big enough i want a slight forward orientation to this and i don't have the soil to displace to achieve that i'm going to lift this straight up i'm going to boost that cone just a little bit more right in the center set my tree back down in that same position holding this angle and i'm going to again settle to achieve that forward orientation that gives me that position that i'm striving to achieve now in order to tie this down i'm going to go ahead and cross over that mass of roots from one side of my root mass right up against the base but just below the soil line so that i cannot see that tie down we always want to hide that wire we shouldn't be visibly seeing where we tie a tree in that's a low quality of craft if i can hide that and submerge that underneath the soil i start to enhance the visual quality of my repot and set myself up to be able to enjoy this tree without seeing any of those signs in the mechanics of the repotting process tie down one is in place and now tie down two is ready however because i want that front orientation and a slight push to the front i don't want to pull down on the back side that i've been trying to boost up so before i tighten that wire i'm going to go ahead and chopstick in soil to really solidify the position of the soil and the contact in the back of the tree to make sure i maintain that forward orientation and i'm going to go ahead and cross over that mass of roots to achieve that forward orientation before i pull down i don't want to offset the angle that we've worked so hard to achieve so my first initial insertion of soils on this back side and i'm going to come back in and just do a light chop sticking to insert that underneath the root mass until i feel the tree start to experience the force of that soil once i see that happening now i can tie down and feel comfortable that i'm not going to change the position of the tree now with my two tie downs secured the back side of that root system filled with soil to prevent that movement i've got a tree that's anchored in the container clearly separated roots established to be able to give me that continued buttressing of the trunk i've just done every single thing necessary to set my air layer up for success i'll do the final insertion of soil top dress and water and i'll keep this tree in the greenhouse for a few weeks making sure that i see the new growth continue moving forward now as i insert soil into this root mass we've got to be careful of a few things we're dealing with very delicate fine roots that have occurred because of the air layering process but we also have to ensure that we get soil between those roots in order to establish that contact of soil to root and give that balance of water and oxygen that allows this tree to thrive we pulled out a lot of sphagnum moss we freed that really tight network of roots up which is necessary in order for the tree to produce roots radially instead of stay in that matted environment in that shape that that plastic bag created for the air layered roots so as i'm doing this process i'm not going to be using a lot of force and i want to be careful to not over chopstick one of the ways i set myself up for success was by having that cone that i set the tree on be big enough to occupy it with in the all of the spaces on the bottom of the root mass. Now I just need to go in and find the soft spots and the spaces where the sphagnum came out and where those roots have been separated to get that contact of soil and root and really have success. Very, very delicate chopsticking at this point, just finding those holes, finding those soft spaces in that root mass and making sure that the angle of my chopstick is getting into that at a point where if there are spaces underneath the root mass, I'm integrating soil into them. You'll notice that my chopstick is very close to the edge of the container and at a very significant angle. This is important in a shallow container and for the production of radial roots in an air layer to be sure that I'm integrating that soil properly. You'll also notice that this hand is over the top of the soil as I'm chopsticking and to some degree even applying a slight downward pressure. This ensures that I don't pull those fine roots up to the surface as I'm getting that soil underneath them. I want to integrate soil into the spaces, but I don't want to stick it under the roots and pull the roots to the surface where they're going to be susceptible to drying out. All of these techniques combine to successfully cultivate this tree after the separation process and we need to be aware of each step to really maximize the potential of that air layered piece. Now that I've detailed chopsticked in all the soil, you probably noticed me bumping both sides equally with my hands. This is a light tap on the pot with my fists, not very dangerous to damaging the container, but a little bit more of a bump to just settle things around the root system and make sure we've got that contact in place. That spongy root system is an interesting sensation in the chopsticking process. We really have to adapt and learn how to feel that out when we're integrating that soil via the chopsticking method. I've got soil. That soil thoroughly integrated, I'm going to go ahead and top dress my surface of the soil to stabilize that soil, make sure that I facilitate even moisture distribution and the occupation of roots throughout the container. Thoroughly water this tree in and again, I'm going to put it in the greenhouse safe from wind, safe from intense sun until I see the tree give me indications that new root growth is continuing to occur with the experience that the tree has had today. I have a very high level of confidence that this tree will continue moving forward without a hiccup. I can't wait to get back to the point where it grows, that growth hardens off, it re-establishes that root system and we can further dial in and refine the canopy of this tree to move it forward as a bonsai. One last thing I want to talk about is the root system. I'm going to go ahead and show you a little bit more of the root system and then I'm going to go ahead and show you a little bit more of the root system and then I'm going to go ahead and show you a little bit more of the root system. One last thing to be aware of on air layering. When we put that air layer into the container, it's very difficult for water to get under that large cut of the trunk. So once we've thoroughly watered it in, we want to use a block in this shallow container to change the angle and allow some of the excess water to move underneath that trunk where we've made that cut to thoroughly hydrate the soil that exists in that container. This establishes that balance of water and oxygen from the get-go that catalyzes root growth and helps the tree move forward from the operation. For the next 30 minutes, I'm just going to leave this tree up on an angle and let the water slowly permeate that core of the root mass and the core of that soil that I've inserted into the container to make sure that we've got thorough saturation of the new soil system catalyzing that new root growth and moving the tree forward with health. We've now seen the air layering operation come to fruition on the American Hornbeam and on the Blue Rug Juniper. This is the initialization of a shape that didn't immediately make itself apparent in the material, but was obvious once we started thinking outside the box. As you can see, comparing the Hornbeam and the Blue Rug Juniper and the success of both operations, the time that we gave these pieces to formulate these tremendous root systems was a paramount part of the success. The trees showing activity, the movement of water, and the distribution of sugars and starches is the timing mechanism that we identify in terms of deciding when to separate the air layers. Roots after that operation, to set them up, to create a great nebari and continue to elevate the level of that tree when we plant that into a bonsai container, the final component of how we take an air layer and follow it through from beginning, middle, to the end to really build that foundational element of root system in that new bonsai. 
