Properly anchoring a tree in a bonsai container is one of the most technically difficult things we have to do in the repotting process, but it is so important. By getting that tree secure, we allow it to produce new roots and thrive after the repotting operation. In order to be able to do this well, we're going to walk you through anchoring strategy as a generalized approach to how do we know where to anchor and the techniques that allow you to tie a tree into a container with the multitude of root situations we're going to encounter and get the very best result out of your repotting operation. Once we understand the process of chop sticking, once we learn the sensation of when soil has filled or at least occupied a good amount of the space in contact with the roots, we're able to come back to anchor strategy and focus a little bit more on this. Now, first and foremost, why is it important to anchor the tree properly? Healthy roots. We need that stability for roots to thrive. We need that stability for roots to thrive. We need that stability for roots to thrive. We need that stability for roots to thrive. We need that stability for roots to even be produced. We're good with that? We're clear with that? Okay. First of all, stability to encourage root production. This is of paramount importance. Okay. When we start to say, how do we achieve the greatest amount of stability in any singular location in the anchoring process? When we start to think about all of the things that we have to consider during the anchoring process, our head can really start to spin. It's a bit overwhelming. I'm going to stop you before you get too confused and you get too worked up. I'm going to say, hey, let's simplify this. First and foremost, the biggest thing we need to know is where do we anchor a tree? If you have a tree that has a leftward lean, naturally, we need to anchor it on the right side of that tree. If we have a tree that then has a secondary forward lean, we need to anchor it on the backside of that tree. If we have an anchor on the right side of our tree and an anchor on the backside of the tree, we need a third anchor to help that tree from rebounding or moving in that unheld or unprotected direction. Three points of anchor for 95% of our bonsai trees are going to create the points of stability that you need to properly hold a tree motionless in the container. Three points is what I want you to focus on. We are trying to apply the most direct application of force across the shortest possible distance. Okay? Most direct application of force across the shortest possible distance. At every location that we're tying this tree into the container, container. Most direct application of force across the shortest possible distance. This is of paramount importance that we really believe and try to abide by this concept because this is how we get stability. This is how we create immobility between the tree and the container. When we tie a tree down, the most direct application of force across the shortest possible distance gives us the best possible holding capacity and it's with this in mind we approach technique number one. Technique number one is commonly referred to at Mirai as the bamboo tie-down method. This is saying we're using a bamboo stake driven into a solid root mass and we have two wires coming out of the bottom of the pot that are going to tie to that stake and apply force to that stake to give downward leverage to that established root mass. Now you might be saying well that's great with an established tree but I don't have an established root mass. I have a very loose root mass. Okay, same concept applies. Most direct application of force across the shortest possible distance. Direct application down, shortest possible distance, bottom of the container to the top of the wall. If we need to anchor to a screw going into deadwood, to a piece of deadwood, to a strong structural root, to achieve the same leverage as we would be getting with that bamboo stake, we are still utilizing the bamboo tie-down methodology, the most direct application of force across the shortest possible distance, as the most fundamental and effective tie-down strategy possible in anchoring of our bonsai during repotting. This is our number one. This is our most direct application of force across the shortest possible distance. We're looking here. We have our root mass here. We hammer a bamboo stake in here. Our wire comes up on two sides of this ties to both sides. We are getting a straight down application of force across the distance of the bottom of the container where our tie-down wires enter to the top of the wall just below the surface of the soil. When we're finished. And if we do not have a solid enough root mass to hold the bamboo stake, then we might be tying to a piece of very strong nebari at a point where we can't visibly see that tie-down. We may be tying to a piece of deadwood where we visibly can't see that. We may have to drive a screw into a dead area of the trunk or the root mass and tie to that screw as the leverage device which would take the place of that bamboo stake. But we're saying bamboo tie-down methodology or any of those substitutes screw deadwood structural component this is our number one let's take a look at technique number two unfortunately technique number two is the most commonly practiced technique in bonsai but it's the least effective unless we have certain circumstances we simply cannot overcome technique number two is the over root tie down method now if the most direct application of force straight down across the shortest possible distance from the bottom of the container to the top of the wall is the best way to get the most secure anchor then taking our wires diagonally up and over the fine root mass and tying down in an indirect position over a longer distance has far less function but sometimes we don't have that solid point or that solid root mass or the ability to actually contact a structural piece of wood and so we can use the cumulative effect of our finer roots be sure to use the correct pressure we hide that wire down inside of the container and really use that to pull on that tree and apply that pressure to those roots obviously there's risks in this which is why this is number two and not number one as the technique of choice technique number three the bamboo tension method now this is a technique that applies to containers with an inward curving lip and generally is held for medium or shohin size trees we can use that really strong hard outer surface of bamboo to apply tension to it hooking it and securing it under those inward curving lips to apply a downward pressure to the root system and not even have to tie the root system in at all but simply using the tension of the bamboo hid beneath the surface of the soil inside of those inward curving lips and we have a third application of technique to get a downward force and create an immobile tree that's going to produce roots with vigor now what happens if we don't have this solid root mass on the bottom to be giving us a basis to be tying that root mass into the container how do we combat that because if this is flat we have to understand that this flat base this becomes one of our points of contact this becomes two and this becomes three three points of contact okay so if we have a solid root mass and we've got a flat base we can anchor in terms of a rectangular container if we look at the layout standard layout of holes in a rectangular container we could do front left back right or front right uh back right front left we go two two across the bottom we tie here we tie here tying here holds this side the right side holds the front side of the tree tying here holds the left side holds the back side and that flat bottom being in contact across that platform three points of contact one two three okay this is your standard fundamental so first we have a sharp lateral唐spอน of support let's find out why this is important first you control the root right foot so you're able to Emergency massa Valley. now what am I going to do well this is an easy detail but again this is a good calisthenics exercise if you're milk task. let's try to give you something that you know that matches up and alkalizes let's create a single temporal would you do this with that you okay sitting on the deck of the container. Okay, that's one. We need three, right? So now we start to say, okay, in order to hold this position here, first and foremost, we're going to be using a block that supports the position and the angle that we're hoping to achieve. And we know that if we apply a block to the structure of our tree, we have to tie our tree to that block, okay? Because we never block without tying to a block. Why do you never block without tying to a block? It'll move. It's going to move. The tree gets a bump, it shifts, block falls out, now we've lost that whole system. So we apply tension, counter tension, right? This is the tension counter tension methodology. So now when I start to look at my anchoring strategy, if I have to block to support this, I have to tie to secure there. I've got two wires that are going to be there, okay? If I have this on the deck, of the container, and I want to maintain that, I need to figure out whether I have a solid root mass here or whether I have to use some other form of the bamboo tie down methodology. I need two to tie that to the bottom of the container, right? That's my first point of contact. That point of contact must be secured. This becomes my second point of contact. I need to maintain that angle. I must tie the tree to that angle, okay? And then in terms of this system, we still probably have some front to back, or potentially another consideration of a rebound wire that we need to be utilizing as an anchor. When I'm looking at this and I'm trying to develop my anchor strategy in my container, if it's leaning here, I have no choice but to tie here, okay? Now once I tie here, most of our trees have this kind of a lean, which generally means, depending on the shape of the root system, that we're probably either going to have a fall towards the front or a fall towards the back. So once we secure the most major direction of fall, we can now have that second location countered to the secondary direction of fall. Okay, already you have two of your three locations, right? And once you have tension on this direction of fall, and once you have tension on the secondary direction of fall, you also have to have a rebound protection. Because once you put these two areas under tension, if that tree experiences a force where these are under tension, it's naturally going to recoil from where it's being held, and that's what we have to prevent. So when we think anchor strategy, we tend to make it very complex. When I prepare a container to tie something in, I'm not thinking about what technique I'm applying. I'm only picking the locations that I have to support the tree from, and then once it's prepared and the tree is in the container, I then address what am I going to do to anchor this. Do I tie to the root system in terms of a bamboo stake? Not solid enough. Do I have a structural element? I do, but it's going to be visible. Do I need to add a screw to some deadwood section or some structural section of this tree? That's the only option I have. Okay, cool. Does it support itself in this position? No, it doesn't. Okay, let's block and tie to the block then. You see how you can simplify it? It can become very, very fundamental and easy if we just think about the fact that, look, three points of contact, nine out of ten times three points of contact, is zero. There's going to be plenty. There's going to be that one in ten where you're going to need four. If you need more than four, you screwed up. Something went wrong. Yesterday, we had to have four because there just was no structure to the root mass whatsoever. But that's the first time I've had four points of contact this entire spring, and we've already repotted well over a hundred trees. But we're saying three points of contact, most direct application of force across the shortest possible distance. We have these three methodologies and the locations hinge on what direction is your primary, what direction is your secondary, and what's the rebound to prevent the system from falling apart. This is anchoring strategy in its most fundamental application. We have three techniques that we can apply to the repotting process. We have a very simple concept of countering the tree's directions of movement in three points to get a solid anchoring of any tree in any bonsai container. And all of a sudden, world of anchor strategy becomes very simple when we break it down into these concepts and techniques to allow us to be able to tie our tree in with security and facilitate the finest root growth after the repotting process. I hope this helps simplify, I hope this helps educate, and I hope this gives you a platform to begin the process of learning how to anchor your tree into a bonsai container. We will continue to be here in the library providing repotting opportunities to see these techniques put into action, and we'll be here online for all of your questions to answer and help you in your repotting process. Happy anchoring, and we look forward to seeing your healthy bonsai as a result of your improved technique. 
