What's going on guys? The first Apex members critique. Super excited to kick this off. We've always wanted to look at our Mirai Live members trees and start to give our feedback in terms of different opportunities and ways that we can maximize this material, identifying the positive points of the trees, what are some ideas of how we can continue to elevate that tree and really bring that level of that tree to its highest possible potential. We're gonna start off just by identifying what we love about the trees and then talking about some of those opportunities that we see as different pieces of potential to raise that aesthetic value and the evolution to that next level. Just to kind of set the groundwork for what these critiques are gonna look like, my practice in bonsai is based around the fact that I literally love nothing more in life than bonsai except for my son. And because of that, whenever I'm looking at a tree instead of trying to dissect it and really bring out and discuss the faults of a tree, we always focus on what's good and what we can do to make it better. That's gonna be the baseline for our critiques. I hope these are valuable for you. And to kick off our first-ever pro Apex forum members critique, we're looking at a beautiful Japanese maple from Max. Now Max has been submitting wonderful trees to the forum Q&A. He always has something interesting to ask in the live Q&A's and this Japanese maple is no exception. This is a fantastic tree that Max was able to acquire from a very famous bonsai personality in Japan, from Mr. Iura up in the Obuse area of Nagano. Now Mr. Iura is very, very well known for his shimpaku work. That's primarily what they have at their nursery. They do dabble in taxis, they do dabble in deciduous trees, and you can see that this tree has a tremendous root base as we would expect from a high-quality Japanese maple in Japan. Wonderful movement throughout the tree. It's a wonderful tree. It's a wonderful tree. It's a wonderful tree. So we're going to go into a little bit more detail about the trunk and a lot of opportunity to advance the design. Now one of the things that we've got to acknowledge and kind of address is the fact that when that tree was young and it was given all of that movement, that first curve in the trunk as it thickened has kind of formed this larger junction where those two pieces of tissue, that curve, that trunk continuing up from that base, have meshed. This isn't necessarily a bad thing and in fact it's actually a very which is a very high point for high quality Japanese maple, something that we look for in that very smooth, thin bark deciduous form, particularly when we're looking at the traditional model of what we value a deciduous tree to be at that highest level, that scarless form of the trunk is a big component of that. This tree has great branch distribution. It's got wonderful movement. But when we start to look at this, we've got to ask ourselves the question. As we get through that root base, that nebari and we move up into that lower section of trunk, it's a very thick, powerful tree. But as that trunk line continues up, it starts to become fairly elongated, fairly slender, and it starts to talk more about a feminine form. When we kind of try to reconcile this tree, we've got to make one of those decisions. Are we going for the feminine form? Or are we trying to maximize that shorter, smaller masculine base? What I would say is the movement of this tree, particularly in picture one, where Max is kind of showing the front of this tree, really gives us the best visible point to orient from, from the movement. And we see that good movement. As we quantify movement, different angles, different spaces between the angles, and different planes, front to back, that we engage with, that depth of the design, we see that from picture number one, where the front has been selected. I think this is still the most powerful front. Is there a slight degree of change or orientation that we could make to minimize how swollen that junction where those have joined exists? Maybe. And that's up for Max to determine. But when we get past sort of that midway point of the trunk, we start to get into this repetitious sort of back and forth movement up in the apical region. If you kind of count up one, two, three junctions where we've got branches, the back branch being number one, the branch on the right being number two, and the junction that has the big, long branch dropping down to the left side of the tree as the third junction, this is really where the movement of the tree has that beautiful different angle, different spacing, and different planes. And then we get up into a little bit more repetitious movement, a really similar sort of girth to that upper apical region of the tree. And if we're talking about taking advantage of the power on that lower portion, I might suggest that we take off that apical region, compress the shape a little bit. We've got that big, long drop branch. We've got that branch coming to the back. That drop branch and that branch coming to the back could be the junction. Where we finalize the height of that tree, grow some of those branching from the back to form that apex and save that drop branch. If we were to keep it elongated at that junction, we would have to eliminate one of those two branches because it is starting to swell a little bit at that junction, and we do need to make a decision if we want to keep that tree taller. I think your best possible bonsai over the course of this tree's existence and duration in a container is going to be to shorten that height, make that commitment to that powerful base, and at that junction, use one of those branches, and then you're ready to go. One of those is the apex. That long branch has a real feature of the design of the tree, and start to maximize that power that we see in the nebari in the original curve in that trunk. For me, this tree is just at the very beginning of becoming an outstanding Japanese maple. Take advantage of that strength that exists in the lower trunk. Start to look at how we manicure and manipulate the rest of the form. There's potential for thread grafting to add more branches down low to further compress that design and highlight that power. We can utilize that big, long branch as a real feature and character of the tree to generate some asymmetry in the silhouette. I think you have all of the makings of a fantastic tree over the course of time, but I do think the priority in terms of maximizing this piece of material is to make that commitment. Are we going with a taller, more elegant tree and trying to dilute the power of that base, or are we compressing that design and trying to maximize the power of the base? And in that dilution, we have the ability to preserve those two branches as the terminal of that tree and really build that more compact, powerful Japanese maple that the base is giving us the opportunity to achieve. In addition to that, I wanted to say, we could very easily air layer off the top of that tree, utilize that as a much more slender, elegant form of a Japanese maple, not necessarily just chop it and do away with it because it does have time, it does have energy put into it, it does have really beautiful branching coming off of it. We could sacrifice that, use that as a second piece that could be a nice little shohin, a really compact, beautiful, little elegant Japanese maple. Always think about, when we're talking about discarding a portion of the tree or removing it, can that portion of the tree be something valuable? And if so, that's where the air layering really comes in as a technique that allows us to maximize the time that's been put in to each piece of that material. Last thing I'll say about this in terms of the critique is, we can continue to evolve the prominence of the base formation of that nabari, and this is very characteristic of Japanese maple. During each repot, going up to the base on the bottom side and the way we work those roots, perpetuating and really driving that lateral expansion of that mass will enhance the really powerful nabari that we see already forming. There's actually a little bit of a better nabari on the backside of the tree. Picture number three shows how prominent and how beautifully integrated that nabari is on the backside, but we don't have that same power and interest that we see in the front. Something to consider in order to drive that forward, really making sure that we handle those repots by taking underneath the trunk all of those roots, driving that lateral formation, a really good opportunity to continue to advance this tree and really maximize its potential as a bonsai. Love it, Max. Thank you for contributing that to the members' critique. All right, tree number two coming at a perfect time as we've been really diving into literati or the bunjin form more and more. A fantastic ponderosa pine from Scott. I enjoy this tree immensely. And when we look at picture number one of the original front. So the front that Scott presented in the original design, outstanding in terms of the way that he's utilized the different angles and the different sections or those junctions between the angle, obviously a wonderful long slender pine, very characteristic of the kind of pines that Andy Smith collects. Love Andy. Great collector. He's been doing it for a long time. He does it very well. And you can always plan on a tree that you get from Andy becoming fantastic. The handling of the literati design, beautiful in terms of the way that we've dropped those branches down and really reduced the width of the silhouette. I like the direction that this tree is headed. Now in the very first picture and the front that Scott has presented, we do have, and this is an early stage of development for this tree, so I respect this decision. We do have sort of a branch on both sides of the trunk that are giving us equal distance in terms of that silhouette. So we are lacking a little bit of a commitment to that asymmetry. And again, I want to say that this tree is probably not quite ready for a big dramatic commitment. We need to use that foliage, build vascular tissue, get back budding, shrink the size of the needles. These are all the techniques we've been teaching you guys on Mirai throughout the ponderosa pine work that we've been doing. And this tree I'm assuming will come to a point where it is overgrown, where we do remove one of those two branches to make that commitment. But one of the things that really spoke to me is picture number two. And there's a big reason why. Picture number two is kind of the backside and slightly off of the original front that Scott presented. And the thing that appeals to me about picture number two is the location of the apex and the fact that that initial portion of the trunk coming out of the soil that we see in picture number one is very perpendicular or vertical to the container. And we notice that it kind of nullifies some of the direction and movement that we can achieve in design. Litterati does have some of this ability to really anchor a far degree of asymmetry depending on what the base is giving you. And it looks like this base probably in the future as it develops will give you the potential to be able to anchor a little bit more asymmetrical movement. When I look at picture number two, the apex offset, almost breaking the lateral boundary of the container, this is one of the big pivotal points of Litterati design when we try to generate that asymmetry. And then we start to see some of the prominence of either the branch on the on the bottom, on the left or the branch on the right, giving us that direction of movement that either works with the apex or against the apex, depending on what direction we go. The fact that in picture number two, we see the tree offset to the right portion of the container tells me that there's probably a crack root or a strong piece of wood that exists on the left side of the tree. So if we push in that direction, as it evolves, we probably can uncover some reasonable point of stability or justification in the base, moving the tree, off center towards the right, so that we have that influencing and informing the design. Maybe we keep the drop branch on the right. Maybe we keep the drop branch on the left and orient the apex back, but still leave it outside of that lateral boundary. All of these different ways that we kind of key into maximizing the visual interest of the design and the asymmetry is where we want to be thinking about as this tree gives us back budding, vascular tissue growth, smaller needles, this is where we're kind of conceptualized. Again, in this young state, it's not time to make those decisions. We're going to use everything on that tree to build the roots, to build the vascular tissue, to build the back buds. And I understand where Scott is at in this first iteration. This is where we start with a piece of material. But seeing some of those moments where we have access to that potential, I really see picture number two that is the backside as giving me a little bit more quality in the base. We have a similar amount of movement that we witness in the trunk. And then we have that opportunity. With that asymmetry broken by the position of the apex to really move and groove inside of this idea of harmonious or tension-filled design to maximize the quality of this tree. I think, and again, we always want to strategize about the future. We always want to prepare for the future. I think this tree is not ready to make that commitment or move just yet. And I'm glad that Scott kept so many branches in the eventual form of the literati design. Just like we revamped the literati design on the stream, we waited and built that tree to that point where it was too dense to be able to pull out those branches, leave those gins behind, and really maximize that form of the literati that we tend to cherish and prize. And that balances that slender trunk with that sparse amount of foliage at the canopy of the tree. Scott, I'm going to say I love picture number two. I think it offers you a lot of quality. If you're going to stick with picture number one, maybe give it a little bit of an angle change to take that verticality out of the base as it originates from the soil. And if you could look to offset that, that apex because what you're looking at in three dimensions is that picture number one might be better, then go ahead and try to maximize that drama in that asymmetry of that form. And I think that you'll have a tree that will totally spike your interest and just take that next step in terms of design quality. I love, I love, love, love looking at the trees that you guys make. I cannot get enough bonsai. And watching Mirai Live members' trees elevate their level and quality and seeing the progress that you guys are making, is super inspiring to me. It motivates me to continue doing what we do. The team here feeds off of all of your interaction that we get from you guys. We look forward to doing another Apex Forum Q&A for our pro members just to give you guys another chance to get feedback and understand and grow your vision and your bonsai practice. Contribute. Let us talk about your trees. Learn from what we have to say, I promise. It's not about tearing trees up. It's about identifying how beautiful they are and how much better we can make them. With that next step and that experience that I have in bonsai. We love being a part of your evolution in bonsai and helping you guys take that next step with these trees. Whether you choose to use what we advise or not makes no difference to us. It's about talking about the possibility and potential, understanding the steps we can take and the opportunity that does exist. We look forward to another Apex members' critique. I can't wait to see more of your trees and offer some suggestions that you can, or maybe choose not to use, but that do dial in some of the different opportunities and potential that exist inside of a singular tree. Thank you guys for your support. We'll see you next time. 
