Joe Harris was one of these individuals when I was a 12-year-old bonsai practitioner whose name and picture was in all of the magazines, whose reputation preceded any experience that I had had with Joe as one of the foremost western bonsai practitioners. Having studied in Japan, if you haven't heard the podcast that we did with Joe, the two-part discussion of his history in bonsai, one of the true OGs of bonsai in the United States and in the western world in general, and still to this day one of the most knowledgeable individuals that I have the pleasure of interacting with. And when we started thinking about how do we talk about Satsuki Azaleas, which is this genre where there's so much curiosity, I think misunderstanding and misinformation, sort of piecemealed components of knowledge around. It, Joe's name was the first one that came to mind when we thought, how do we put together a complete and focused sort of chunk of knowledge that will allow you to understand Satsuki Azaleas and their performance and handling as bonsai in a comprehensive way. And so I feel super fortunate to have Joe in studio with his wife, Claire. We've got Ira on the mic. Good morning. Josh Sales producing the Mirai Lecture Series. And without further ado, I'm going to get out of here because I know virtually nothing about Satsuki Azaleas. I'm going to turn it over to the man, the master, and the legend, Joe Harris. Thank you, Ryan. So good morning. I want to thank, of course, Ryan and Mirai for having me out today. This has been something that I've been... Preparing for, looking forward to. Want to cover as much as I can today about Satsuki. I wanted to start with a little of the history, what they are, where they fit in the plant kingdom, and talk about how to produce them for bonsai. And then we'll go over the propagation, cultural care, seasonal care, and focus a little on the wiring and training as well. So I've called this some of the answer. There's so much to cover. I want to try to get through as much today as we can. I think that... Yeah. You know, talking about Satsuki, how they fit within the bonsai world, and how they have been produced. So today, talking, what are Sasuki? And the taxonomy, you know, Satsuki are two species of rhododendron that are found in Japan. Rhododendron indigum and Rhododendron ericarpum. Both are late-blooming compared to other evergreen azaleas. They bloom late May to early June. And the word Satsuki, saw being fifth in Suki moon, so fifth moon, and the old lunar moon calendar, Oriental moon calendar. That equates to late May, early June. And that's, you know, when they flower. You can look at another way, Satsuki, or regular Tsuchiji, or evergreen azaleas, will bloom a month or so, about 30 days after the spring equinox. And... Yeah. And Satsuki will bloom about 30 days after the other azaleas. And we call it a flower dormancy. That's technically maybe not a dormancy, but it's a period where the growth really shuts down, and all the energy is for flower production, reproduction, to make the seeds. So... Okay. So we have two species. The Rhododendron indigum, or the Satsuki Tsuchiji. Also, we call them Iwasuchiji, or river azaleas. Where I studied in Japan in Konuma, you could find wild Rhododendron indigum on the river banks. And so, cool to see, you know, just pink, regular pink flowers. But... The indigum are slow-growing, they're, you know, western, southern Honshu. The leaves are small to medium, and, of course, oblong, which is one way to tell them from the Irocarpum. Typically a small flower, sometimes, especially with some of the hybrids, you'll see a, you'll see a... A little larger into the medium flowers. Assortment of colors. Different patterns. And we'll go through, when we talk about propagation, you know, some of the many different color patterns on the Satsuki. The indigum normally have five petals and five stamen. And they are more cold hardy than the... The... Other, other variety, the Irocarpum. But they are less heat tolerant, which is, you know, probably in a container with good irrigation or good watering techniques, probably not a, not a big factor. But the cultivars, you know, some of the noted cultivars of Rhododendron indigum are Cozyne. It's child, Nikko, Osaka Suki. Chensine. With the... With the smaller, you know, smaller leaf, smaller flower. The Rhododendron Irocarpum, also referred to as Maduba Sasuki, or Maduba is round leaf. It's a little faster growing. It's found in the southern range of where Rhododendron indigum grow. Into the southern coast. In the northern part of Kyushu. They do a little lower elevation than the Sasuki Tsuchiji. And they do... The ranges overlap. You know, Yakushima Island is... You could find them in certain areas of Yakushima Island. But it's... You know, the... The... The... As with... The... As with the Coltivar Indigum, so many different colors and patterns in the flowers. They do have five petals, but the difference, you will see more stamen, eight to eight... Eight maybe ten stamen in the Rhododendron Irocarpum. Some notable cultivars, Takasago, one of my favorite. Asai Zudu. And it's... cajo, and acon. So that's really, you know, the two species that are referred to as Satsuki azaleas. There are so many hybrids between the two. In normal, in horticultural literature, they're almost always referred to as Rhododendron indigo, just as a standard reference. The history of Satsuki is, you know, there's so many details. I was fortunate to be able to have, to work for a company or study at a park owned by a publishing company that had the most comprehensive reference of Satsuki azaleas. known. I'm doing a brief history. There are certain books that we'll talk about at the end that can give you a little more details if you're interested in it. But Satsuki were first mentioned in poems, you know, written poem books back into the late 1700s, the 8th century through the 11th century. So, you know, there's a lot of history there. There's a lot of history there. There's a lot of history there. There's a lot of history there. There's a lot of history there. There's a lot of history there. There's a lot of history there. There's a lot of history there. And so, you know, in the 11th century, you start seeing references to the Iwasatsuki, Mocha Satsuki. That's a very old term for them. But the, really, when they came into, the first horticultural reference, it was in a volume of books translated into the brocade pillow, the Kinshuku Makura. And that was in 1692. A famous azalea expert, you know, the most renowned at the time, Ihe Ito, put out a volume, a five-volume set. In the last two volumes, he referenced 168 Satsuki. And this is the first time that time that it referenced that people were actually collecting branches branch sports collecting seeds you know natural seed mutations and he did you know detail drawings of the petals of the stamens of the coloration and some of the Satsuki we still know today are Matsunami Takasanga which I've mentioned before as a Maduba Sasuke, Hakata Jiro which is a beautiful white flower really nice leaf nice flower, Zai which we now call Kenzai which is like a honeysuckle flower a beautiful flower again you know the history the early history is a bit of a mystery very few references survived the different revolutions and wars that you know we lost a lot of the information from the early days of the Satsuki you know when the hybrids and the growing you know as mentioned you know they are the cultivated Sasuke, or natural hybrids of indigim and rhododendron indigim and rhododendron miracarpum you know there's so many natural crosses especially when they started to be planted in together in gardens in the seed collection. collected. You know there's you know so many hybrids and even with different species Rhododendron cuchianum, the Japanese wild mountain azalea, and even some of the Kurume azaleas which were started being cultivated around the same time the Satsuki azaleas were. By the mid you know 1850s you know before the Meiji restoration they there were around 250-260 varieties that were recorded. You know note some famous Chitose Nishiki, probably the most common of Sakazuki Gumpo or Gumpo as it's referred to in in the southeast, and Kozan which is the parent of so many varieties that we use today. And Kozan was found growing not too far away from the Bonsai Park where I studied in Nikko at the time. It was found growing in a garden there. Rinoji Temple is one of the is a Buddhist temple at Nikko and the owner of Gekon Sasuki Kinkusha Publishing Company, Mr. Kinko Rukaku, had a brother who was a Buddhist priest there. So I got to visit the temple a couple of times. A really really beautiful place. You know moving on during the Meiji Restoration, you know Japan was really in a term in a turmoil. We had you know the the end of the samurai shogun era was coming to a close and so many documented all the documentation cultivars were lost. It was you know really you know not just on the Satsuki other other different genus like acers or maples, Japanese maple, all the cultivar names were lost and there's a good chance that you know what we call a certain cultivar today it was known before the Meiji Restoration as a different name. Good possibility. In the 1900s there were a lot of the Rhododendron ericarpum that were collected and planted into gardens alongside other azaleas. You know mainly Satsuki but as mentioned Cuchianum, Kurume were also put into these large gardens and they would collect the seed and grow the seed to select flowers with certain characteristics and coloration patterns that were you know deemed to deemed marketable. You know of course these were nurserymen and one of the famous plants is Siazudu which is a large flower with a blotched throat it's referred to as a Foucarine coloration. One of the very popular cultivars with the large flower and large round leaf is Cajo and And it has a brother, Akon, which is basically the same flower but with a ruffled petal. These were ones that really were part of the early cultivation in containers. These were referred to as Shizen, Meiboku, or natural hybrids before 1910, but they both came from Asayuzuru in the 1890s, 1880s, 1890s. Kijiro Akashi, around 1910, 1915, started hand pollinating Satsuki, picking out different flower colors, different patterns, and crossing those to create these. Create new flowers. And this was really the first mention of someone manually propagating. Up to this point, they had all been natural pollination from insects, from bees. He used Ishiyama, which is a purple flower, a little larger flower. And Hakata Jiro, which is a very old white flower. A lot of different hybrids came out of this time. And the growers in and around Saitama Prefecture in Tokyo and up into Tochigi Prefecture, those nurseries started producing Satsuki around this time. And I mentioned they started being grown in containers. They started being grown in containers. They started being grown in containers. They started being grown in containers. Not specifically for bonsai culture, but for flowers, you know, it became a big fad. And the early propagation methods were not only to produce trees for bonsai, but to produce taller trees for bigger, taller flower displays, which was pretty neat, the different propagation methods. And I think that's really what came out of that time. In the 1930s, they were, they really had moved on from the smaller indigum flowers, you know, the small flowers, small leaf varieties. And you know, they were focused on the most dramatic flowers and big, you know, big flowers, multicolor. And they started bringing in different azaleas, specifically from Holland, some of the Belgium-Indian hybrids. One that is noted as one of the first ones they started using is Mademoiselle Mourou. And they were big, big flowers. When you crossed them with Satsuki, you would get a lot of double flowers, which we refer to as yai or yai zaki flowers. And a lot of the crosses, one that I put down, Gyokure, which is, which is, is supposed to be Kaho crossed with the Belgium. There is some controversy on that, but I believe that that is a pretty, pretty factual. And then also Koka came out of that, which was Kyoko Nishiki crossed with the Mademoiselle Mourou. And these were large flowers. These were, not really for, small bonsai, but mainly for just flower display. And during World War II, in the late 30s, early 40s, there was a lot of rationing in Japan. There wasn't water available to take care of the plants. And a lot of, and is with bonsai, many of the Satsuki, tsuki were planted in the ground and left on their own. There were countless plants lost, and even whole varieties that disappeared during World War II. It's very similar to the Meiji Restoration, maybe not as bad as the Meiji Restoration as far as the loss of history, but really devastating. But as things started getting better in the 1950s, Satsuki really returned with a vengeance in Tokyo. The nurseries in the Itabashiku Borough, they started styling the young Satsuki whips in repeated S's and repeated Z's just to get a taller plant with many branches for flower display. And you see, you still see these in the Satsuki shows where you'll have what we refer to as flower towers, big conical three, four foot containerized plants with just conical shape just with flowers. But even though that they started out with flower displays, as those Itabashiku style plants aged 10, 15, 20 years and the trunk started to develop, we still see those today. It was maybe not as monotonous movement, nowadays with using more bonsai techniques, you see more of a more natural pine tree shape to them. But that's really where they started out, where the genesis of Satsuki bonsai came from. And in the 1960s, the the bulk of the production of Satsuki in Japan moved into Tochigi Prefecture, nurseries around Konuma City and Utsunomiya. And there were literally millions and millions of young Satsuki being produced in the greenhouses around Konuma, just acres and acres under glass and poly. And you know, throughout the 60s, the 70s, the 80s, a lot of these plants were initially styled and put into raised beds or in fields to caliber up the Satsuki trunks. With some work on the branches, but mainly to grow the, to fatten the trunks up with sacrificial branching that would be pruned off later. In the 1970s, the global oil crisis, a lot of the lot of the Satsuki growers were hard hit. They switched from growing to growing Satsuki to vegetables. You know, a lot of the Satsuki were put in the ground in the fields at that time, even more than before, to free up the greenhouse space for the food crops to conserve water you know satsuki um you know not very nutritionist you know so they they really uh the vegetables were made them a lot more money in the 1980s into the 90s you started seeing a lot of the satsuki that were put in the ground in the early 70s late 60s being dug up and and styled i went to the bonesaw park in 1985 and you you could go to the cultural center in kanuma and there were just thousands and thousands of satsuki that were being dug up and uh you know hobbyists buying them to style out it was uh they were sold by um the size of the the caliber of the trunk and the variety so you would buy a cosine you know 30 centimeter trunk for a certain price a kaho with the same size trunk would be you know half that price so it depended on you know the how slow they were the quality of the flower but that was uh really where um you know during the late 70s 80s where a lot of the satsuki bonsai started to to become really popular so in the uh the early 90s the economy in japan started to suffer much like the 1970s a lot of the crops the satsuki crops had to be destroyed there wasn't really even any reason to put them in the ground they couldn't afford the labor to maintain them so it was really devastating you know the price really dropped they have recovered you know nowadays they have recovered there's still a great number of satsuki nurseries in and around kanuma after the the economy started going down in the early 90s you know the crops were you know a lot of the crops especially in the kanoma area were destroyed not even put in the ground you know it was really devastating time for not only satsuki for bonsai and nursery stock in general but while the you know prices have recovered there's still a lot of fantastic nurseries growing satsuki uh azaleas in kanuma and down in around osaka in kyoto in southern japan as well um the breeders you know just to see some of the flowers that they're producing nowadays is incredible so there's really no end in sight to to the new varieties the new flower types that they're producing so satsuki azaleas for bonsai are unique in that they must be propagated specifically for bonsai you would not use the same technique as you would to produce a landscape plant so i wanted to i think it's really important to go over how to propagate the satsuki for bonsai and and hopefully talk a little you know walk you through the steps involved and and in that we can talk about the different flower types what to look for and uh how to how to make your own young trees what we're doing with taking a cutting from new wood from new growth is we want to produce a cutting that will remain apical dominant that will put all its growth into growing upward that to create a a whip with a certain size we'll talk about that a little later at what size we want to create but we have to create a a whip so we can wire and style at a later time so the proper selection from the cuttings produce that you want to produce certain flower color patterns and shapes um We, in some cases, we have to be very specific on where we take the cutting from the plant, where certain flowers grow, and we'll talk about that a little bit, too. After they're propagated, the early transplants, soon after they're rooted, and into the next year, basically three different stages of transplanting before they are ready to wire. So the basic flower types on Satsuki, you'll have solid color flowers. Either you're solid. You're solid pink, you're solid white, referred to as Muji, and then a Socagero-type flower, which has a ring around the outer margins of all the petals with the white throat. And the Fucarine, which you might see with a little lighter margin right on the edge of the petal. But with a blotched throat, a darker, reddish, blotched throat in the petals. Tamafu, which is a margin petal, a ring all the way around the petal with a lighter center, and sometimes reversed, but mostly a red margin with a lighter center color. Yeah. Yatanokigami is probably the most famous Tamafu flower, and it's often used for Bonsai. It's got some unique characteristics we can talk about a little later with the fall colors, when we get into the fall color on some of the Satsuki. Zaizaki, we mentioned Zai or Kensai, the red hunt. This is a honey Soca flower, really a great flower, certain things to look for in propagating Kensai to produce that flower. If you make a little mistake, you will end up with an obscure, big, round flower Azalea. There are a lot of different types of Zai. There are a lot of different types of Zai. There are a lot of different types of Zai. There are some thread petals. Zibisaki is, you know, I list Karaito. Karaito is even a subcategory of Zaibisaki. Almost no petal at all, just stamen. But Karaito is a really unique Satsuki as well. Suma. Suma-beni. Suma-beni. Suma-beni is red fingernail, so only the tip of the petal, the very tip margin, will have color. Normally, it'll be a red petal or a white petal with a red fingernail. Sometimes you'll see a red petal with white, but not as often. And then the Shibori flowers. And then the Shibori flowers. This is what people think of when they think of Satsuki Azalea. Normally with a white base with many different dots and stripes, either red to, you know, light pink to purple. And the, you know, fine parallel lines. And the, you know, fine parallel lines. When I was in Japan, you know, we had a lot of people, you know, We had a lot of people, you know, we had a lot of people, you know, I was in Japan. I was in Japan. When we went to Kanuma for a, a, a festival, they were, you know, beating drums. And I noticed on the street the man-hole covers had Satsuki flowers, Satsuki flowers on them. And they were, you could see the stripes and the dots in them. And so that, that's really what, you know, what people think of when they see Satsuki. Satsuki. big multicolor flowers. They are probably the most difficult to reproduce in propagation, but there are certain rules to follow that will give you a high percentage of a good result, but you have to spend a little time marking the branches prior to taking the cuttings to make sure you know where to take those cuttings from. A couple of other flowers, the Hansome, which is a half white, half pink, or a half light pink and a half dark pink, the Jai Hansome. You see those only on certain varieties. Acon, Cajo and Acon have a lot of flowers that are half and half, pretty unique. And the Jai flower, which is a pink base, so there's no white flowers on the plant. It's just a pink base with darker red, purple stripes, dots, and patterns. So looking, and pardon the drawing, just a few of the different Shibori flowers. The Hansome, the Hakumei Shibori in the bottom right of the Shibori column is probably the most popular or the most famous. That's what the manhole covers are a copy of. And certain varieties like Matsuname and Kaminoyama Kirin, are really good examples of the Hakumei Shibori flower. And then the Sokujirō with the white throat. And Tamafu, which is also categorized as a Sokujirō flower. Tamafu with the ring all the way around the petal with the with the lighter colored flower. S Jord Center. The Ztraizaki flowers, with the pink and the Jai Shibori with the pink and the, with the stripes and dots. The single color again, the Muji Flower, the Tsuma Beni. The Tsumo Gilro, which is the white fingernail I mentioned. and then the zaizaki flower off to the right with the very narrow petals, the kenzai, kokenzai. The new shoots, if we're taking cuttings just to reproduce a solid color, and we just want to produce them for a landscape plant, we could take a cutting from anywhere on the plant. Last year's wood will root easy, and it will reproduce a plant, but it will not be apical dominant. You will not have a single trunk. Satsuki have a lot of latent buds in the older wood, and they'll sucker. Naturally, when you find... Satsuki in nature, they're multi-stemmed shrubs. So for bonsai culture and bonsai techniques for sasuki, we need to have a whip that produces, again, an apical dominant growth habit. And the only way to get that is to take the cutting from this year's growth, or the new growth. So you're going to... So we're going to, you know, marking the branches during flowering, when they're flowering in the spring. If you have a single color or a single pattern, there's only one flower color or flower type on the tree, there's not really any... any... need to mark the branches. Any shoot can be taken. But for the multicolor flowers, the shibuti flowers, we need to take cuttings from the white flowers to the white with just slight variation, just light stripes and dots. I mentioned kogetsu or yoshizuki. This plant is unique that it has the flowers that have the ring pattern and you will see a flower with half the ring pattern and half just a white base with stripes. You want to avoid any ring patterns. You only want to take the flowers from solid whites to whites with really light variations in the flower. And for the multicolor pink base, the jai base flowers, it's the same thing. You want to take the shoots from the solid pink to the solid pink with, with light variations in the flowers. If there are any white sports or very pale off, you know, lighter than normal flowers, you need to avoid those. And I bring up shinkyo and meikeyo just because I don't want them to be just because they're very popular varieties, but there's certain unique issues with propagating them. Shinkyo is a sport, a branch sporter mutation from Yatanokigami, and it has white flowers in addition to the Yatanokigami's Tamafu flowers. And it also, Yatanokigami has a dark red fall color. And Shinkyo, the older leaves, last year's leaves, will turn yellow in the fall instead of red. And so that's one way to tell the difference. But we cannot use the cuttings from the white flower branches that will only produce a white azalea. And when you produce a tree with just one flower type from a from a named cultivar it's no longer that cultivar it's referred to as obscure or just a you know just a just a satsuki it doesn't have a name so we only take from shinka we only take the flowers from red solid reds which yata tenokigami has about 10 to 15 percent of the flowers on on the plant or or solid pink so that's where we want to take the cuttings to re-molding reproduce shinkyo. And it might take four or five years for the white flowers to show up. So you really won't know how well you did until about four years after that starts to bloom. And maikyo is a sport from shinkyo that has fucarine flowers. And in this case, instead of taking the cutting from only the red flower, we need to take it from the flowers that have the stripes. So if you ever have reason to produce maikyo, there, you know, this is in several references, but it's a pretty difficult flower to reproduce. We talked about kenzai. Kenzai will produce branches with round petal flowers. They look almost like a sakazuki, just a nice, it's a nice flower, but it is round petal. It will not have that honeysuckle type flower. We cannot take cuttings from those branches. So we need to make sure when it's flowering to mark those branches so we don't take the cuttings from there. So the timing for taking cuttings, we want to, of course, check, make sure they're healthy, no insects, diseases. And if there are, you know, we need to treat those, you know, as a week to 10 days before we plan to take cuttings. And only take cuttings from a four to five year old plant. You know, we mentioned with maikyo, it takes several years to produce all the flowers. So, we want to make sure we have a mature tree that can reproduce all the flower types that we want. The shoots are, we want to take those a month and a half or so from when they start to grow in the spring. The flush, we want ideally two to three inches in length and for there to be about seven to ten leaves on the cutting we take. We can't take them too soft. We need to take them where they're just starting to harden off a little bit. But, you know, two to three inches, seven to ten leaves is a good benchmark for that. Again, for the solid color or the single pattern, you know, we can take any shoots. For the shibori flowers, we want to mark the shoot that has the desired pattern. In this case, with the multi-colored, the multi-stripes variation, we want to take from the solid color to the ones with just slight variation, slight color patterns. When it's in flower, mark those branches. I like to mark those branches a year before I take them. And then again, the year I'm taking the cuttings to verify that that branch is still stable enough to produce that flower. But, you know, at the very least, mark them when they're in flower the year you're going to take that cutting. So, again, you know, check the marked branches. At the same time, we want to do some different grafting on change達. a week, you know, five to seven days after we take all the flowers off before we harvest those cuttings. And when we do take the cuttings, you know, take them in the early morning when they're well hydrated before they get any stress from the sun. And what we want to, when we do take the cutting, we want to make a level cut. We don't want to do a slanted cut, you know, perpendicular level cut and remove the leaves. You remember these cuttings are two to three inches and we want to remove the leaves from around, you know, the lower inch of the stem, leaving five to six leaves on the cutting. And we want to, you know, get all the cuttings and if you're not going to strike those cuttings in the soil immediately, put them in a small container of water to keep them hydrated. And for the media, it's, you know, well draining media. We want it, we don't want it too fine, you know, peat moss is probably not the best. We want to make sure that it's capable of holding the cutting upright. But we want it to drain well, as well. You know, any commercial, commercially available propagation media would work fine as long as it doesn't contain any fertilizer. A lot of the potting soils or container mixes. They're putting in time-release fertilizers now. Make sure that it doesn't have that. At the park, we used kanuma soil, kanuma sushi. We didn't, it wasn't a really fine grade, but we did, it was maybe a screen lighter than what we used for potting the bonsai. We, I like styrofoam trays, deep styrofoam trays work really well, but you can, you know, a large shallow pot would work just as well. You want them, you know, put the cuttings about an inch apart, so you want to how many cuttings you have, you know, an inch apart, and you can decide, you know, how big a container. It's best to have a clear cover over the azaleas or over the cuttings. You know, there are commercially available seed starter kits that come with a transparent cover used for vegetable seeds. Those would work fine for satsuki. A lot of the, the plastic food containers that have flip lids that are clear plastic, you can punch holes in those, and some of them even have vents. Those would work really well as, in addition to all the others. As far as rooting hormone, um, you, it's not necessary. Uh, it might, you know, might increase the take. Uh, you should, you know, but we we would get 100% and never use it. If you do, do use a rooting hormone, be sure to follow the label instructions carefully. It's especially related to PPE or personal protective equipment. Make sure you wear gloves and, you know, glasses or goggles. Don't want to get it in your eye. When you strike the cuttings, when you put the cuttings into the soil, put them, don't put them too deep, a half an inch to three quarters of an inch. With no leaves touching the soil surface is, you know, it put them in just deep enough where they're stable and they won't fall over. That's, we don't want to get them too deep. And we'll say why in just a moment. But, well, if you put them too deep, they'll form two layers of roots. So if we, if you stick it in, you know, an inch, inch and a half, the roots will root above where it's cut and then they'll start to root up top. And that will cause you trouble down the line. It's best to put the cutting in straight up and down, perpendicular. I've seen even in Japan, people who would put them in at an angle and they would do that, you know, thinking later, you know, it will be easier to make the first spin in the trunk. But the problem is it causes problems with the surface roots. You'll have one, it'll produce one sided surface roots eight out of ten times. So it's best straight up and down. Worry about the trunk later. When you put them in the soil, you want to compress around, compress the soil around where the cutting is and then lightly water, you know, get a really fine water breaker with a really fine spray and water, water them thoroughly and remember to mark the name and it's best if you put a tag in. In the tray, what they are, put another tag in the other side. Redundancy and record keeping is really important because you lose one tag and you won't know what they are until they flower. So, you know, mark the name and put it with the cuttings. So we're doing this around the first part of June. About a month and a half to two months. We want to do our first transplant and we want to carefully remove. I use a what we refer to as a weeding knife, but just a utility knife and cut the cutting out from the soil from the pot it's in. And we want to move that carefully, move that up to a range. Around a two and a half, three inch pot. And, you know, we always use the same media to keep everything consistent. So about so after we start the cutting about two months later, we'll move that up into a small two and a half, three inch pot. We, you know, for the first couple of weeks, protect it from the Strong, you know, strong exposure, protect it from the wind. And you can start to lightly fertilize at this point. You can use a liquid feed would be fine or a good organic fertilizer. Bio gold is, you know, the standard, you know, fertile commercial Japanese fertilizer. Bio gold is really good for Satsuki. During that time, any little side branches on that on that cutting, we want to remove. If you see any buds popping out, just break them downward with your fingers. You don't cut them, just break them off. So the. The second transplant. Is about two and a half to three months. We will move those up to a four, four and a half inch pot. And at that time, you know, we're we're getting into late summer. We want to. You know, continue to break off the side branches. But at this time, instead of moving them. You know, we want to protect from the strong. Sun in the wind when we first put the first transplant them into that four, four and a half inch pot. But we want to keep those in partial shade. And what that will do is prevent the strong production of flower buds. And if they're if they're in partial shade. And remember, we want these to grow tall. We don't want any energy to go into flower production. And the bud set those those flower buds will start to develop. In the summer. Prior to the summer of the year prior to, you know, for prior to the year that they're going to bloom. So that second transplanting, keep those in partial shade into the fall. And if you do see any flower buds form. Carefully remove them. Use tweezers and carefully. Break those off. Remember, at the base of that flower are also or relief buds. So when you that hard flower, but if you just are really aggressive and breaking it off, you can injure those leaf buds, which. Is counterproductive. So just carefully remove any flower buds during that first year that the cutting has been done. The third transplant moving up to a six inch pot or so in the spring of the second year. So the the spring after you propagated the cutting, it can go to a six inch pot and you can start to let the side branches grow at that point. So in the plants. That we see with poor quality flowers. When you when you start to see the first bloom on the Satsuki. Mark and note the ones that. Don't look like the parent. You know, for the multicolor. Multi pattern flowers. Again, it might take three to four years to produce every flower type on the that is known to that cultivar. So we need to wait a while to make sure that all the flowers are true to type. But be sure to mark the ones that don't have the good flowers. For me, if they don't have a good flower. They need to be called out. You know, don't. You know, maybe that's a little harsh. But for a production. In a production situation, we wouldn't want those. We would we would destroy those. To keep them from. Keeping them out of the mix. Don't. You know, you can call them obscure. They might work well. You know, they might have good roots. And they might make a great bonsai later. But they're not really. A true to type cultivar. So be sure to. Not mark to mark them as such. I've seen a lot of. Trees that were marked. You know, Niko number two or Niko number three. And it would be a Niko flower. Cutting from a Niko. That had a white flower. Which would be, you know. We refer to it as Niko Dan. But it was. It's not Niko. It's obscure. It's just a. Odd flower color from that plant. Or a Kinsai round petal. You know, they might be a nice. But they wouldn't be. A true to type Kinsai. I've seen. Trees that were. Have been imported or Satsuki. That have been imported from Japan. That. Will have. A tag with the kanji. Kinsai. And then in. Up, you know. Upside down parentheses. Would have. The kanji for Madu. Ba or Madu. Round flower. And. Unless you. Are. Buying them. When they're in flower. You don't know. Unless you can read the tag. And so. You have to be careful. On that. A lot of the. Commercial production. For landscape. There are a few nurseries that. Specialized in Satsuki azaleas for. Landscape. And they might call. A. A. An off color. Flower. You know. Osaka Zuki. Number two. Or Niko. Number two. So you have to be careful. When. I came back from Japan. And we started. Propagating. Satsuki. In. The nursery. I can. Work for. Brussels. We. Were. Very careful. To get. The. Nursery stock. That was. The best. Quality. Flower. And of course. You know. We. Saw. Them. Bloom. Before. We took. The cuttings. And marked. Them. Appropriately. But. You need. To be very careful. On the stock. You get. And that's. Another. Point. If you're. Looking. To. Grow. Your. Own. Satsuki. From. Cuttings. True. To. Name. Satsuki. That. You. Can. You. Know. Even. Though. They're. Landscape. Plants. And. Multi. Stem. That's. A. Good. Source. To. Get. Your. Cuttings. From. To. Grow. Satsuki. For. You. You. Know. What. I. Do. And. How. I. Got. To. Japan. And. How. We. What. I. Went. To. Study. I. Was. I. Started. Working. For. Brussels. Martin. At. The. Opportunity. In. Nineteen. E. Five. I. Was. Offered. A. Apprentice. Apprenticeship. At. The. Canuma. Nature. And. Bonsai. Park. In. Canuma. City. Japan. And. Under. The. Tutelage. Of. Makoto. Hashimoto. Satsuki. And. Bonsai. Training. And. You. Know. Bonsai. Is. Wiring. Wiring. As. Bonsai. So. I. I. Went. In. My. Apprenticeship. Was. Ran. Through. Two. Cultural. Visas. Four. Years. At. The. Long. Time. Almost. Eleven. Years. And. He. Was. A. Five. Needle. Pine. And. As. A. Spruce. Expert. And. He. Came. To. The. Bonsai. Park. In. The. Late. Seventies. Mr. Okaku. He. Asked. The. Owner. Who. Did. That. And. He. Tracked. Down. Mr. Ashimoto. And. Hired. Him. So. When. I. Went. To. Japan. I. Went. You. Know. To. The. Bonsai. Park. And. The. Bonsai. And. He. Came. And. Came. To. The. Bonsai. I. Went. To. Japan. And. He. Came. He. Came. He. Went. To. India. And. To. The. Bonsai. Um, uh, but so when I went, um, I didn't really understand, um, a lot about Satsuki. Um, you know, we grew them at Brussels and I, you know, I knew some cultivars and I, of course, thought I knew something about wiring until the first day I got to the park and realized I didn't know anything. But, um, the, you know, the, the bonsai or, or, you know, bonsai, when you think of bonsai, it's a containerized, um, tree or woody ornamental that you style in this, to look like an old majestic tree in nature. And with Satsuki, and naturally it's a multi-stem shrub, which is, um, you know, it's, it's hard, um, you know, we're, we're using, we want flower display. We want nice big branch pads for flower display. Display. So we're, we're kind of, um, manipulating that whip, uh, to look like a pine tree. So it's not really a natural style. And so the bonsai people and the Satsuki people, at least in the eighties, when I was in Japan, um, you know, it was two different worlds. We had the Satsuki people and the bonsai people. And so they both have, they both have good points, but like I told people when they'd asked me, um, you know, some, some really high caliber bonsai people would say, oh, do you like, you know, you like Satsuki, you know, I like good bonsai. Um, so I was there for, uh, you know, to, for bonsai and my teacher, um, used bonsai techniques for Satsuki. And that was, in fact, that was one of the name of a book that Mr. Okaku did with John Naka and Richard Oda. Um, you know, that was the title, Bonsai Techniques for Satsuki. And, uh, Mr. Hashimoto did, um, all of the wiring, uh, in that book. Um, and it's a great book if you can find it. Um, you're probably the, the best book on bonsai, um, bonsai instruction as well as, um, Satsuki. But, you know, why do Satsuki make great bonsai, you know, you know, the positive attributes. You know, beautiful flowers, um, mostly in scale with the size of the plant, uh, you know, small to medium leaves, and as mentioned with like Yatanokagami, many have really good fall color, which, you know, I didn't really think about until I got to the park and saw all the different varieties and, uh, the different colors they would change in to, to the fall a lot, only the older leaves would change color. But some even the, uh, the, the current year leaves would have nice, uh, dark red to yellow, uh, coloration. Um, good habit. They really respond well to pruning. Uh, they have a lot of, uh, you know, latent buds in the stem. And so when you prune them, they'll respond really well. And they're very long lived in container culture, as long as you take care of, um, you know, proper repotting. And proper watering, which we'll, we'll talk about a little as well. Um, you know, Bonsai versus Satsuki, you know, the natural habit is a multi-stem shrub and, you know, we're styling them and as Hashimoto-san put it, um, you, you use Satsuki, just you style a Satsuki like you would a Goyamatsu or Japanese five-needle plant. Um, you use Satsuki, just you style a Satsuki like you would a Goyamatsu or Japanese five-needle plant. Um, you use Satsuki, just you style a Satsuki like you would a Goyamatsu or Japanese five-needle plant. Um, you use Satsuki, just you style a Satsuki like you would a Goyamatsu or Japanese five-needle plant. five-needle pine, and with five-needle pine, you have all the styles, really, you know, in the Nassau area of Tochigi Prefecture, lower elevations, you see the Pinus parviflora, big formal, big upright formal trees, you get up into the higher mountains in Tochigi and Fukushima Prefecture, that, you know, very heavy snow load, the branches will grow up in the spring, and the snow load will bend them down in the winter, the trunk and the branches, and in the spring, it'll grow up again, and after decades, you have a lot of character in the tree. The Satsuki, you know, they grow on the riverside, so they cling to rocks. When swept, so all the styles, you can, you can use with Satsuki. The main goal is to create big clouds and pads of foliage for flower display, and the, the age, you know, the wiring, the techniques to give the branches and the flowers a little bit in the trunk to aged appearance, it's the same as bonsai, you know, the same, same school as bonsai wiring technique. So there are Satsuki specific techniques, some which I don't adhere to or use, especially on micromanaging flower buds in the fall. You know, that, we never did that at the park. You know, that, we never did that at the park. You know, that, we never did that at the park. And we had, you know, we were one of the three exhibitions for the Satsuki Festival in May. And we had, you know, we were one of the three exhibitions for the Satsuki Festival in May. We never micromanaged flowers. We never micromanaged flowers. But there are, there's certain things that the formal Satsuki schools do that we don't in bonsai techniques. So nobody's right if everybody's wrong. You know, I've, even the current publisher of the Satsuki Kinkyu, he was in England years ago when I was doing an exhibition, doing a demonstration, and he looked at the tree when I was finished and he's like, Bonsai Park Satsuki, and I was like, yeah, Bonsai Satsuki. So there's still a little, still a little ribbing from both schools. So when you're looking at, you know, you've worked for three, four years, and you've had the whip, and you are starting, you want to start to style it, you know, we want to look at the surface roots, the knee body. And pick, pick the roots. Pick the roots. Pick where the best, the widest flare is, the, the best display of the surface roots. Amate, or front, you know, we're looking to pick the front of the tree. The surface roots are, you can't really change those. You can, you expect them to, to swell and get bigger and develop later, but initially, you want to pick the widest. You want to pick the biggest flare and the, and the best, the best flare and display in the front. You know, we have what's, you know, the, the trunk to the, to the first branch, and then, you know, we've, that will help decide, also decide the front. Amate. surface roots I look at is about 50% of the decision-making on when you're picking the front of a tree. So we want the crown, other than a formal upright, we want the crown to tilt slightly forward towards us, you know, a lot of people say apex, I've always used crowns, you can, and the branches should have good placement, and we'll go through that a little bit as well. But on the front, the surface roots, Tachinagari, you know, the trunk between the, between the roots and the first branches. Um. You know, it gives the, the aged appearance, we want it slightly tapering up from the roots. And we want the, you know, hopefully to have the movement, you know, a curve or some movement in that lower trunk up to the first branch and on the, so on the surface roots and the lower trunk and the trunk up to the first branch is really going to really decide the front of the tree. From the first branch up, that's more controllable. We can change that where the surface roots in the lower trunk, not much you can do. It's up, turn it around in the pipe. And it's always a compromise. It's never going to be perfect. So you're finding a happy balance between. Uh, between those. And we mentioned, you know, earlier, you know, the, the gradual taper from the base, you know, up to the first branch, of course, but, um, all the way to the top of the tree, we want, um, to have a gradual taper to give that aged appearance. And we also want to see that in the branches as well. We don't want to have. Thick, heavy, uh, branches all the way out to the end. We want to break that down and gradually taper the branch size, uh, the twig size and the branches out to the, out to the perimeter. And, you know, we talk to the trunks caliber, um, proportional to the height of the tree. Uh, we don't want to have a, um. A skinny, you know, a, a skinny trunk with a very tall tree. Uh, we want to find that balance between, uh, the, the caliber of the trunk and the height. The crown, um, you know, really the point of the balance, point of balance for the tree. Um, you know, we mentioned except for the formal uprights, you know, leaning towards you a little bit. Um, and again, in proportion to the rest of the tree, we don't want, um, a, uh, a short tree with the, with the top that's the, the same width as the lower branches. We want it proportionally, um, uh, smaller as we, uh, to, to balance off with the rest of the branches. And, you know. Not really with, uh, Satsuki or, or five-needle pine, but, you know, few exceptions, you know, the older trees, once they reach to the point where they're, um, at their mature, uh, size, you have many small branches creating a crown. Um, except on some, uh, conifers, they typically don't keep going a single liter. They start to. Um, to fan out and create a, a broad crown. Now, this is, you know, basic, um, you know, basic, uh, bonsai, the position, uh, length and direction, uh, the open space between the branches, um, and, you know, again, proportionate with in, in harmonizing with the trunk's height. Um, you know, we, you know, it's case by case, every tree's a little different. Um, the first, you know, the first branch, um, should extend, uh, to the right or left, um, of the tree. Um, the sashi, sashi-eda and yuki-eda, uh, is the strong, the primary focal point. Um. And. You know, either on one side, uh, the sashi, sashi-eda, um, is really where, uh, you're balancing the crown with that primary branch. Uh, the yuki-eda is the branch on the opposite, um, to help balance the, the sashi-eda. Um, so, you know, the sashi-eda could be. Typically, it's the first branch. There are some cases where it might be the second branch, even the, the third branch. Um, you know, there's, uh, a few trees that the first branch is even in the back and, uh, you know, they're, they're great trees. But, uh, so it's really the, um, the tree, you know, the, the branch that you want to focus on. Um. And, and balancing all the branches on the tree out. It's hard not to have a tree here to, to, to show you. But, um, you know, the, going through the problem branches, and this is just, you know, Bonesaw 101, um, you know, bar branches, uh, things that draw your attention that are visibly obtrusive. Um, some bar branches, you can, um, camouflage and kind of hide that they're directly across. And they might, you might have to keep one. But you can work and, and find a, a happy balance. Um, parallel branches, spoke branches, which mostly you see on conifers, and you typically will just remove, um, one or more to. To even that out. You see spoke branches sometimes on, um, uh, Rhododendron quichianum. Um, if you, spoke branches typically, if you leave too many branches at one spot, the trunk will start to swell. And so it's, uh, um, you know, it's, it's almost, it's very important to try to remove as many branches in a, in a spoked area as you can. Um, eye pokers, uh, you know, branches that come directly out the front. Once you've picked the, you know, use your, uh, pick the front of the tree. Um, if a branch is coming right out and it's in the lower, lower part of the tree, it probably needs to be removed. If it's in the top half, third of the tree. If it's coming directly out, you can usually work with that to help create the, the crown. Um, but you know, any heavy branches that are coming straight out at you, uh, probably need to take them out. Um, if all the branches are on one side, um, you can try to remove some, uh, and work with new shoots. I've seen a lot of people with, especially with azaleas that are one-sided, uh, try to make a raft style. And that typically never really works out well. Um, I've seen some good ones, but, um, you know, that's normally a plant that we would, uh, probably not want to use. Um, and then up downs and water shoots, secondary branching. Uh. Extending from the, uh, top and the bottom. Uh. That's normal pruning. We can take care of those with, with normal pruning throughout the seasons. Um. It's pretty, you know, basic bonsai stuff there. And training the, the young sasuke. Um. You know, the cold, heat tolerant. We talked about the, you know, the rhododendron mendicum, the rhododendron maricarpum. You know, the indigums are more, more cold hardy. Uh. They'll work better, uh, in a little more, you know, uh, colder climates. The ericarpum might not work as well. They might, you might see some winter issues. Um. You know, again, good branching. It's got a good knee body. It's got a good, you know, lower trunk. Um. And, you know, with sasuke. And this is a slide I put in specifically for, you know, training the young whips. Um. You know, and the thing with sasuke. In 10, 15 years from a cutting. You can have a 25, 30 centimeter trunk. And really make something, you know, really, really nice in a short amount of time. As compared to a. To a conifer or deciduous tree. Um. And, um. We talked about height. A little bit. Um. And I'll say one to two years here. It's more of a two year. Where I would look at the cutting. I want the cutting to be. Around. 18 inches. When I, when I start to wire it. So, um. That's usually three to four years. Um. You can, you know, some of the faster growing sasuke will give you a taller whip faster. Um. But that's really about the height I want to start with. If you, if you wire the sasuke too early. And this is a key point. They'll be stunted. Um. They'll never caliber. Especially if the wiring is really aggressive and tight. Um. So we, we need to wait until. They're. Still pliable. But just. Right at that. Right at the edge. Um. Is the best time to put that. Movement in the trunk. Um. So, um. The sasuke. Are. Uh. Very brittle. Um. Some more than others. The kozan family. In my experience. Kozan family. Or. Or more brittle. Than. Osaka. Suki. Or. Uh. Chinzon. Um. Kaho. Akon. Gyo. Tin. Um. Aburi. Or. Otsuki. Um. Those. Are. Fairly pliable as well. Uh. But. Kozon. Are pretty. In kozon. You see a lot. Um. And. Probably. The. The plants that are imported into the country now. Into the US now. A lot of them are kozon family. And. Um. So. They're. They're a little more brittle. You need to be. careful on where you place the wire. So, you know, just remember they're night and day as compared to wiring a conifer. You have to be very careful where you place the wire, play close attention to that. You know, I say prior planning and careful wire application and bending. We'll get through that a little bit as well later. The best time to wire the trunk, the whip, into a basic shape again is, you know, three years, anywhere from two to four. It really depends on the variety you're working with. But typically around three years is where you'll want to just start putting the initial movement in the whip. The best time to wire the trunk is in the fall or late winter. When it's not so brittle and of course, I'd go over the small branches you can wire most any time, but let's go back to the fall and late winter. winter. So, I use this in deciduous bonsai as well, just in this idea. Like in the summer when the sap is flowing, the tree is leafed out and is actively growing, it's going to be more brittle. But as the tree starts to slow down in the early fall, the sap starts to drop and it just is on the, just thinking about dormancy, winter dormancy. At that, when that sap starts to drop, the trunk, the branch is a little more pliable during that period. the early fall and then in the late winter as it starts to wake up and you have sap start to move up but not not in full full force but just just where it's starting to the buds are just starting to move in the in the late winter that's the best time for the satsuki whip wiring in preparation to wiring the whip um of course we only want to uh to use a healthy plant you know if it's uh the color is off if it looks weak don't wire it because the wiring um getting the a plant getting wired and uh having a lot of movement twisting in the trunk it's very slippery stressful you're pulling you know this the cellular structure apart a little bit and if you're not using a healthy tree that can really recover well that can tolerate that you're not going to have a good result so only a healthy tree you know well rooted in the container make sure it's tied in the container well but that should be done that should be already be done prior to wiring a Satsuki and this is where a lot of these wives tales or misinformation comes from I guess that shouldn't have said this too in the same sentence but if you look at some of the old recommendations that you need to stop watering a couple of days before you wire it so they'll be more pliable that's a bad idea you want you want the tree well hydrated but you don't want to you don't want it over hydrated you don't want to over water it so the best the best thing to do prior to wiring is to put the put the Satsuki in the shade for a couple of days you know two or three days in limit the water keep it well keep the soil moist but don't overwater the tree but keep it in the shade for a few days you know limit the water don't drought stress it and again determine the front of the tree we talked about looking at the knee body to touch you know god you know you need to the branches, find that happy balance, you know, between the primary branch, the crown, you know, use all the variables to find the best front. And mark it, you know, be sure to mark the front so you can keep referring back to it. And, you know, what style we're going to use, if it's going to be a cascade, formal upright, if you're using a multi trunk, kabu dachi, multi stem, or a two or three trunk, you know, we know what we're using there. And then we'll go in and remove the branches that we're not going to need. And on the wiring, and we'll go over more of this a little later too, but when you look at wiring a satsuki, especially the whip when you're first doing it, we want to use, you know, the correct size of wire, how to find that. It's best, you know, to test the tree to see how pliable it is. And, you know, this is a little trial and error, but typically on, if you're using aluminum wire on a satsuki, it's three quarter to one to one, the diameter of the branch you're working with, especially on the whip. You know, my recommendation is if you, you know, if you're, if you're using it for a satsuki, I would recommend, I want to tell you, you know, between picking, you know, between two different size wires, pick the bigger of the two. When you're wiring a whip, it's a good idea, instead of one large wire to use two wires. Maybe a little smaller, maybe the same size. But you have more surface contact and you have, it's going to be a little more, a to make that bend. It's going to be stronger, more surface contact area, and the trunk's going to be less likely to break. And when you're measuring the wire for the whips, and that leads to a story, usually about a third more wire than the height of the whip you're working with. The Satsuki nurseries around Konuma, when they were wiring whips, they would use un-annealed aluminum. You know, they wouldn't, you know, the brown coloration, we call it annealing, but it's really more of a brown coating on the aluminum wire. That's more expensive than just the raw aluminum. So, they would just use the raw aluminum, and they had, when the wiring was done, they would unwrap that heavy wire from the whips, because they didn't want to cut it, because that cost a lot of money. And they had vices that they would clamp the one end into, and straighten the wire back out to reuse it for the next year. And I got to do a lot of that. But, so, again, two wires is better than one, more surface contact, and it's, you're going to, it's going to be a little easier to make those big, aggressive bends. So, we talked about the Tachinogari, this is probably the first time you've ever used it. And, you know, if it's leaning to the right, you know, from the surface, or it's, it's leaning to the right, typically you're, you're going to wire clockwise. And if it's, you know, if it's leaning to the left, then it's counter-clockwise. You want to follow that flow. That's already in the, in the trunk. And in the whip, we want to take that heavy, the heavy wire, we're gonna, we're going to go on, for example, wire the trunk with and we want to put it all the way to the bottom of the pot to securely anchor it if there's a wide flare on the surface roots go as close to that as you can typically you know we've already marked the front i'm going to start the wire in the in the back or wherever i can get the closest to the trunk but typically if it's in the back that that's where i want to go and we're going to wrap the wire you know close to the trunk and that's you know my teacher always said that you think about when you're when you're putting the wire on it if you can slide a piece of rice paper between the wire and the trunk you've accomplished the perfect the perfect tightness on the wire i never i'm still trying to figure that one out but so we want to you know carefully wind the wire on the trunk uh satsuki or you know it's very hard wood they're easy to scar um so we want to be careful you know when we're applying the wire we want to twist the wire on the trunk and if you need to you know we're using fairly heavier wire if if you need a pair of wire pliers to help you coil the wire on the trunk that's a really good idea of course the angle of the wire should be around 45 degrees um and not too tight or too loose it'd be perfect a marked discussion that was the rice paper deal but i've seen instances where um maybe the whip is is a little thick and it's um you know it's maybe on a variety that is really brittle we would use raffia and and especially on the lower trunks we might put raffia on the lower trunk just to to help prevent the trunk from cracking rarely did i don't know if i've learned how to do that much but the scholars say that raffia is really hard wood so i would put raffia on the lower trunk maybe on the lower trunk just uh top to help prevent uh the trunk from cracking um rarely did um i don't know if i'd better do this one that was another one i cheat but it was... I saw too much of it, was copper wire used in initially wiring the whips. We did use, and I still use copper on azaleas for most everything, except on the larger wire, I will wrap with paper before applying just because of, how the copper as it work hardens, as you apply it, it can get very stiff and you can damage the bark on the azaleas. So wrapping with paper will help that. And as copper oxidizes, it can stain the trunk or branches. Normally it's not an issue unless it's on the lower trunk or on parts of the property. So that's the primary branching where you can see. And then the prior planning, the nine P's. Prior planning plus perfect practice prevents particularly poor performance. I've changed the word out in there, but you know, the more, the prior planning is very important with Satsuki. You know, the wire should, should be put on where the outside of the bend is supported by the wire. If, you know, something that you might get away with, you know, if, you know, something that you might get away with, you know, if, you know, something that you might get away with, you know, on a limber genus species like a shimpaku, or a five-needle pine or, or, or Kurama or black pine that are limber, that, that outside, that coil maybe doesn't have to be on the outside of the bend. It should be, but you, sometimes you can get away with it. With the Satsuki being brittle, you have to have that wire to support that bend. or it's going to break. And I caused my, I provided my teacher with hours of amusement in learning that. Because learning how to wire on Satsuki azaleas in hindsight was great because it taught you what you cannot do. At the time, it was a bit frustrating, but it's an instant grading system. Because if you make a mistake, it breaks off in your hand. And Mr. Okaku, you know, was very nice in letting me practice on all his Satsuki, but you don't want to learn, you don't want a learning curve on your plant. So we need to make sure that we know where we want that branch to bend before we, put the wire on. Because we need to get that coil on the outside of the bend to support it. If there, you need to look for any scars, old wounds, maybe a knot or where the trunk is twisted, that the internals could be brittle. And you, you, when you bend that, it's going to fracture and crack. And bending the trunk. If we're, you know, we're styling a typical informal upright with the whip. You know, the trunks, we want the curves from side to side of course. But we also want some from front to back. We don't want, you know, a two-dimensional ithobache. where it's just a repeated S or repeated C. We want character, you know, front to back. Think of, you know, in the mountains where the heavy snow load in the winter bends the branches down and they grow up in the spring and get bent down again. We want to emulate that natural effect from the snow load. So we're, you know, a three-dimensional trunk line. And we need to support that bend. You know, I'll use, I don't have enough thumbs here, but we want to use both thumbs to bend that branch with the coil in the right place, with the wire in the right place. If it's a really heavy bend, you can, when you're bending it, slightly twist. You know, not turn it but just slightly twist and that will help you make a severe bend. We want to remember this is a young whip. And as that whip calibers up, it's going to lose a lot of that, a lot of that exaggerated curve curvature. So don't be afraid to put, you know, really aggressive curves because as the tree calibers up it will become more subtle and that you know we're planning for the future on that you know bending um you know bending slowly on the on the young whips it's not as you know we're we're probably not going to use a jack but if you can you know if it's a really brittle variety like yattano kagami the kagami family are very brittle you might put the get as far as you think you can without breaking and after you know two or three days come back and and bend a little bit more you could maybe get a little more bend um after after a couple of three days as far as using a jack or a turnbuckle with the whip it's you usually are not going to do that sometimes to to hold a curve at the at the top of the tree you could run a wire from the lower lower part of the whip to the top maybe to help keep that if it's too springy and you don't want to put another wire on but usually we're not going to use a trunk or a turnbuckle as far as using a a branch bender don't the sasuke are much too brittle and typically if you need a you know trunk benders are really not used a whole lot except in in a lot of use a whole lot except in in a lot of use a whole lot except in in a lot of in really specific instances talked a little bit of the copper versus aluminum especially on the small branches i use copper there's absolutely nothing wrong with aluminum you tend to use a little larger diameter which may be a little more obtrusive especially if you're working on a customer's tree in my case i want to i want it as clean and nice as i can copper wire that's properly annealed as you coil it on the branch or the trunk it work hardens it gets stiffer as it's bent and you you know if you're if you're just starting off wiring in practicing the work hardening if you make a mistake you can't back it up and if you make a mistake you can't back it up and and move it over to the other branch that work hardening you know pretty much you need to cut it off and and do it over again aluminum you can it's more pliable it doesn't have that work hardening uh property to it so you can uncoil it and and continue on with it um on satsuki it might be good in some ways i don't go for a part of it because um on satsuki it might be good in some ways i don't go for a part of it because especially if you're not comfortable with copper, because you're using a bigger wire. It's more pliable. You have more surface contact. I still use aluminum a lot on deciduous trees. You know, the old adage, you know, copper's for professionals. Aluminum and copper. On the branch, you know, again, check how pliable it is and pick the right size wire. You know, I'm just, I'm one of, it's part of the nine P's. Always start with the lowest branch on the tree. You know, we've decided the height, we've decided the, you know, how big the crown's gonna be. And when you start at the lowest branch, the lower branch and finish that branch, and then go to the next highest. That way you can keep everything in scale and balanced with the top. If you start on the bottom and you put the primary, you put the main wire on and you go and you put the end, you know, using one wire for two branches and you put the other wire, and you go and cut something on this branch and cut it too short, then you might have to go and you have to take more off of this branch, more off the top. It's best to just slowly work your way up from the bottom so you can, you know, step back, look at it, keep everything in scale. You know, we're styling these branches like a pine. So a good, a rule of thumb is to shape the branch like your cupped hand. Clean line underneath, nothing growing, shooting down, rounded outline and layered towards the trunk. So we have all the branches layered to create a nice rounded cloud on the branch. So starting from the perimeter wire all the small branches down and move the branches down. And then move back towards the trunk, you know, putting the wires where you need, or putting the branches where you need to put those. Then moving up to the next highest branch all the way around to the trunk. That's the best way. You don't want to put heavy wire on the lower branch and then put a, you know, go to a branch that's on top and bend it down. Then have to go back in there and do it again. And, you know, you create a tight space to go in. So you want to, you know, finish the lower branch before you bend anything else down on top of it. Using one wire for two branches whenever possible. You want to, you know, look at the branch length. I usually add about a third, the length of the branch to the wire. Think about how much wire it's going to take to go around the trunk one, one and a half times. And then the length of the other branch when you're, when you're deciding, you know, how long the wire to cut. So one branch, one wire for two branches, being sure to go around the trunk at least once. One and a half times to secure that wire. Because you don't want to put a wire on one, one wire on two branches and both of the branches move when you, when you bend the other one. So we want to secure that wire by going around the trunk or the main branch at least one, one and a half times. If there's a open space, there's a, you know, a branch that you need to wire that you don't have anything that's that you can anchor it to. What I do is I'll start, I'll take a wire and wrap around the trunk around three times to secure that wire and then wire the branch. around the trunk or the main branch will anchor that wire enough where it won't move when you bend that branch. If I do that with a larger wire and I'm using it on the trunk, I'll take a pair of pliers and I'll bend a little coil at the end of the wire which will help hold with my finger and I'll start at the back of the trunk and go around a couple of three times for that branch to get that branch to wire. This is a pet peeve. Keep all the wire running in the same direction. Don't cross the main wires. Always keep everything running the same direction. Sometimes with the fine wire, out at the tips, you can cross, but I typically frown upon crossed wires. It's the prior planning. In general, use as little wire as possible to get the job done. Sometimes, especially on the young whips and the young branches, it'll look like something out of Popular Mechanics. That's the first time. Especially if you're not using annealed copper or annealed aluminum, it can look pretty mechanical. Again, use the right size and as little as you can to get the job done. A couple of notes on shaping the branches. It's specifically for Satsuki. The area where the branch meets the trunk is very brutal. It's the most brutal part of the plant. You want to gently lower or, in some cases, raise the branch very carefully, very slowly from the base over the base at the front. If the trunk is linked in an elusive one, raise the bottom branch roughly 60mm cord assimpied with the oriental root. Next, are you having problems? of the trunk and be sure to use the pads of your thumbs to support it and stop right before it cracks lisa that's what my teacher suggested i do but again you know saskis are are very brittle and you have to pay really close attention um and we talked about you know wiring the uh the secondary branches the um the fine fine branching to emulate that old old pine branch with the uh with the you know with shape of your cupped hand and that's our flower display that's going to allow us to continually prune to thin out and to keep really um fresh vibrant foliage to produce the best flowers for the next couple of weeks and then we're going to move on to the next one and that's the um the wiring aftercare um and this is general um for bonsai you know protect from the sun in the wind for several weeks and then slowly move it back out if it's wired in the fall you know protect from freezing in a cold frame or you know or if it's uh it depends on where you live of course your local bonsai community can give you you know care tips on on winter care winter protection but you know don't let it go through a hard frost if uh or hard freeze if it's just been wired because you know remember when we wire and bend we weaken that branch somewhat so we want to be very careful and and protect that watch the wire carefully to prevent it from getting too tight and causing entry injury if you're if you do wire in the fall you do your whips in the fall that wire should come off within maybe six months after it starts growing in the spring you might see it start cutting cutting in a little bit get that wire off if you do wire in the spring about three to four months it's going to it's the trunk's going to swell the bins are going to set quicker so if you wire in the spring three to four months you'll probably be taking that wire off there is absolutely no excuse for wire scarring a satsuki or anything for that matter except some of the conifers especially the ones that you wire and the wires on for three years and you take it off and a week later it comes out sometimes on conifers you can let the wire get a little tight not on satsuki not on deciduous no excuse and removing the wire opposite to the application you're calling the wire on uncoil the wire off on the smaller wire i typically unwind all of the small wire some of the larger wire i'll cut if i can't get off without risk of entry the problem is if you cut all the if you cut a lot of the small wire you're going to miss a little piece and two years later the branch is going to die because you girdled that branch and it's especially if you cut if you if it's copper and it's hard to see and go back and check so it's best to unwind the smaller wire and we're going to talk a little more about this and come back to this later in the session in the seasonal care. But really pruning on the Satsuki three times. Before bloom, we want to remove any strong shoots, sucker growth from the crotches, from the bottom of the branches, you know, to clean it up. And be careful, you know, not to cut the flower buds off because that's what we're after. And if you're styling the tree, if it's in development stages, before bloom is the best time to remove big branches. And we'll, again, we'll circle back to how to do that as well. But when you remove the bigger branches early in the season, you provide a longer growth period for that callus to start to close over that wound. You know, plants really don't heal, they don't, you know, they compartmentalize the injury and create a callus to cover that. So we want to give the tree as long as we can during that first season that we make that big cut for that callus to come back. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . it's way better than any other cut you've ever made to make it better than anything else you've looked at, but that's exactly what's important. We try to make that look pleasing to visitors. . . . . to close over to help protect that wound. After bloom, and depending on the vigor and development stages of the Satsuki, a week to 10 days after removing the old flowers and the seed pods, we want to prune. And let's go back and think a little bit about when the plant is flowering, it's in really a dormant-ish, I can't really say dormancy because it's technically not dormancy, but it's a period where all the energy is going into flower production and not a lot into growth. So when we remove all the flowers and the seed pods. It's going to take the plant a little while to realize that it's not blooming anymore. And of course, this is all hormonal signals and really complicated stuff. But normally a week to 10 days, the tree is going to adjust and start growing again. That's the best time to prune because you're going to get a... A faster response. So the tree's waking up, the shoots are starting to grow. When that's pruned, it's going to respond quicker than if you just pruned it right after you remove the flowers. On pruning the new spring growth after blooming. There's two. There's two primary methods. If the plant is in a development stage and you're wanting to thicken branches up or lengthen branches out, the best pruning method is what I refer to as fish tailing. Two shoots, two leaves. Leave two shoots at a certain... At the end. At the terminal end of the branch, leave two shoots and two leaves on those two shoots. If the tree is more refined and you have the branches where you want them, it's flowered nice, and you have a lot of growth on the branch. You can remove all of the spring growth, leaving about an eighth of an inch of green, first year growth at the end. Don't prune it back to hard wood. Leave a little, you know, eighth to a quarter inch of greenwood, but take the rest of the shoot all the way back to that. So that's one way. It's going to respond quick, you're going to get shorter internodal growth, and we'll clean in, you know, in the fall, we'll thin that out and clean it. But that is the best way to keep the Satsuki and scale year to year. If you do two shoots, two leaves, after three years, you have, you know, two or three inches of growth that you have to do a heavier prune. And that's not necessary if the branches are developed and they're in good shape. And it's a mature plant. It's a mature tree, mature bonsai. There are, there is a different method where I've seen people cut back to two shoots and then cut the leaves in half. That's in the Satsuki school of technique. But I mention it because, you know, this is really on Satsuki, but that's something that you can research. But cutting the leaves is tedious and it's really not necessary for development. As mentioned earlier, the flower buds start to set in the summer, the year prior to blooming. So make sure, and this is just a general rule of thumb, by, we used to say mid-July, but I'm going to go back, by the early to middle part of July, have your pruning completed. Or you're going to start to cut off flower buds for next year. If you're designing the tree, development stages, that's not really an issue. It's just a matter of time. So make sure. But if you want flowers for next year, be mindful that after the, the middle of, middle of July, you're going to be cutting flower buds off. The third pruning in the fall is just cleaning up any of the summer shoots, the sucker, water shoot growth. And thinning out areas that, you know, you don't want to prune. You don't want to prune areas that get congested. If you, if you took all the new growth off and you have a lot of foliage, you might go in and, and thin out some of the, the more congested areas. The fall is a good time to lightly brush the trunk. Azalea trunks can get a little dirty, platey. Hard plates, small hard plates on the trunk, on the, on the trunk surface. They make soft stainless tapered brushes specifically for Satsuki. So you, the taper, you can get in between small branches. You can use light brass brushes, really soft brass, brass brushes. Brass brushes can work too. The, the, the really fine stainless are the best though. So on the branch anatomy, you know, cutting a large branch on a Satsuki or an Azalea. Let's just say if you're, if you're working with a robust branch, you're going to want to cut a large branch on a Satsuki or an Azalea. But what we looked at was going to wrap a invert with a Rhododendron quicianum, or even azaleas that have been dug up from, with large trunks from the garden. A lot, a lot of people in the Southeast use large azaleas for Bonsai. Cutting a large branch or root can result in killing each other. Satsuki or azaleas can compartmentalize between a branch and a root. So one root, one large root can compartmentalize in the lower trunk up to that branch or maybe two or three branches. And if you cut that root, those branches will die. Or in turn, if you cut the branches, the root will die, which can lead to really bad root rot issues. So we need to be careful on how large a branch we cut at one time or how big a root we cut at one time when we're repotting. And depending on the size of the branch, special pruning techniques can be used to reduce, um, uh, injury. We, we call it tricking the branch. We can make a, um, we can cut a wedge out and leave the lower 20 to 30% of the branch attached to the trunk. And what that does, and of course we'll thin foliage out as well, but when we injure that, um, uh, area, the tree, uh, responds by, um, activating those latent buds, those dormant buds. So we start to get shoots around that, um, coming out of that injured area, which will continue to draw, uh, energy up from that, the roots. And then leaving that lower 20, 30%, um, of the branch attached to the trunk will continue to feed that foliage as well. So after two or three years, um, as we start to get, um, branching that is substantial coming from, uh, the trunk around the wound, we can go and remove that main branch. And it won't, uh, it won't kill the root that that branch would, had, uh, a relationship to. Um, I've seen a lot of old azaleas, um, uh, from, you know, big production areas down in, uh, Mobile, um, Mobile, LA, that's lower Alabama. Um, and, but even in Louisiana too, you know, where a lot of the, um, old, uh, nurseries have been growing azaleas for 100, 150 years, um, they would dig up these big, giant trunks, but they would cut the roots and the heavy branches. And they, you would see all the decay in the trunk and the trunk would be half dead. Um, and that's the reason because of how the branches and the roots compartmentalize. So, it's something on old azaleas to be very mindful of. Um, here are my general rules. If, um, the branch is equal to a third or less than a third of the trunk's diameter, it's typically okay to remove that whole branch. Um, if it's a third to half the trunk, it's okay to remove the whole branch. Um, if it's a third to half the trunk, it's typically okay to remove that whole branch. trunks diameter there's a little greater risk in causing injury down into the roots if it's over half if the branch is over half the trunks diameter it's a pretty good chance that it's going you're going to have some damage whether that's going to really affect the overall health of the tree it's case by case but if the branch is you know two-thirds three-quarter diameter of the trunk it's a sure bet that you're probably going to see part of the trunk die down into the root system and in that case you you want to use a technique that you know mentioned before where you can replace try to replace some growth around that cut before you take that main branch off and flush cuts convex cuts you know small branches can be cut flush you know above the branch collar sometimes it's hard to tell on satsukis where that collar where the branch attaches to the trunk but on the small branches you can cut those flush the cuts from areas where you take a larger branch off on the satsuki should be slightly convex you don't want to make a concave cut into a azalea for the mention what we mentioned above how how it will die it will it will cause dye back in the trunk into the root system so we want to make a slightly convex cut on the on the larger branches um in cuts with the larger than a pencil i'll say a one of the one of the uh elementary school the big pencil anything bigger than a pencil should be shaved smooth with a very sharp one-sided one bevel single bevel grafting knife utility knife um and uh this is uh what's referred to as a grafting knife but um this is just a utility knife but it's a single bevel uh very sharp um and you can uh using your thumb you know your your the hand holding the handle is support and using your thumb to slightly smooth down that convex cut satsuki uh or azaleas uh callus over uh much better on smooth wound surfaces than left rough and again you know slightly convex when we're making uh cuts uh larger cuts we'll uh i'll use a very fine saw this is actually a saw that's not produced anymore this is uh from masakuni and this was uh especially marketed as for satsuki azaleas very very fine set and this made a very smooth cut which then you could go back with flat knob cutters and slightly round out that convex cut prior to the cut to using the grafting knife to shave that smooth this cut when we talked about taking the large branch off and or in our tricking the tree discussion this is the what the saw I would use to cut that wedge out of the branch and the air the cut area towards the trunk we would shave down and then seal that whole wedge by filling it with cut paste clay based cut paste there are even though these saws aren't produced anymore from for Masa cuny there are a couple of great substitutes this is a small saw from ars this is marketed as a ikebana or flower arranging saw to cut to cut branches that they use in in Japanese flower arranging not as fine as set on the teeth but very fine I use this my crews at Isley nursery use this in our maple production make a makes a really fine cut so there are there are some good replacements for the for the Satsuki saws Masa cuny still markets a a saw but it is from a different manufacturer and the the teeth are a little coarser than even the ars you so pruning dose we talked about removing the new growth and keeping the the growth in scale with the with the tree with the bonsai so if we if we take all the new growth off in the spring and get a flush after you know two to three years we have maybe an inch of growth so we want to go back every you know one to two years and thin that out take maybe 20 percent of the growth to let light and sun or to let light and improve air circulation so every every one to two years on the satsuki that are that are have dense foliage that have you know have have nice full branching um we want to go in and remove you know up to 20 but every three to five years we need to go in and reduce the growth to get the tree back into scale and what we're really looking for are heavy wood out that are that's growing out in the end of the branches go after the heaviest wood and the weakest and and to keep everything to prune everything back into the scale we want it and that's general i mean that's been so we want to you know we're we're always um cleaning old foliage or pruning old foliage on the conifers to let light in to the end of the branch interior for bud development because after three to five years we need something to prune back to to remove that heavy wood to get those younger branches taking their place at the end of in the in the branch the younger shoots the younger twigs to improve the taper out to the end to give the aged appearance that we're after so with the Satsuki every three to five years we need to go in and really look for the heaviest wood that's typically you know the printing the most from the perimeter and let it in wiring or letting the young growth take over to get the taper in the branch I also want to caution I've seen some damage done where people would in the spring take back all of the new growth but they didn't leave any of this you know they didn't leave that eighth of an inch or quarter inch of green they took it back into hardwood the first year there wasn't really a problem because the latent buds in the in the older wood would take over but it was it took more energy for the plant to do that and then the next year all the new growth was pruned back into old wood again and and after three to four years the tree started in in this case one of Brussels customers he did that with all his azaleas and he all of his trees started to decline because he didn't leave that that little bit of green wood it would have been better if he would just have cut back to two shoots and two leaves but he was told to take all the new growth off but you have to leave that little bit of wood I just wanted to to revisit that um so it's sick or azaleas in general or multi-stem shrubs they sucker a lot of sucker growth they're really you know except for some species of rhododendron that grow into tree form um they're they normally don't have a central leader a central trunk main trunk um so when we style them for Sotsuki or Sotsuki bonsai with you know tall tall trunks um and they don't you know the lower branches get a lot of growth they get really dense they're not pruned out correctly every you know one to two years as we just talked about the top can start to get weak and it's a it's a see in probably the main concern that I hear about on Satsuki or weak tops. It's very important to keep those lower branches pruned correctly and everything, all the foliage even from top to bottom. If you do start to see a weak top, either the growth is not as vibrant as the lower branches or maybe a color change, you need to make sure that you go in and thin out the lower branches to match the foliage on the weak top. Because if you leave those lower branches dense and strong, they're eventually going to take all the energy away and that can't get to the top. So that's that's something to watch out for. And it's also, you know, if they're not pruned on a schedule, that's something that you can évidemment happens the tops get weak and the taller the the taller the Satsuki is the weaker the more you see the top get weak so when you're printing we talked about the soft growth leave a short stub when printing the soft green shoots if you're printing the mature growth and these are we're typically talking about twigs not not branches don't leave any stubs print those flush and it's especially if you leave a long shoot and it's in a shaded area that can die and decay and it's just a petri dish for pathogens which can lead to further damage so general rule of thumb if the if it's soft vibrancy if it's soft vibrancy if it's soft vibrancy if it's soft vibrancy if it's vibrant growth leave a short stub of vibrant growth leave a short stub of green if it's whole old mature hard green if it's whole old mature hard hardened growth don't leave a stub when hardened growth don't leave a stub when treatment when I first arrived at the treatment when I first arrived at the Bonsai Park the publishing company sold Bonsai Park the publishing company sold a product called Sasuke bond Satsuki a product called Sasuke bond Satsuki bond and it was really a glorified wood bond and it was really a glorified wood and it was probably the worst thing in my opinion you could use but we we used it so I got to see a lot of examples on why not to and what happens when you use a wood glue type product Saski bond or Bonesaw bond is that the glue will dry hard on this on the wound surface and as the callus attempts to cover that wound it has to push up against that hardened wood glue and especially on Satsuki with you know really really soft callus it will roll over itself and become contorted and not close over smooth like we want it to so I would strongly advise against using any type of wood glue sealant what also with the wood glue type products and even some of the latex the when you take a large branch off you know it's going to bleed you're going to have sap come out and in that in the products that dry hard or semi hard on the surface you can have a fluid buildup underneath that sealant and I mentioned petri dish a minute ago that that literally is a petri dish when you're repotting you have to make some compromises you want to get all of that black soil out as much as you can without endangering the health of the tree that lot you can work on it I've had Sasky root you know big trees that I would work two or three days with this little Singing pick and a hose getting black soil out cutting roots getting more black soil out cutting roots getting more black soil out and thinking I'll never do this to my tree but you need to cut more abuse it's the tree's life of for parts came get to a point where you have to stop because you're really endangering the health of the tree. You don't want to take too much of the core out, but you might have to do it, you know, it might take you two or three repottings to really complete the task of getting the roots, the rotted roots, and the black soil, black dead roots out. And a good thing to do if you do have severe root problems, it's always best to mark those plants. Just as a reminder to you, you could put a, you know, just a blank stake tag in just to remind you if you if you think it needs water, hey maybe it's, maybe if you have to think about it it doesn't need it. And not to over fertilize. So that's a good thing with the to mark plants that you need to remember certain things about. Go ahead and mark it because the more, if you have root rot, the more over watering you get, you do, the more you over water and the more you over water. So it's a good thing to do. the more root rot is going to keep developing. So you need to be careful there. Again, on the before bloom, if we're going to bare root or we're going to change over to a new soil type. Say you propagated your whip in a bark mix and you want to move it over into a conuma soil or a conuma soil with added aggregate to it. Now, you know, do it in the spring before bloom. And when you're repotting, especially if the tree is weak, you want to prevent it from going into a flower dormancy. And, you know, I'll touch on this later, but to go over this. You know, I've talked about breaking buds off when in the first year whip. We don't want to do that now, we want to let the flower bud swell up enough, not open, but to swell up and get soft enough, where with our fingers or tweezers, we can get in and remove that flower bud plus the seed if you just pull the flower off and leave the seed. Just pull the flower off and leave the seed. If you pull the flower off and leave the seed, you know, and get that seed off. Just pull the flower off and leave the seed. seed you're not doing the right thing that seed is going to rob energy from the plant and prevent you know and hinder the growth that we're after so let the flower buds swell up soft and take and pinch those out and remember the reason we're doing this is around the base of where that flower bud is attached to the plant are leaf buds and if we break that bud off we are more than likely going to damage those buds so let the flower swell up into bud don't let it open but let it swell up and get soft enough where we can just pinch it off and get all those flowers off the other time that we can repot satsuki is after they bloom remember they go into kind of a dormant period during flowering and if we're just going to do a light repotting we're just going to take the plant out of the pot clean off the hard pan on the top take the root the matted roots from around the perimeter and the bottom just a light repotting that can be done after they're dead after they're dead headed or we take wait a few days and we can repot and just do that light repotting a lot of times the satsuki will be put in to a show pot that pot might be you know a antique pot hundreds of years old very expensive that's either borrowed or rented from someone for use as a show pot so you know a lot of times they'll be repotted after the satsuki festival and those pots return to their owners soil for azaleas and we'll cover a little we'll come back to this in a few minutes typically uh kanuma uh suchi or kanuma soil with or without added aggregate or or uh fujizuna ezozona a harder particle is used for satsuki because of the ph and the roots it's it's hard enough where the roots well it provides drainage and has a good total porosity but the azalea roots grow really well into the Konuma. It's soft enough where they can break into the Konuma and still have good drainage, and the pH is good. Akadama tends to be a little softer. It breaks down too quickly and stays too wet, especially at the bottom of the container. I've seen Akadama used with azaleas, but make sure to put enough aggregates in it to have enough airspace. The roots need enough airspace to respirate. We'll touch on that in a minute, but we want to make sure that the soil mix has got good drainage and good porosity. Deeper pots are typically used for Satsuki. Traditionally, they're four to five inches deep. There used to be just one pot shape and one pot size, that everyone used. It's really to accommodate the ericaceous roots. The deeper pots provide more area for the roots to grow. This gets into what we refer to as a perched water table. The lower portion of the container stays wetter than the rest of the soil media does. The larger, deeper pots provide more of a Goldilocks zone for the roots to grow in. We'll touch on that in a couple of minutes. More details on the perched water table. Again, on the pot, the shape and the size in the soil really dictate how you water the plant. If it's in a shallow pot, shallow pots stay wetter than deeper pots. So you need to adjust your watering sometimes to accommodate the shape and depth of the pot. If it's in a shallow pot, shallow pots stay wetter than deeper pots. Especially with Satsuki. Just a couple of seasonal tips. Walk through the seasons, what to do before flowering, water, fertilizer. Start before flowering. Basic care. Correct watering is really critical at this time because the new growth is coming out. We want to prevent any drought stress. Anything that can affect the flower buds, which will affect the quality of the flowers. They might come out smaller if it's really drought stressed and you get root damage. You'll have a smaller flower or the color might not be as vibrant. So try to maintain an even, moist soil. Try to maintain an even, moist soil. Try to maintain an even, moist soil. Try to maintain an even, moist soil. A little bit of moisture level in the soil, not over saturated. Not saturated, just even moist media. Organic fertilizer, BioGold you can start to put on in the late winter to early spring. As it starts to emerge from winter dormancy. organic fertilizers take a little longer to break down to be able to make nutrients available to the plant. So you tend to start a little earlier versus synthetic. But about 30, 40 days prior to blooming. And so we're talking maybe latter part of April, or so, remove your fertilizer cakes or particles, however you fertilize, remove them from the soil surface. And what that does, and just a, sorry, a quick follow-up on that. If you leave the fertilizer on during flowering, that can affect the color, but really, the shape, the shape of the flower can be affected. So you might have, you know, petals are mutated. They have notches, just not a really good flower. So be sure, you know, month or so prior to flowering time, remove any fertilizer cakes from the spring. Trimming, we talked about that a little bit earlier, you know, any downward growing shoots, anything, that is obtrusive, you know, this is the time to, to prune that out. Especially if you want to expose the trunk line or the main branches, where they attach to the trunk, you know, you can remove the foliage to, to highlight those areas, anything that's heavily congested. And, as far as the flowering buds, I'd say, that's, I don't know, I don't think we talked about that much. But with the, with the, with the seed, with the seed, with the seed, with the seed, with the seed, with the envy, with the seed. some you might need to thin some areas it's really cultivar specific really it's not something that we really ever did or I do but depending on the cultivar you might it might be so heavily budded that taking you know thinning out by pruning branches taking some of the buds out might be done at this point again don't break off the hard flower buds wait till they swell and are soft enough to pinch and when as the tree flowers especially if it's going into a show you know you might you know remove the buds where that flower is going to open and and it's going to camouflage or hide the trunk or the branch like we mentioned before and again show trees even buds and flowers that's if if you've done everything we just mentioned shouldn't be an issue so flowering time you know this is the show time this is what we've been working for is to see the beautiful flower display really critical things along with keeping the tree well hydrated you know well watered not over saturated but evenly moist throughout the flowering period only water the soil surface do not water the foliage or the flowers uh it's very important um if it's you know raining or strong sun move the move the plant into the protected area that's going to keep it from getting wet or or and provide some shade um you know strong temperatures strong you know your intent you know hot temperatures strong winds again protect them from that um every day during the flowering period remove spent flowers any flower as it finishes you need to take that flower and the seed pod off we checked them at the park during the show time twice a day we would take boxes in take all the flowers off and the seed pods you know and if you've got two hands you got two flower pickers you know get all those bad flowers off do not leave them on the ground do not leave any spent flowers on the sole surface of the plant on the on top of the pot make sure all the spent flowers the finished flowers are removed and when the plants finish blooming everything's starting to finish off go ahead and deadhead the plant remove all the spent flowers and and unopened buds even if they you know you can tell you'll know when the plant's finished and if there are a few unopened buds go ahead and get those off and get the plant growing again so the reason i was so adamant on removing the spent flowers the ovalina petal blight um is um the scourge of azaleas and rhodes rhododendron i mentioned earlier in the talk about uh in the 1930s they were they started bringing in belgian indian hybrids to cross-pollinate with satsuki well around 1930s is when the ovalina flower blight started showing up on belgian indian hybrids so that that's not a coincidence um what happens what the the thing you're looking for and and scouting for the the petal blight or areas that become translucent look like they're water soaked um It's very important to get this off because there's really no chemical control available nowadays for the petal blight. At the park during the flowering time, one of my principal tasks daily was to use a fungicide called Benamil or Benlite and to prevent a residue on the flowers we would slowly add water to the powder to make a paste and a slurry and slowly dilute it until we could mix it into the tank where, when we sprayed all the flowers, there would be no powder residue when the spray dried. We did that regularly, sometimes three or four times per week and had to change it every three weeks. There might not be so many depending what the quality of the thereby did, if you considering the time we spred the flowers, there might be no decarbonized flake in each of them. daily on every azalea that was in flower just to control the petal blight and we were you know 80 90 percent successful with in conjunction with the mechanical removal of this of the spent flowers the petal blight can can in two days destroy all the blooms on the plant um so it's important uh to mechanically uh control that because i think ben lake might still be available in japan but it's there was a production issue that poisoned many plants and venomil was taken off the market in the u.s there are maybe there are a couple of chemicals that can still be used i am not a crop consultant and i can not because of my position i cannot recommend anything but advise you know asking extension agent or knowledgeable horticulturalist about what chemical controls you could use for petal blight um post flowering um deadheading once you once it's stops flowering it's going to stop it's going to use less water especially after the new foliage is removed or pruned you do your after flowering pruning so watch your water don't over water at this time after we deadhead again let's wait a week to 10 days we can't wait a week for it to be ready so you'll have to wait a week to the 5 days um before we start putting on our fertilizer and we talked about the light rep the light repotting at this time um pruning um you know we'll already gone through most of this fish tailing two shoots two leaves or taking about an eighth of an inch of green shoot for those new buds in that juvenile foliage to quickly respond to the pruning and to grow out. Again, pruning needs to be completed by July. Summertime, keeping the plant hydrated, keeping the soil evenly moist, really important. But during the heat, we wanna make sure we don't overwater. We tend to worry about them drying out and drought stressing. But if we keep them too wet during the summer, that's the time where the root rot really takes hold when it's warmer. So we wanna make sure we don't overwater during the summer. Watering the trees in the morning or late afternoon is the best time. I typically water around 3.30 to 5 o'clock in the summertime. Don't want the leaves to stay wet into the night to prevent fungus. But watering in the late afternoon, the trees during the night can translocate the water and better hydrate themselves. Then say if I water in the morning and then they go into the heat of the day. So the late afternoon is a good time to water during the summer. If you're using organic fertilizers, they decompose a lot faster in the heat. So check it monthly or more often. And then depending on where you live, you might need to offer some protection from the hot afternoon sun and just give morning exposure. And again, rotating your plants. If you, you know, there are turntables that are made for outdoors. That you can, you know, spin the plant around. But, you know, rotate the plants every four to six weeks. And it's not a bad idea to move them to a different location in the garden, in the display garden as well. Just so you have even sun exposure all the way around the plant. Going into the autumn, you know, the plants, as they start to prepare for dormancy, won't need as much water. You can tell that, you know, you're watering every day. You get a sense of how fast or slow that the soil is drying out. You want to reduce the nitrogen fertilizer. And, you know, by the first of October, generally, it might differ depending on your location. You know, blood meal. I reviewed this with our horticulturalist and she could not find a good source of blood meal. So I might be a little dated with my blood meal. But, or bone meal, I'm sorry. I keep talking about blood meal. Blood meal. But bone meal, we do, we have put on not only azaleas, but other, all the bonsai in the fall just for a winter feed. And, you know, touching on this again, if you overwater and over-fertilize into the fall, it prevents the tree from shutting down. And what can happen is you'll get late summer shoots that keep growing and don't shut down. And then the first frost hits that new foliage that isn't hardened off and the stem dies. And as that stem decomposes, it can release toxins that travel down into other parts of the plant. And can, so you can see, die back into areas that you don't really want to die back into. So it's really important to throttle back to fertilizer going into the early fall. In the pruning area, you know, cleaning the summer shoots, the sucker growth, water shoots out. And again, lightly brushing the tree that's growing, but it's not to use that much soil. to remove the loose bark on the trunk and the branches. Again, on culturally flower bud removal, but only on the first year whips. Or if you're going to wire in the fall, you're gonna cut flowers off, but you know that going into it. Dormant sprays, again, I can't really, you know, we use copper and lime sulfur in Japan. I can't really recommend anything. A lot of these formulations over the past 10 years have become very restricted. And you would, in some cases, you would have to hire somebody to spray for you. But the biggest thing into the fall, into the winter, is keeping things clean. You know, get the, don't, you know, weeds, the best time to pull a weed is when you can barely see it. Because if you let weeds grow in the pot or in the area where you keep your trees, insects grow, you know, they live there. So keep that in mind. So keep everything clean and sanitary. And you shouldn't really have to worry about dormant sprays. Wintertime, the, you know, big concern with any bonsai is root kill temperature. In the ground, you know, the tree could be very cold hardy. But when it's grown in a container above ground, the roots can be damaged at, you know, 10 degrees, 15 degrees, 20 degrees, if that root ball freezes solid. So we, you know, a general rule I have is if it, if the temperatures at night were forecast to go into the low to mid 20s, and it won't get above freezing, and it's going to stay that way for a few days, I will protect the plant. If it's just for a few hours during the late, or, you know, the, you know, 3 a.m., 5 a.m., just for a few hours, I'm not as worried about it. But if it's a long, a long time span where it's going to be below freezing, below, you know, 20, 5, 23, I will protect the containers. And if it gets very cold, especially as the trees start to come out of dormancy in the late winter, I will, you know, maybe even put a heater in if it's necessary. Good ventilation, if you keep them in a cold frame, or in an enclosed greenhouse, you know, you can keep them in a cold frame, or in an enclosed greenhouse, you can keep them in a cold frame, or in an enclosed greenhouse, you can keep them in a cold frame, or in an enclosed greenhouse, when it's, when it is warm enough, make sure you open the, open the lids on the cold frames, or open the doors, and keep good ventilation in the winter. We want to, you know, prevent a drastic temperature change. You know, if it's in a greenhouse in the winter, and the doors are closed, and the sun comes out, it could get 80, 90 degrees in that house, and then go, it could get 80, 90 degrees in that house, and then go, and drop 50 degrees at the, during the night. We want to prevent that. That's too big of a temperature change, and it can damage the plant. During the winter, you know, if they're outside, high, you know, if you live in a area, windy area, the trees can be desiccated pretty easy in the winter. The trees can be desiccated pretty easy in the winter. The trees can be desiccated pretty easy in the winter. Especially if you're not watering correctly. You know, again, water during the winter on most plants, you're only watering every few days, if that. So, but you don't want the plants to be in a windy environment and dry out. Or in, if it's, you know, if it's, you know, if it's, you know, if it's, you know, if it's, you know, if it's, you know, if it's, you know, if it's, you know, if it's going to freeze, you don't want the roots to freeze when it's, when the root, when the soil is dry. You want to make sure it's well hydrated when it freezes. But you don't want to water late in the day, because if it freezes hard, and the roots, or the root ball is saturated, and it freezes, it could break the pot. And you want to be very careful. And you want to be very careful. Normally in the winter, I'll water before noon. So that's another thing to keep in mind. I want to just touch, as we end, touch a little bit on just a few basics on the growing media, the watering techniques, fertilizer, sun exposure, and pest. And specifically, a couple of pests specifically for Azalea. a couple of pests specifically for Azalea. So in the growing media,, the container growing media, we have to find a good balance between air space and water space. and water space. So, you know the problem is you want to, I mean, You take a bottom layer and put it out there, You take a bottom layer and put it out there, So, you know, growing media is a mix of components that, you know, read this, you know, provide water, air, nutrients, and stability. And, you know, the media supports the plants, nutrients are supplied by the fertilizers, water and air are offered by pore spaces in the media. And so you have basically larger spaces in the media that are air spaces and the smaller spaces that hold water. And, you know, we'll talk a bit about the components, but we talked a little bit about the height of the media and the components. The container, you know, the deeper pots provide more area for the fine Satsuki feeder roots to grow because they are sensitive to overwatering. And this is an important slide. You know, the media should stay evenly moist. Not wet. Not wet. Not saturated. I'm going to beat that again. The media at the bottom of the container grabs the water. It won't let it go. And through, you know, capillary action plays a part. But when I said earlier that the shallow pots stay wetter, they don't, that's the reason. Because there is more of a perched water table, a higher perched water table in a shallower container than there is in a deeper container. And a way to look at this is if you take the same soil mix, and this example, and this is from one of our references, one-to-one of peat moss and vermiculite. And we take that media, and we put that in a six-inch pot, six-inch deep, a four-inch deep pot, and a 48-cell tray. And that pot is probably, oh, an inch and three-quarters deep. And that same media, we wet it until it's saturated, and then we take it out, and we find out how much water. In a six-inch pot, there's 20% airspace and 67% water. So the roots have to have air spaces to respirate. They extrude carbon dioxide, and they use oxygen, kind of the opposite of the leaf up top. So they have to have enough airspace to be able to respirate. And then, of course, they need enough water-holding spaces to be able to hydrate themselves. So in a six-inch pot, we have 20% air. In a four-inch pot, we have 13% air and 74% water. So the perched water table is remaining at the same level in the container, but the different heights affect how much air and water is being retained. And, of course, the 48-cell, the shallower, only has 8% air and around 80% water. So the deeper the pot... the more area in that pot that will have the air spaces needed for the roots to properly respirate and grow. I've always used this example with a sponge, and the sponge has, you know, has water-holding capacity. It has, you know, large pore spaces for air. It has a lot of water. And small pore spaces for water. So we have a sponge that's soaked in water. And say this is a shallow pot. And you see a little water draining out. Maybe you see. I'm sorry if you can't. But if we change this from a shallow pot to a deeper pot, we can see how much water is splashing all over the pot. We can see how much water is splashing all over the pot. And we can see how much water is splashing all over the pot. over the laptop. It's, you know, much, much, much different. So that just gives you an idea of how important that PWT or perched water table is. You know, when we're repotting, we put maybe a coarser mix at the bottom to compensate for that perched water table. It still stays saturated. Roots, you know, they might, they'll grow into it, but it still stays more saturated than the middle and upper part of the soil. Top dressing with mosses. We, especially on Satsuki, we used to use a product called Yamamoke, which is, a collected dried, dead dried moss. It was collected off of rocks in Kyoto. It was quite expensive, but we would put a thin layer of this moss on top of the kanuma, which was really good because the kanuma, the color of the kanuma was a little obtrusive. So it looked better with the moss. But what that does, it helps keep the the media evenly more evenly moist and especially when you're watering you see the surface particles of a new plant new pot newly potted plant they dry out quicker because they don't have any roots growing into them and they haven't really been wet enough long enough to to stay and knit into the rest of the soil in the pot and so you see that drying off and you oh it's dry and you water and that bottom of the the pot still stays even wetter because it really doesn't need that water but when you get the a thin layer of moss on the top it helps better regulate the moisture level in the soil it keeps more evenly moist and again on a little more watering always water the leaves to wash off dust and debris especially in windy areas where you have dust blowing every day you know wash the leaves off and the leaves can absorb absorb absorb moisture as well especially ericaceous plants like azaleas and again don't water flowers don't want the flower blight um if it's in if you're in a period of uh a seasonal period where this the it's the plants are not drying out every day you don't have to water very often maybe every two to three days every week or so be sure to to water the plant heavily to try to you want to leach out any uh fertilizer that's uh overly you know excess fertilizer that's being held in the soil so every week or so be sure to leach it leach the plant or the root zone especially if you're using a synthetic fertilizer it's more important than if you're using organic organic talk a little bit about fertilizers organic and synthetic fertilizers provide the nutrition in different different modes of action different mechanisms providing nutrients you know organic fertilizers are made from naturally occurring minerals organic matter like bone and bone seed meals seed meal being canola or rapeseed meal in cotton seed meal maybe composted manures and synthetic fertilizers are made by chemically producing fertilizers from raw materials the nutrients and this is the best description i could come up with on the difference the nutrients and organic fertilizers are not water soluble and they're in in turn they're released to the plants more slowly they need microorganisms in the soil you know mycorrhizal fungi and rhizobacteria to break them down into a form into a mineral ion that the plants can absorb the roots of the plant can absorb and you know also on on the organic fertilizers because of what they're made from the micro macronutrients in nitrogen phosphorus potassium the npk they'll also provide all the secondary micronutrients macronutrients and the micronutrients and you know they're they're much safer to use for the most part there are some organics that are a little hotter than others but for the most part they're much safer to use in turn the synthetic fertilizers are basically salt they're water soluble salts mineral salts that the plant can absorb immediately they don't need that time period to break down they're immediately available to the plants they you know the the root tips that are are feeding on this we would call them meristemic they're kind of like the stem cells of plants they you know rapidly absorb these minerals from the synthetic fertilizers and because you know, I talked about leaching, because the synthetic fertilizers are salts and we're using like Kanuma or Akadama clays that can hold on to those salts, leaching becomes very important. You know, a lot of growers will supplement organic fertilizers with a foliar feed with Peters or Miracle-Gro, which is fine. The leaves can, you know, leaves can absorb a lot of fertilizer. But if we've ordered the soil, the clay-based growing medias, we have to watch for salt buildup. And, you know, just a few slides on the different nutrients and what they do. And, these will be made available if you're interested in what each one, what function they have in the plant's health. I've heard a lot about calcium in flower buds. You know, calcium is important. You know, here in, you know, strengthening, strengthens the cell walls. And, you know, if you're interested in that, you can go to the website. And, you know, we typically think of it in the plant buffering from environmental stress. But, you know, this is just a few, some interesting details on what the different nutrients, what role they play in the plant's development. At the Bonesaw Park, we made our own fertilizer. We made, for the plants on the display in the park, we made dried cakes. And, in the houses that were across the street that had the publishing company's collection of Satsuki, we just used it as a raw paste. We used a rapeseed meal with a, a rapeseed meal and a 20% mild fish meal. We added some systemic insecticides to help prevent insects from living in the fertilizer. It didn't work very well, but we tried. And this was a very good fertilizer. The cakes, the odor wasn't very bad. Using it raw was, was a little, it was a little rough. But, you know, cotton seed meal, bone meal, blood meal, that's what I used to make my own when I came back. Before I decided BioGold was a lot more economical and easy. But there are a lot of recipes. Fish emulsion, if you can tolerate the odor, is, is very good. It is something that can, you can mix a little strong. You have to be careful with, with Satsuki. You have to be careful with, with Satsuki. Controlled release fertilizer like Osmocote can work well, but with clay-based growing media, Akadama, Konuma, you have to be very, very careful. I typically tell people to avoid it. I've trialed, I've done some trials with different controlled release fertilizers. I've trialed, I've done some trials with different controlled release fertilizers. It, it's just, it's the, it's too dangerous, really, to, to really recommend, with clay-based media. For bark, for soilless bark media, you know, they've worked great. For bark, for soilless bark media, you know, they've worked great. But for, but for not a large quantity. But for, but for not a large quantity. But, but, but, but for not a large quantity. But for clay-based media, I would advise against it. We already talked about the Peters, Jacks, Miracle-Gro. You do have to watch for the salt buildup. But as a foliar feed, from time to time through the growing season, it's beneficial. And the timing of the fertilizer application. We've already talked about when azaleas we want to fertilize in the spring, but we want to remove the fertilizer about a month before we think the plant's going to start flowering. Thank you. Thank you. Sun exposure. Again, we want to protect the flowers from any heat. But azaleas, part sun to full sun in some areas. Good ventilation. And be sure to rotate every four to six weeks. Turn the tree around. Move it to a different bench or a different pedestal. And a turntable if you can. It's a good idea. Probably the most serious insect pest with azaleas are called lace bug. They feed on the leaf and they cause a reticulated variegation in the leaf. Easily to control any insecticide that would control aphids. Typically, we'll take care of lace bug. But, you know, the typical spider mites, aphids, you know, just general insect issues with all plants. We talked about the flower blight and root rot. You know, there are some chemical controls for root rot. But, again, proper watering and repotting should suffice. You know, we use a program called Integrated Pest Management. And we have people that scout for pests that, you know, you're watering your trees every day. You know, look for any issues. If there's leaves. Leaves are discolored. You know, you see it every day. So, you know, take a look. And, you know, again, keeping the area free of weeds and debris. You know, insects, you know, if you have a lot of weeds, insects can jump and get on your plants. And then, you know, cultural controls, mechanical controls. We use some biological control. We have different insects, some nematodes that we're using for black vine weevil. That's something new that we're using. But it's just all part of integrated pest management that focuses on reducing chemical control. And using more mechanical and cultural controls. And only using chemicals when absolutely necessary. And if you're unsure of what the pest is, you can take a picture of it. You know, go to your garden center. Have their staff help you identify it. If there's a disease or something that you're worried about that is affecting your plant. OSU, Oregon State University, has a plant lab that you can send samples to. And so get it tested if you're not sure what it is. Because if you're not sure, how do you treat it? So with that, I really appreciate your time. And if you have any questions. We do, yeah. First up was a question from Gary. And he wondered what are the differences between Satsuki and the regular North American azaleas and rhododendrons. As far as this knowledge and the techniques would go. That's a good question. As far as the difference between the evergreen azaleas. That we normally see in landfills. Landscape and ornamental plants in the U.S. You know, Glendales, Rutherfords, Kurume. They differ from Satsuki in the blooming time. Whereas most evergreen azaleas will bloom around a month after the spring equinox. Satsuki blooms. Bloom 30 to 40 days after those plants bloom. So around 60 days after the spring equinox. Rhododendrons are a different, you know, the species rhododendrons are kind of a different animal. Really, that's a whole different subject. But with the evergreen azaleas, that's the main difference. As far as working on those, it's really the flower time. If you work, you know, they're going to bloom in the spring. They'll bloom either before the foliage starts growing or right along with it. And the latter is probably the most common. So that's really the only difference. But as far as the pruning, making sure you leave on larger cuts, making slightly convex cuts, not cutting, you know, taking large branches off. That all holds true for any of the evergreen azaleas we would see in the landscape in the U.S. All right. Kathy has a question and it's about azalea bark scale. She's asking about the general timing for egg hatch. And she's in the Midwest and some of the best control measures you'd recommend. And would it be multiple treatments or just once a year? Yeah. As far as the chemical controls, I can't really address. You know, I'm not a crop consultant and I'm not licensed in her area. It gets really complicated. I would be careful on that. But the emergence in your area might be different from us. Local extension service is probably the best source for information on that. But as far as control, if you see bark scale, it's a good sign that you're not pruning. You're not brushing the bark enough. If, you know, we brushed the azaleas at least once a year, sometimes twice a year to keep the rough bark off. And sometimes you have to do it in stages, especially if it hasn't been brushed in a long time. It takes a while to get back. And we've also, you know, when you're brushing, if you get hard plates, you can take a little probe. This is a Masakuni number 13 probe. And you can lightly scrape some of the hard scale bark. And you get the scale insect, too, but the scale bark, too. So brushing is the best mechanical control. As far as chemical control, I would really recommend extension service. I think you touched on this in your presentation. But Kathy had also asked, what's a good general course of action for when the apex starts to get weak? Yeah. And that's, again, that's going back. It's one of the most common questions I've been asked. You know. Because the azaleas are not apical dominant. They're, you know, they're multi-stem shrubs that sucker. The single trunk getting nutrients and water to the top is a challenge for the plant. But the key is to keep the foliage on the lower branches and the upper branches identical. Keep the foliage, the pruning even. Because the lower branches are going to try to take all the nutrients and water from the top. It's easier for them to get it. So we have to keep those pruned back and thinned out to make sure that they don't get too strong. Because the stronger they get, the weaker the top will get. So it's mechanical control. Just keeping the foliage even over the whole tree. All right. Bob has a question and says, is putting a top dressing of a shredded zygote. And shredded regular green moss something that you would recommend for azalea? And I think we touched towards the end on the Yamamoke. Yamamoke is very similar to the shredded sphagnum. But I want to just touch on sphagnum. There are different grades of sphagnum moss. And I would suggest what we used to refer to probably still is marketed as New Zealand sphagnum. It's a clean kind of an ochre or light yellow sphagnum moss that's used in orchid growing. I've seen that moss. That moss put through screens. I prefer to cut it instead of crushing it. Because you can get too many fines. And it will form a hard mat on the soil surface. So if you do shred it through a screen, be sure to shake as much dust off as you can. But it's a perfectly good replacement for the Yamamoke that we used in Japan. There's also some bag products. I've seen mosses that were bagged up. I believe they were from South Korea. That was very similar to the Yamamoke. I'm not sure if anybody still imports it. But it is commercially available. All right, great. Steve has a question. It says, Chojabai are typically grown with multiple stems working with the plant's basil dominance. Do you know if Satsuki are ever styled in that way? One more time, please. He's talking about Chojabai and that they're typically grown with kind of a multiple stem style. And do you ever see Satsuki handled in that? Handled in that fashion? You know, natural style, like not really. I'd get where he's going with the Chojabai. The reason I wanted to repeat, there's a Satsuki called Chojaho. And I didn't want to get confused. I have seen several Satsuki. That were styled multi-stem with kind of similar to Chojabai in that you could see the lower branch structure and the foliage on the top. Yeah, I've seen that. It's not very common. But yeah, in fact, Chojabai won the Coca-Fu Prize this year. And if you haven't seen the Coca-Fu book yet, it's the biggest trunks on a Chojabai I've ever seen. It's incredible. But anyway. I'll have to check that out. Bob has a question. It says, what area do you need to be in to follow the repotting schedule that you gave for the propagating cuttings? So for the first transplant, say we take the cuttings in early, mid-June. The first transplant is about 40, 50 days. And the second transplant. Oh. Probably late October, early October, late September, early October. So, you know, we were in, you know, I would say from zone six to zone eight USDA zone. You would be fine. You might need to do some adjustment. But it's really when the flower, when the Satsuki blooms and the growth, you might have to delay if you're in a colder climate and don't get as much growth during the summer. You might have to delay that second repotting a little bit, maybe even to the next spring. All right. Steve has a question and asks, as best as you can say, what is the lowest winter temperature that a potted Satsuki can reliably survive in the winter? And then Bob has a similar question. What kind of dormancy period do they require and what general temperatures? Okay. Well, what type of dormancy? I'll address that at the end. As far as the root kill, you know, Satsuki in the ground and planted in a garden, the indigums can take down to, you know, zero Fahrenheit, maybe a little colder without too much problem. Irocarpum, I would say five to 10 degree. You know, it's more towards the 10 degree would be where I would start to be a little concerned. In a container, the root kill temperature, I'm going to say the minimum root kill temperature, you know, I'll stay with that low 20, but 18 degrees Fahrenheit, you start to see ice crystals form in the root, the cellular structure of the root. If that is prolonged, you know, if it goes down into below 20, or, you know, the high teens for multiple days and it doesn't get above freezing, I would offer protection. As far as Satsuki, and dormancy, they do need a dormant period. They are tempered, you know, plants. I would say what the minimum is. I used to have a, I'm still using a punch card, so it's going to take me a second. You know, 90 to 120 days of dormancy would be a safe answer. You know, they, some azaleas, some of the, some of the Irocarpum, or some of the hybrids with more Irocarpum genetics could do well with less of a dormant period. You know, they're more heat tolerant plants. The Satsuki Indigum, or the Satsuki, Tsuchiji, Rhododendromedicum, they do require more dormancy than their Irocarpum. But I would say 90, 120 day, you know, regular, you know, normal sun, seven, eight winter. And then what, what general temperatures are the, qualify for dormancy? Oh, as far as dormant period, you know, they'll start going dormant. You know, dormancy, multiple variables. You have length of day and temperature. So, below 40 degrees, you know, the fall equinox, you know, we'll start to see the days get shorter. And when the temperature starts staying at nighttime below 40, that's when they'll start going into dormancy. And depending on where you live, you know, that could last a different period of time. All right. Steve has a question. It says, what are the specific soil needs of Satsuki in terms of the components and the particle sizes? I know you did kind of go over a lot of that. Container Sasuke, container Satsuki, they can grow in many different medias. Some soil, you know, soulless media work well. It depends on the length they're in that pot. They can go into, you know, if it's a production where they only stay in a pot for, you know, six to eight months, you can, and they're repotted to a bigger pot or something. But for Bonsai Satsuki, that are in the pot multiple years, you know, I'd like, I still like Konuma. I think it's the best container media to grow Satsuki azaleas in. Depending on your watering habits or your customer's watering habits, adding a different container to the pot, you know, depends on the type of container that you're using. So, you know, adding additional 20, 30% of an aggregate of a lava in with the Konuma is not a bad idea. It's just learning how to water a specific soil. And that's just trial and error. And we want to reduce the trial and error period. But I still don't think Konuma is the best. Particle size. We talked about the different pore spaces. Larger pore spaces for air, smaller pore spaces for water. But say you have a 60% water holding capacity in your media. Not all of that. In fact, a very small percent of that water holding capacity or small percentage of that water is available to the plant. So, as far as particle size, I recommend that you have multiple, multiple size particles in your media. Don't just use one size particle. You know, don't, you know, don't use any real fine particles that can collect at the bottom and keep everything wet. Or, but, you know, as far as what size, you know, what millimeter size, I could, I could offer that information. But on the top of my head right now, but all of the mixes that I use, the premixes, Akadama premixes I get from Japan and the Konuma, they have roughly four or five different particle sizes to create that, that combination of pore spaces. Much like your sponge. Okay. Bob has a question. This is a when and how much are you fertilizing? Is Green King better than Bio Gold? Oh. So, I'll go back to Mr. Rokaku's counsel on Green King. Green King kills Saski. He didn't like it. We never used Green King. Green King is a great fertilizer and I, I actually still use some on conifers. Green King, um, can be a little hot for azalea roots. I think it's more how fast it breaks down. Um, and, you know, some of the nitrogen is a little hot as compared to Bio Gold. I think Bio Gold is a safer fertilizer for Saski. And that's just my opinion. Um, I've seen Green King used on azaleas that, since I've come back from Japan and I've seen, and I've seen some, uh, some damage, some burned up trees from it. So, uh, Green King, uh, use it carefully and, uh, trial, trial it before you put it on your best trees. And then what about, uh, timing and, uh, quantity? Um, quantity followed the label instructions on the, uh, bag. That's the best advice. Um, and modify that, uh, if you're using Green King again, I would caution to start slowly and trial on, on, uh, more, uh, inexpensive azaleas before putting it on the big ones. As far as timing, again, in the spring, um, uh, fertilize, uh, you know, late winter, um, you know, right as, right before the plants start to grow to give the, uh, organic fertilizer time to start breaking down. Um, and with the azaleas, Satsuki, remove the fertilizer before blooming, about a month before blooming. Um, so, late April, early May, depending on when they bloom in your area, remove the fertilizer from the soil surface. Let the plant flower. And then after you deadhead the flower buds and flower buds and seeds, wait about a week to 10 days, and start your fertilizing again. And throttle back that fertilizer towards early fall and remove, you know, remove it, I would say the first part of October. All right. And Bob has a question about repotting. How much quantity of roots can be removed and any considerations for the area directly underneath the trunk? Um, um, um, I'm going to go politician on you, case by case, um, but it brings up a good point. Pardon. Um, how much, how much is safe to remove? Um, we've on in the spring before flowering, when it's, you know, just late winter, early, very early spring, late winter. Um, you can go in and remove quite a bit. Um, if the tree is very healthy, um, digging up underneath the base, getting into the core, um, you need to be very careful. Um, younger plants, we would go up underneath and cut a lot of the heavy roots to, to swell up the surface roots. You know, if you have big roots underneath, you can cut those and the base will, will swell up in theory. Um, older plants, you need to be very careful when you go into the core like that. They're, um, more temperamental than say, uh, a five or six year old, eight year old Satsuki versus a hundred year old, you know, Satsuki. It's, it's night and day. Um, but if it's been properly repotted, you know, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, you know, year after, you know, every three, four years, three years, um, it should be in pretty good shape. Um, you have to be careful if the plan is weak. Um, you want to try to remove as much of the black soil, the black roots as you can, even up underneath. But if you take, if you, if you bear, if you take too much of the core out of the, an old azalea, it's a good possibility it's not going to make it. So again, it's case by case, every tree is different. But as a general rule, you know, when we repot, you clean the hardpan off the top, you take, you know, maybe 25% off the sides, 25% off the bottom, you're removing half or a little more of the soil and repotting. If you're changing it to a different soil type, and it's young, healthy, vibrant tree, you should be able to bear root it pretty easy. But when you get into really taking a lot of roots off the aftercare is critical. If you've got a mist house, if you've, you know, when we import Satsuki from Japan, they have to be bear rooted. And even old trees, they can tolerate it. But I have them in mist houses, and we are very careful with the watering. It's not, you know, it takes a certain facility to be able to care for it. All right. Right. Kathy is up next and is asking about Subdue, if that's still a fungus and root rot treatment that people use for azalea. I know you didn't want to answer a lot of those. As far as chemical controls, I have to be careful, but I do know the product Subdue, Subdue Max, and it is for root disease. And, you know, I don't know, you know, what label restrictions Subdue Max has now, but it's effective. It is a very powerful chemical control, chemical fungicide, and you have to be very, very careful with Subdue Max. You know, label instructions, it's a violation of federal law not to follow them. If any, you have any questions on Subdue Max, call the number on the label or check with your extension agent. All right, great. And Bob has a question. How much sun exposure should Satsuki get and do they need any protection from the sun? Yeah. Satsuki can grow, depending on your locale, in partial sun to full sun. You know, you need to watch for sun-scald, you know, hot, intense afternoon sun. They need protection. They can grow in partial shade, but you need to. But in. Anything heavier, you're going to, you're going to see them get leggy. You're not going to have a good flower bud set. And it's important to rotate the plants so the whole plant gets even exposure. All right. And the last question is the sketch that was requested a little bit earlier. If you could show us a little bit more detail on that wedge cut process that we talked about. Yeah. On the. And pardon my. I'm not an artist by any means. But. So when we were talking about removing a large branch. We're going to saw. A V. About. Three quarter. aways from the top of the branch to the bottom leaving enough connected to support the branch and then we're going to take you know sometimes you can use knob cutters to start it but we're going to take our we're going to take our single bevel grafting knife and we're going to slightly we're going to smooth down the the portion of the cut on the trunk this we don't really care about we can leave this rough but towards the trunk we want to get the callus healing over as soon as we can so we want to uh to shave that down slightly convex from the trunk and then we're going to fill this whole void with cut Paste with putty okay right and if it's a big branch um and you're worried that you know you know a chipmunk's going to jump on it or your child's going to grab it you can take a bamboo piece of bamboo or a rod and you know give it some extra support make sure you get padding on the trunk if needed and just put a little extra support on there as well if needed all right well that concludes the questions and thanks again for sharing all your knowledge with us today joe i really appreciate it sure 
