on guys super tuesday uh we've got something very very special cooked up for you in the workshop tonight actually uh he's not fully cooked he's a little lighter than normal yeah welcome everybody uh to all our tier one members thank you guys for joining us i hope you get a lot out of this evening's stream um dealing with azaleas for our tier two mastery members um this archive is probably going to be something that you're going to want to go back and refer to a lot because the world of azaleas is a wild and woolly thing and and peter's going to dispel a lot of myths and give you guys a lot of knowledge so uh and for all our innovators out there um we've got some really interesting uh things that peter's going to be cooking up but uh there's not going to be any tertiary content surrounding this azalea because we just wanted peter to give us the big brain dump so you guys have a week off from catching up on further footage there's a pretty sweet video that ricardo drummed up for you guys on youtube if you want to check it out peter doing some work on some spruce but uh one of my very good friends uh comrade in apprenticeship and uh consistent inspiration for me as a professional to refer to and learn from it's a super big pleasure for us to have uh mr peter warren in the workshop this evening all right take it away brother hi it's a pleasure to be here thanks for the invitation uh i am a fully paid up member of bonsai mirai live but he's this is an innovator right here but i'm an innovator that just got his innovation covered yeah but uh i never have the time to watch you so you know i always fall asleep watching a video of you uh in your dreams i've done it twice when i was like boning up on like what i should be doing for the for this uh holy smokes live stream i'll put some preparation into this i like it i like it i like it right so as uh as ryan said we're going to delve into uh the world of satsuki azalea uh which is something that in the bonsai world a lot of people don't don't understand fully don't appreciate they treat them exactly the same as uh as other trees and that's and then they end up with lots of problems uh essentially the way in which we we make um satsuki azalea is very very similar to to the way in which we make other bonsai uh with a few slight variations and it's those slight variations that if you get wrong um you you end up with uh the top of the tree dying or you end up with a weak tree basically i studied a lot of bonsai and i've done a lot of bonsai and i've done a lot of about satsuki azaleas um because uh where i studied at shunkai in in tokyo mr kunyu kobayashi was one of the few nurseries in japan where satsuki and bonsai were practiced together uh with the last live stream you did uh you did shohin uh and i'm sure you talked about how in japan the shohin world is very very sort of separate has its own association uh it has its own professionals association uh sort of separate we didn't we didn't say that actually but we definitely needed you to yeah no well i mean you know that's why you're here to correct our errors well they do uh so there's you know the the overall bonsai association in japan and then there's a shohin bonsai association and in the same way there is a satsuki association and so satsuki growers um you know people who specify in just uh people who specify in growing satsukis they have their own association they have their own exhibitions um they have their own uh uh there's a whole world just surrounded by satsuki um cultivation and display uh and so some of the ideas behind the display the creation of the trees um you know what wins awards and things like that are slightly different from what we would see um within the the bonsai community in similar way that the shohin world is and so if you look at a lot of the sort of uh satsuki magazines you'll see sort of uh some trees that are uh they're called hanagi which is basically just a very very sort of thin trunk and they're very thin trunk and they're very thin trunk and there's just like massive umbrella of flowers uh and then you look at that and you see well what where is the the kind of the artistry in making that kind of tree um and there isn't much in terms of like the you know the movement in the trunk and the branches you know where the sort of the genuine skill comes from is the the distribution of the the different colored flowers on the tree uh you know how perfect those uh those blossoms are the size of the blossoms the color of the leaves and things like that so a lot of the the kind of uh um considerations that we have from uh from appreciating satsuki uh do come from a from a sort of a horticultural perspective uh and the real big difference between growing them uh compared to say junipers and pines or designing them is that uh working with azaleas is much more of a horticultural challenge if you get that horticultural down then they just grow like crazy like this tree is now starting to do you know you get shoots coming from anywhere i could take every single piece of green this tree and it will bounce back it will send out buds shoots from all over and so you have this incredible ability to just grow branches where you want them as long as the horticulture is correct the minute that that starts the sort of the horticultural aspects start to to to be lost and that's everything from watering fertilizing uh sort of transplanting uh pests and diseases once those things get overlooked then you can't design anything you can't create anything obviously that's the other species of tree but much much more so with with the zelius if you get that that horticultural down then you can do whatever you want with them okay and that's pretty much what been one of the problems with this tree would you like to just tell us a little bit about the history of this tree please right yeah so this tree um is a tree that's part of a collection that i i'm curating right now and uh it originally was imported into eisley's um via joe harris and the matsunami project that i've been working on for a long time and i've been working on a lot of the trees that he had there that's no longer in existence um this was the last of the trees from that imported project and uh and when it was purchased by the current client its health in particular in the apex was quite poor because the apex had been broken off uh in the collapse of a greenhouse and so peter's been helping me horticulturally get this tree back to a state of health and and more energy in the upper portion of the tree and it's finally gotten to a point where you can really do a heavy pruning and set the tree up both shape wise and also for flowering in the future uh and it just worked out time wise that you're here at the perfect time to be able to help bring this tree full circle yep i mean you can actually you can you can do a lot of heavy work on the tree at this time of year as long as it is healthy okay if the tree is weak cutting it back hard will just result in making it even weaker um and so the the first job that you did over the last couple of years was really to to fertilize it very heavily uh the people who were looking after it were instructed to water it heavily and you can see evidence of that uh it might be very very difficult to to see but on a lot of the branches we're actually sort of developing quite a few kind of like tiny air roots and if the azaleas are in a very very humid kind of environment they will actually start to develop roots some of a lot of the varieties will will start to develop roots from from the um from the branches particularly in like very very dense areas and so you can just by looking at those few signs and seeing the color of the leaves the amount of flowers and the extensions that we've had this year because all of this is this year's growth uh we we can tell that this is a very very healthy tree do you do you have any idea what species this is oh this is a kaho is it okay all right i've never actually known the true species of it yeah so uh how many species of of um satsuki azalea are there are they all varieties are there are there are there are there are there are varieties should we say are you asking everybody online does anybody know all right you got to give them time to answer so while they're figuring that out keep walking us through your what you're doing okay because they everything that we do with azaleas uh pretty much across all the varieties all the different varieties there's there's a commonality across them um but then there's different variations so some of the some of the varieties will grow uh very very long extensions some will be very very sort of compact uh the node length between leaves um will be will be much more denser there's a lot of sort of slight variations but there's a there's a from a basic level you can apply most of what we're saying across all the varieties once you start delving deeper and deeper into the world of azaleas then the way in which you deal with say uh an osaka zuki is completely different to the way in which you would deal with a kinsai which is completely different to the way that you would deal with a corin uh and so but that's once you start really sort of delving into the into the depths of it like what we're going to do today is really just kind of a broad brushstroke of that kind of thing if you if you then start getting into it on a deeper level it starts becoming a very interesting but really quite sort of specific field there's lots of these different little variations so what i'm going to start off doing uh is to is to remove all of the flowers so we've had the flowers are pretty much like they were finished probably about two weeks ago so as ryan sort of said you know like referring back to this work is is going to be very good for most people because we're a little bit late for the ideal sort of timing of this ideally sort of a lot of the flower removal should have been done maybe about two weeks previously um the flowers are finished and a lot of them have fallen off and we've just have the the pistol remaining in here so the the the fertilized sort of you know the center of the flower okay and these will have been fertilized and if these are left to remain on the tree then they'll turn to seed and that really does tire the tree out okay so we'll be removing those and any of the flowers that we have left on the tree so we're just going to sort of start to go through and move that very sort of quickly uh if this tree was a was a was a bigger sort of bushier tree uh and there's a lot of growth over it what i would do is take my uh my trusty uh hedge trimmers uh to it and just go crazy on it and just go clipping the whole thing off kind of topiary style to get back to the base structure but with this tree we're still we're not really at that point where uh it would be a good idea to do that we're gonna have to approach each branch one by one uh looking at the the strength of them if you have any questions please feel free to use the chat box in the chat box we'll also ask further questions whenever we get to those kind of questions um i'd love to hear from you but i'd love to hear from you yeah absolutely yeah absolutely yeah my question is is there any kind of variety that's there were other varieties that was in a variety that was in a variety that was you know like like a variety that was treat it differently from what you're saying right now what like do you want to show us uh Brian did. Okay, so Brian would have got that from the Satsuki book of varieties, which is a book of registered varieties which the Satsuki Association put out. And if you wish to exhibit in any of the Satsuki Association exhibitions, it has to be one of those registered varieties. Oh, wow. So what's the difference between Satsuki and just Azalea? Why is there a differentiation? We use the term Azalea to refer to sort of any type of rhododendron. You can throw all that stuff on the ground, dude. Yeah, thank you. I appreciate you keeping the studio clean, but it's here for you to work. Okay. Yeah, go for it. Just a whole hog, dive in. Mud pit. So Satsuki is just basically one variety of it. The name Satsuki is, I mean, they're referred to rhododendron indicum, which, I mean, there are other rhododendrons, around. A lot of them have a lot bigger leaves. A lot of them will tend to, will flower first before sending out the new growth. Azaleas, Satsuki azaleas, will send out the new growth before the flowers. Whereas like the Tsutsuji, which is a different variety of azalea that they have in Japan, send out the, they do it the opposite way around. So they flower before sending out the new growth. So just in terms of care, Eric was wondering, Eric got an azalea from a local nursery, but just wondering how different the care can be. Essentially the same thing. Essentially the same. Essentially the same thing. How successful that variety will be at turning it into, if it's a different type of rhododendron into, a bonsai will be sort of dependent on the variety and things. So like if it has a very large leaf and then it might be a bit more difficult to turn into, into, into a, you know, a small size bonsai. Hey Peter, can I make a request? Yep. Can you use slides? Can you slide back a little bit so that Ricardo can focus and you can rotate the tree. I mean, show, show, yeah, you do, just do your thing. You work like you're working and these guys are good at capturing. Okay. They've had to, they've had to deal with me for the past several months. I've, I've definitely put them through the ringer. Well, Paul had a question. He asked, why does leaving the seeds weaken the tree? Because it's basically expending energy that we don't want it to, to waste onto, you know, creating seeds. Um, we want all of the energy now to go into, into new growth, into new vegetative growth, into, to, to growing new roots, uh, and such like, so it's, it's basically just kind of putting energy into place that we don't want it to, is essentially what it is. And so one of the, the kind of, um, we sort of touched on it briefly about some of the, the misconceptions that we have about azaleas, it's about satsuki, um, is, is, is to do with kind of like the, you know, the energy levels within them and, and, and such like. So azaleas are basally dominant as opposed to apically dominant. And so one of the problems that this tree was having was, uh, a lack of vigor in the, in the top of the tree. And quite often that's the, the kind of like the first area of the tree to sort of start to weaken. And there are a number of reasons for this. Uh, one of them is that people will prune back the top, perhaps a little bit too hard when it's not able to, to sort of recover from that. Um, one of the reasons is perhaps not rejuvenating the, the finer branch structure. Uh, frequently enough. And one of the big reasons is, is kind of like messing around with the roots, um, to like, in particular the roots directly underneath the trunk, uh, sort of cutting away at those two. And once that, once those things happen and, and, and the apex starts to weaken, it can be very, very difficult, um, to kind of get that back in. Can you, can you talk about that a little bit though? I mean, like when we talk about like pine, juniper, spruce, apically dominant species, and then you start talking about azalea. Are, are, there, there's always a discussion that azaleas are, uh, are basally dominant. Is, is that, is that true? Is that why the apex weakens or what's the deal with that? It kind of is and it isn't. I mean, if you, if, if, if, like I was sort of saying earlier, if you set the tree up, uh, and the horticulture is good, it's got, you know, a good root ball. Uh, and by a good root ball, we mean, uh, that the, the water can really sort of penetrate through to the, to the core directly underneath the trunk. And that every time you, when you, when you come to repot it, and azalea's doing it. You're repotting slightly more frequently, um, than, than other trees. Like how, like how frequently? Uh, depending on the species, depending on your, on your conditions and environment. Think of about three years as a, as a kind of a general, um, as a general rule. So this tree being in its third year, we're looking at next year. Yeah, definitely. I mean, if you, when, when, when you look at the, the, the kind of the, the compaction of the, of the top of the soil, um, it's getting quite, quite hard. I mean, water will definitely be sort of penetrating through there. Uh, and Cahoe is a. A species that you can leave a little bit longer than other ones, but there is, uh, a variety called, um, Yata no Kagami. Kage, yeah, yeah, Yata no Kagami. And that is a suicidal tree. It will kill itself after two years, three years, if you do not repot it. Uh, the root systems with azaleas are super fine and very, very hairy. Kind of like the hairs on my arms. Yeah. Do you want to get a close look at that? I love that. And they will mat together. They will, they will sort of form together. They'll mat together. Uh, and the soil that we use, uh, which is, uh, uh, Canuma, um, breaks down relatively easily. Uh, and if we use organic solid fertilizer, that breaks down. And so you've got all of these things basically forming this impenetrable mat on the, on the surface of the, uh, of the pot, um, which then leads to, to, to poor oxygenation, poor water penetration. Uh, and the tree just then starts to suffer. Um, So when you come to repot azaleas, what you tend to find is that you have hardly any roots in the bottom of the pot. Um, they do, they don't really, they're, they're a very shallow rooting species. They grow by river sides. They, you know, they, they like, uh, they like a lot of moisture, but they don't send roots for, you know, deep down into the pot. And what you tend to, to find is, uh, if you start messing around, particularly with the roots underneath, directly underneath the, the, the kind of the, the trunk, when you come to repot them, and you can get in there, because then they, they don't form very strong roots, and they don't form that sheen that you were talking about in previous, um, live streams. It, it, it doesn't form like a super hard, dense sheen. And if you go in there and you start working away, it will just crumble away. And if that starts to happen, then, then you start to see the, the apex really deteriorating in, in, in strength. So you want to preserve this? You absolutely have to preserve it. You start getting in there and messing around with it, you will, you'll end up with a dead top of the tree. Wow. So what about, like, um, I know when they come out of the field, you know, and they're super strong, they've got all that moisture in them, is that, that's kind of the time you can do heavy branch reduction and heavy root reduction? You can go crazy on them that time. Is that when you set up that sheen? Yep. You bury them, you wash every bit of, um, uh, field soil off. It depends on, on, um, on how they've been sort of field grown. So some of them get field grown in essentially field soil. Some of them get field grown in bonsai soil. Right. And so if they've been field grown in bonsai soil, then they generally will be. Yeah. Like a, a decent kind of sheen underneath that, um, uh, underneath the trunk. And so you don't necessarily want to be going in too crazy on them. Um, but yeah, you've got to establish that. And that's the time. That's the best time. Cause it's, as you say, it's, you know, it's just coming out of the field. It's full of energy, full of moisture. Uh, you can cut it back to zero, um, you know, green on it, very few sort of fine roots on them and they will be out of recover. Wow. Is there a. Uh, pH recommended for soil? Okay. So azaleas are, I mean, that's one of the things that everybody sort of talks about it being, uh, they're acid loving, um, uh, species. And so the, the soil that we tend to use with azaleas is the, the, the Konuma soil, uh, and that does have a slightly more acidic pH. It's round about sort of 5.5, um, six to 5.5, but there's not a huge, I mean, like what's the, what's the average sort of acidity of, of, uh, of Akadama? Yeah. Typically. Typically six, five, right? Yeah. Six, five. And so there's not a huge difference in the acidity levels between, um, uh, Akadama and Konuma. Uh, and there are some growers, uh, who will, you know, you can, you can grow an azalea in Konuma, no problem at all, uh, in, in Akadama, no problem at all. Um, from a pH perspective. Okay. The reason why Konuma soil is so good for azaleas is not just the pH, but it's the actual, the microstructure of it. It's very, very fine. It's very, it breaks down very easily because it's so full of holes. It's so microporous. And that is what is so good for the, the, the roots are able to penetrate that very easily because they're very weak, fine, hairy roots. And so they can't get in and start breaking down the doors on, on hard soils. They can't get in there. And so they need that kind of like soft microporous soil to kind of get in, you know, stick their, you know, their talons in there. Uh, and it also makes it very, very sort of. Moisture retentive, which the azaleas particularly enjoy. And so that's the biggest reason for, for using Konuma soil as opposed to, um, the sort of pH level. But if you live in an area, uh, for example, where your water is highly acidic, or if you start to, to, to, to mess around with, um, with chemical fertilizers too much, and the pH of your soil starts to rise up, then you'll start to see a lot of problems with the tree. And they'll tend to then tend to be, you'll start to see signs of, you know, off-color in the, in the foliage, lack of vigorous growth, you know, sort of chlorosis type, um, yellowing of the leaves, start to see the veins of the leaves coming out and things like that. Um. Jonathan's wondering if you could describe how you're removing the flowers and pistils right now. Okay. And what you're removing. Can we see this quite easily? Just holding it and just pulling and sort of twisting at the same time. Okay. If you are, you know, if you're doing it for the first time, it's always a good idea. To kind of like hold the base, uh, of where you're pulling on it, just so you don't sort of pull the branches off. Uh, if the tree was weak, then I'll be absolutely sort of holding the base of it, but the, the tree's very sort of strong. So I can get away with just kind of the pull and twist kind of, uh, technique. Um, but you've just got to get in there and just pull it out with just enough force to remove it, but not enough to, to sort of pull the branches off. Okay. So. So you're going to go through and you're going to, you're going to take off all the flowers and then you're going to come back and dial it in. You've been, you've been giving us a good background on, on the root system, the root structure. You get that good sheen set up. You, depending on the variety, these are broad brushstrokes, but you don't want to break up that sheen or it'll weaken the apex. But you do want to make sure that that surface layer, which is where it becomes sort of compacted, gets cleaned out fairly regularly. The soil starts. It'll turn black, particularly if you use like, um, solid organic fertilizers, uh, which is always recommended. Um, there, there is the trade off though, with, with creating that sort of slight compaction issue. Um, so you always want to get that sort of cleaned off. Is that like a once a year thing or? No, it's every time you repot. Every time you repot, you got to redress that surface. So with a lot of, you know, when you come to repot, you're basically not touching anything in the bottom of the tree, underneath the tree. You're just really focusing on those. Surface roots. Interesting. That's, that's where the, the, the sort of the big difference, I suppose, comes with, it's kind of like repotting a, a, a maple, you know, one of those absolute sort of flat bottom maples where there's no roots underneath it, uh, and you're just working on the, those surface roots. Uh, but then you've also got to make sure that you kind of, um, the water can penetrate down through to that sheen. And so, for example, where we have like a bit of a gap here in the nebari as close to the trunk as possible. Uh, where there's no root. Uh, where there's no root. Uh, where there's no root. So, there's, there's soil in there. There's no sort of solid roots. There's no sort of solid roots. What I would do in repotting would be to take a sort of a chopstick or something like this and make a hole just so that I know that water can sort of penetrate down to that. Gotcha. And what I tend to do, um, uh, is I might fill that up with pumice because I know it's not, definitely not going to break down. Mm-hmm. Uh, and so that there's always a kind of, um, a path for the water to get right down into there. You know? Or. Or. But with this, um. this tree I mean because you've got hard there's hardly any roots on the back of the tree you don't really have to worry about that too much if it had a huge spreading nebari then you would be thinking I have seen some growers actually have a tube that when they're repotting it they actually insert a tube into the into the core of the the root ball and just have that coming up with a little funnel on top wow no kidding and when they water it they make sure that water kind of like goes into that funnel goes directly under underneath the trunk that's how important it is wow okay so if you have one of those trees where there's the nebari it's just huge fills the pot almost then sometimes you know that that might be necessary very very cool and so we're saying we're talking an awful lot about water and we're seeing the condition of the roots the ability for water to percolate absolutely imperative but then coming back to that water obviously you can water too much you can water not enough I mean it's kind of difficult to water too much okay you've really got to go hardcore on it to water too much and what you would start to see with watering too much would be you start to see deficiencies because you'd be leaching out particularly the magnesium in the soil so you start to see sort of chlorotic looking leaves with a red tinge around the around the edge of the leaves okay which is one of the big sort of signs of magnesium deficiency so you get chlorotic being you'd see yellowing with a red red margin and you're more likely to see a lot of chlorotic being yellowing with a red red margin you're more likely to see that than the natural sort of chlorosis wow you know like iron deficiency right you know that magnesium gets gets washed out of the soil first and so then you start to see it yellowing with the red if it's just normal yellow then it's then that could be sort of chlorosis or it could be other things um Murph has an azalea that's has uh that whose leaves are turning pale white pale white yes uh Murph said I believe it's lace bugs but one but was wondering what you used to do with it I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't treat them uh well if it's lace bugs any kind of um uh any pesticide would be any insecticide would would work quite well on those so where is he is he in the states I'm not sure where Murph is um well Michael Fiducia from Florida gave you a shout out saying what's up he misses you I miss you too Mike how you doing come up and hang out sometime we all miss you Michael we love you uh yeah pretty much any sort of insecticide azaleas are um when they are very very healthy okay they are a delicious delicious species to eat for insects you know you get um spider mites uh in Japan they get terrible problems with spider mites uh thrips thrips like to go in there and start eating away at them uh all sorts of sap sucking insects scale they're they're a delicious species to attack and so as the azalea grows uh in Japan um uh us including we would be spraying during the summer uh some very very highly toxic chemicals at least once every 10 days during the summer that's how much you kind of uh um you're likely to get attacks of insects fungal problems not so much um but definitely sort of insect attacks so yeah regular fairly regular spraying of um of insecticides is kind of a uh a given in in some environments like in the UK for example I don't get anything at all but I know in in certain areas in the United States Pennsylvania for example um they get a lot of aphids lace beans um scale insect all sorts of things like that so Murph's in Virginia okay so yeah so similar kind of environment very hot very humid perfect environment for for bugs to start multiplying like crazy on these delicious highly nutritious sugar filled uh azaleas which are very easy to kind of attack because they have very thin bark so yeah keeping on top of bugs is is always a big problem well um well Facebook Live got a little crazy there there's some folks who are wondering about um taking care of azaleas in the winter and what are what are the temperatures that azalea okay uh down to about minus five degrees centigrade which is about 95 7 let me do a little yeah yeah 20 28 generally 28. then they'll they'll be okay um uh in Tokyo uh where where I was we very rarely got kind of below that that kind of uh temperatures so anything that was strong was just kind of like left out on the benches um and just left to to the elements uh in the UK as well I mean I've I basically leave things out to to to kind of about which are during the winter, anything that starts getting below that, then you start seeing issues with damage to the vascular system on the trunk. So if you actually kind of like have a look at the trunk, where it's going to be easiest to sort of see here, where you're seeing a lot of flaking here, okay? You're seeing a lot of flaking on the trunk. This is where like the vascular system on there is kind of like expanded and contracted. And it's so close to the surface. There's no bark on them. It's not like a pine, which has got like a massive layer of bark, or, you know, junipers, which develop these layers of bark on there. These are very, very close to the surface. I'm talking like microns. And so if they're full of water during the winter, which they will be, because these are evergreen, so there's going to be water transported up and down, and it freezes, and you have an air temperature of around about sort of five degrees, it doesn't take long for that to penetrate into the trunk and to start freezing it. And then you start to see cracking of the trunk, and you start to see vascular damage, and then the tree starts to suffer and weaken. So around about minus five, anything lower than that, then you have to start sort of protecting them. I had a bit of a problem in the UK this year, not during the winter, because we didn't really get too cold. I kept a lot of the trees in the polytunnel. Unheated polytunnel, so they got down to just below freezing. No problems at all. The problem that I had was in May. So during the World Convention, when I was away in Japan, put all of my trees outside, because it's May, you think it's going to be fine. You're not going to get too cold weather. You want everything outside, because all of the fresh growth is just dying. The growth tends to start late April, where I am, and sort of starts to grow out. So you want that growth to be out. So you want that growth to be out. In the natural environment, so it hardens up naturally. You don't want to keep it in a hot house, and then bring it out on a windy day or a hot day and just have it fry. You just let it sort of leaf out, bud out naturally. And so I did that, and then I got minus five at the start of May. And so all of this tender growth just got annihilated. So minus five is bad when there's fresh growth. But when there's no fresh growth and everything is kind of hardened off, then the foliage is capable of withstanding about minus five degrees. But start going lower than that, and then the trunk and the branches start to suffer. Does that answer the question? Yeah, I'd say so. We're getting a lot of questions about soil. You mentioned kanuma being the best, but if folks are still using an Akadama pumice lava mix, is that okay? Yeah, it's going to be very, very difficult for the azalea to kind of develop that sheen that you were talking about because it's very, very hard elements that are not going to break down and enable those roots to kind of really sort of clasp onto that. You need that. You need that softness. You do need the softness. Interesting. You need the softness, but the softness means that the surface layer becomes sort of compacted. And so you need to kind of rejuvenate that every so often. So would you recommend as an alternative to... Kanuma, just 100% Akadama, or just try to get kanuma? Yeah, I mean, if there's nothing else than that. I mean, if you can buy Akadama, then you should be able to buy kanuma, really. Anybody who's importing soils, anywhere kind of like in Europe, definitely, that is very easy to get hold of kanuma. I don't know a lot of places in the United States that import both. So ideally, just go that extra mile. Buy a bag of it. Try and buy it fresh as well. It doesn't store well. It breaks down a lot in transport and things like that. So when you do come to repot or to use that kanuma soil, it's absolutely essential to kind of like really get all of the dust out of it. Sift it. When you repot it, so sift it, sift it, sift it, sift it again. Every time, even when you put your scoop into a bucket to pour it in, it creates dust. So you've got to make sure you get as much of that out as possible. Wow. And then when you repot it, make sure you kind of like really, really wash it out. And even for like a week afterwards, you'll still be getting like dust coming out of the pot. So that root system, I mean, sounds to me like what you're saying is roots are bust, basically. You've got to take care of that containerized environment. You've absolutely got to take care of it. And what you tend to see with azaleas is that they are kind of like over-potted. Mm-hmm. Okay. And the real reason for this is, yes, they like... Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. They like the water, but what they dislike more than kind of like drought. And this is something I found because a lot of my azaleas were, you know, because obviously traveling a lot, I come back and I see quite a lot of the azaleas in the spring when the temperatures weren't too high. The soil was actually really quite dry, but the trees were showing no signs of any kind of like damage. If that happened in very, very hot weather, those trees would just be annihilated. Mm-hmm. They would be fried. Mm-hmm. And so really like the kind of... What they really hate is to have like overly hot roots to baking roots. And so the deeper the pot is, the more it acts as a heat sink. Mm-hmm. Because as I was saying earlier, we don't actually get roots developing right down into the bottom. With this pot, this isn't like super deep. Okay. So you'll probably find roots right down to the bottom, but not like... Not very sort of compact roots. But if you put this into a pot that was another inch deeper, that bottom inch would have hardly any roots in it whatsoever. But that bottom inch is very important as a heat sink. Mm-hmm. Okay. So it just enables, you know, particularly because there'll be a lot of moisture in there, it'll enable it to kind of like hold a lot of the... Just disperse a lot of the heat that the pot's kind of accumulating so that the roots don't get fried. And this is a very, very good pot for this tree because when we look at it, I can fit a hand in between the edge of the roots and the edge of the pot on this side, and I can fit two fingers on this side between where we have the nabari and the edge of the pot. Two fingers here. Two fingers there. Two fingers there and a whole hand across here. All right. So the woody part of the roots are nowhere near the edge of the pot. Okay. And so they're not going to get fried. If this pot was a lot tighter and we had the edge of the pot very, very close to the woody nabari, then we would start to see this tree suffer tremendously. Interesting. And so it's really the kind of like the heat that the pot holds, particularly the walls. It's up close, sort of close to the roots that really sort of damage the azaleas. And so squeezing them into tight pots is always a bad idea. That's something that rather unfortunately the chief was quite fond of. Big trees and small pots. Big trees and small pots all tight up against. I mean, there were some trees, there were some varieties like Osakazuki. They're pretty, like, they are a very old variety. They're one of the oldest, purest varieties. And so they're... Yeah, they can withstand a lot. But the more hybridized the trees become, the weaker they are. So a lot of the newer varieties, you know, they've got lots of pretty flowers and they're all lovely and everything, but they're weak. And so you have to be a lot more careful with how hard you can work on them, and the kind of the tolerance they have to hard work and things like that. Whereas the older, purer varieties are strong. I worked so hard to build that apex and I noticed that you broke half of it off. It wasn't intentional. Oh, really? Yeah. Will it come back? Absolutely. Okay. Azalea is brittle. Very. They are very, very brittle. And so wiring them takes a different kind of approach. Anything sort of, again, depending on the variety. There's a very good example of it. That was a dead branch that just snapped off. Yeah. So depending on the variety, some are more brittle than others. Others are, some are quite flexible. Some will just, every time you just look at a branch and try and bend it, it'll snap. And so you taking a very much more kind of like clip and grow approach to it is, is a good idea. And if you do have kind of like thick branches on a tree, it can be very difficult to manipulate them. And so you do have to kind of sort of start to work around those. Better time to wire than others? The best sort of time to wire. Wire is, now we can cut the tree back and we can actually sort of get to the structure. But at the moment, the bark is really kind of like soft on them. And so we start wiring the branches and there's a very good risk that as we're applying the wire to the branch, we take some of the bark off. It's so thin and it's so full of moisture. And so now isn't really the greatest time for wiring trees. It's possible, particularly if you're careful. But the best sort of time is kind of September, October, when there's still a lot of moisture traveling up and down the trees. There's still that flexibility, but it's starting to harden up. And so, you know, the bark is perhaps just is a little bit harder. You don't tend to take the skin off as easily. You want a stool, man? No, I'm fine. Okay. Keep stretching the back every now and again. Tanya is wondering when you are pruning, if you clean the branches like other trees, i.e. remove growth growing upwards and downwards. Okay, we'll get to that. Okay. The pruning aspect of it is going to be, is going to come up. So I'm doing a bit of that as I'm going along, just pulling off a lot of the really obvious bits as we're going. And the obvious bits are off the bottom or? Generally, yes. Okay, but we'll get to that. We'll definitely get to that. I'm getting impatient. You are really. I mean, we got it. We kind of like got a two-hour, you know, live stream to fill. We're already 40 minutes in, man. We're already 40 minutes in. It flies by, doesn't it? Well, Matt has a question about the shoots that you're removing. Matt says, during flowering season, if you have new vegetative growth with a bunch of shoots, do you remove them to let the flowers shine? Okay, if you're looking to show the tree, like in flower, then you can remove those vegetative shoots before it goes to exhibition. But what we'll do now is we'll. We'll go through and we'll start to sort of prune those shoots and look at how we, you know, how we do those. So essentially what we need to be looking at as we're pruning this tree is looking at the balance of energy and like how to create foliage pads. The foliage pad creation on azaleas is a very good learning tool for a lot of people because what we like to do with them is the best way of kind of creating them is very, very sort of similar to how you do it with. With junipers and pines and things where you look to create that basic sort of skeleton structure and then add meat to the, to that skeleton. All right. But with azaleas, you can add meat to that structure within a very, very short period of time if it's very heavily fertilized. If the tree is healthy, it's just going to grow from everywhere. It's not like pines where you've got to really kind of let it grow out and then push it back very hard to force lots of back buds, these back bud willingly and easily. From from old. Wood. Okay. And so you can fill that up very, very, very easily. So what we what we look to do is create that sort of basic skeleton structure and then we add the meat to it. Now, one of the things that we also want to do is to make sure that all of those sort of tertiary branches, those branch tips are young and youthful. And this is where a lot of people kind of like struggle because there isn't enough kind of like hard pruning. Uh, once these branches, once these young at the moment, these young shoots are just all they're doing is that there's. There's hardly any wood in them. All they're doing is just kind of like carrying nutrients up and down moisture, nutrients up and down. It's just active, active, active. Once those once we start to cut those and as they get older, so we cut it and it's then we have some more growth on this. Then this starts to get older and starts to become more and more lignified. And we add sort of ramification on there. These these branches start to and the more we hold it back, the more we hold it back, you know, the second flush of growth. The more these these branch tips. Start to lignify become old and it's very much the same as like people have heart problems. You know, when there are we start to kind of get furry on the outside. Stop be becoming like less able to transfer, you know, the blood pressure rises. And what's happening with it with the branch tips and this happens on Maples. But over a much longer timescales, basically, it's just hardening from the inside out. And so it's efficiency. It's ability to carry nutrients and moisture becomes less and less and less. And so it's then starts growing less and less and less. And the efficiency of the tree, the energy of the tree just starts to deteriorate. Because those older branch tips are not being replaced. So as we're going through and pruning what we're looking to do, and this tree doesn't have too many of those older branches. Because this is one thing that you did, you know, you cut out a load of those older branches and under your guidance via text message. Okay, so we don't have a lot of that. But that's one thing that we really have to do. Right. So as you sort of going through removing those unnecessary branches are looking at. Removing older branches. So two-year-old, three-year-old branches in favor of youthful branches. Okay. We always want to be rejuvenating, rejuvenating, rejuvenating, rejuvenating, root system, the branch tips. And we're doing this on like a two, three, four-year timescale with Maples. You can, you know, you're working on maybe like a 15-year timescale with the branch tips. You know, you hold Maples back. You hold them back. You hold them back. You pinch them out. You pinch them out. Eventually, those branch tips start to get old. And did. And lignify and become very, very weak. Then you need to kind of like color that ramification off and start to regrow it with azaleas. That happens on a two to three-year timescale. If you're not careful. And so that's what we've been looking to do. But equally, what we're also looking to do is where we have these explosions of growth. So for example, we've got one here. Okay, let's just take that off. So you can sort of see that one. Okay, we get like four shoots. All coming from one point. If it's even more vigorous, we'll get four. We'll get five or six. What we'd be looking to do is to take that down to two. It's fundamental idea when we're building a branch structure on trees. Two by two by two by two. Something that you I'm sure you just try and hammer into people. Sure. Yeah. All right. Standard ramifications. Standard ramification practice. This is where you see it on a very, very sort of quick every like two or three times a year. You're going to get this kind of growth. So you then got to go down and thin it to two. So which those two are? Depending on what you're wanting to do. So if for example, we're looking to grow this branch out and to kind of extend it. Maybe get it a bit more vigorous than we would look to keep the two longer ones and take those two off. If we're looking to compact it, which is essentially what we're going to be doing with a lot of this tree. What we would look to do is to take these two off and then shorten these two back. Okay, we don't have to cut it back to where there's leaves. All right. Ideally putting it back to where there's a single where there's a single or a pair of leaves is good. But what we'll do that we don't have that second pair. So we just cut it back to the same sort of length. The fitting of those things out very very important. And when you're looking at sort of creating that foliage pad trying to do it with as much of the kind of clip and grow method as possible is always a good idea. Okay, that means we have to wire it less which means we have to kind of like unwire it less which is a big problem for a lot of people because these grow very very rapidly. And so you can end up after a couple of months needing to take the wire off. And ideally should be on top of it. But for those people who can't which is a lot of people then, you know, try to do sort of take that clip and grow method. Obviously, we have to wire that, you know, the main branches which is what's happened previously. All right, so setting that skeleton structure, but trying to take a kind of a very sort of clip and grow approach to sort of putting the meat on on that skeleton structure. Paul has a question if azalea can be designed for both flowers. Flower and non flower showing. Absolutely. So we have very we've talked very little about like the kind of the design of azaleas and how we style them. Okay. When you're styling a juniper when you're starting a plan, what are you thinking about? What am I thinking about? Yeah, I'm thinking about the structure and I'm thinking about five years down the road. Okay, and I'm thinking about creating the lines that will hold the pad. Okay, and in terms of its sort of natural growth habit. Yeah, I'm thinking about man. This is what I put my students the position. I put my students in and now I know how they feel crap crap. No, I'm thinking about reflect man. I don't know Peter just just come out with it. I will you try and make the tree try and make the trees kind of like represent their natural growth. Yeah, I mean ideally right? Yeah. Okay. What's the natural growth habit of an azalea? A bush a bush. All right, these have no natural growth habits. And so the idea that we make our trees look as though they do in the wild. All right, you can find me in azalea in the wild. It looks like this. I'll give you a million dollars. Anything like you heard it here first folks. Millionaire. I don't find it's a millionaire. I don't mean someone taking a bonsai put it in the ground and saying, yeah, that you guys picture. All right, they just do not grow like this naturally. Okay, so all Satsuki bonsai. Is entirely artificial. The way in which they're styled is entirely artificial. There's none of this kind of like let's try and make it look as though it does in the wild. The the styles the images that we are creating are bonsai like styles and images. All right, where you take that is entirely up to you. So you might want to take it into like a deciduous looking tree. And this is where understanding the different species and how they grow is important. So for example, Kinsai is a variety which is ideally suited to that kind of a deciduous like image. And because they kind of like they grow upwards and they grow outwards and we get these kind of like long spreading branches. So you tend to see those in deciduous sort of style images. Oh, Sakazuki are very good one for kind of like creating to like a pine style image with branches dropping down big voluminous foliage pads and things like that. Other ones are very much suited towards exposed root styles and things that we could go on forever in a day. But essentially what we're looking at doing is kind of like maximizing that varieties kind of ability. So we're not looking to try and make. Say, for example, a Hoshi no Kaige Aki, which is a trunk variety, which doesn't thicken up very much. We're not looking to say, okay, I'm going to make this into a real big thick trunk tree. We're taking that the slender trunk approach with that one sort of literati style feel to it has a very small small leaves. And so kind of like, you know, working with those varieties to create styles which are appropriate for that variety. This is a this is a variety which is appropriate for this kind of tree. Kind of style. We have a larger leaf. So we're looking at a bigger tree. We have large flowers. So we're looking at a bigger tree some spaces between the foliage pads because otherwise when you know, it starts to fill up and just becomes a big Bush. And so the styling of them is something which is very very sort of different to how we would approach other trees. So you're using trunk girth as a big indicator of style as well as species characteristics. Absolutely. Yeah. Okay. Eric is wondering how the trunk line was developed for this tree. Basically with wire taking a taking a tree cutting wiring. It brings the movement in it putting in the ground thickening out. Okay. Nerima style. There's a what was that Nerima style just that kind of branches coming off of the outside of curve. Nerima. Nerima the area in Japan where they were kind of they were growing. There's there's basically kind of like different growers who had different sort of styles. And people would just make like a field of like 200 of the same trees. Right 300 of the same trees. See that with the white pines and black pines down in Shikoku. Yeah. Hmm. Okay. So what I'm doing going through all these branches is just looking at where the the skeleton sort of structure is and trying to get back to that. Okay, so seeing where the the thick woody branches are. Okay, and then trying to create a foliage pad off of that. And you're you're plucking a lot out. Are you plucking leaves? And okay, so where we've got unnecessary shoots, for example, coming off the bottom of the trunk bottom of the branches and such like directly off of the trunk. Let's find one here. Okay, so we have one here. We got that. Okay, if I come in with my scissors no matter how close I get to it, I'm always going to leave like a tiny millimeter little stub and from that stub we're likely to get another shoot. Hmm. If I come in and just pull that back and tear it off. We don't leave that stuff. We end up with a little bit of a wound and we're much less likely to get any kind of growth coming off of there. Gotcha. And so coming in just just pulling it back pulling it back getting rid of them that way is a very quick and easy way of getting rid of those unnecessary shoots. And are you removing older leaves as well while you're doing because like all those shoots come from that same origin you get four three four five shoots coming from one origin. Are you removing the leaves? Where those shoots originate? Or is that aesthetic? It depends on like there. For example, we just had a little shoot coming straight off the bottom of the tree and so we didn't want anything. So there's no sort of leaf removal up there. But yeah, we are looking at trying to kind of create an even density of foliage. Got it. So if we do have too many larger leaves in one area then going through and sort of cutting those is you know, pulling those off is good. So we get a good. You know a good even density. So you're you're still I mean the same same fundamental theories of for your distribution pulling moisture through evening that out across the tree apply to satsuki. Absolutely. Cool. Very very much. So in terms of the apex and things like that. So like I was just sort of saying what we're hardly going to touch the apex at all really because this still isn't showing signs of like really kind of like racing away some of this at the back is. But this bit of the front is still yet to do that. We're only getting one two three four, you know five sort of leaves here. Where are we getting 1520 here and so this we still want this to kind of like to race away. So I would recommend that this just grows and grows fruit for another year cutting that back is not going to be a good idea at the moment. Okay, so just letting that continues to grow continues because we can cut it back anytime, you know, we can we can cut it back and start to shape it anytime. We've just got to get the motor of that. Tree of that area up and we have to have some kind of draw up there. There's got to be something demanding moisture something pulling it up. If we don't have that then there's no reason for the tree to send it up there. So in terms of growth habit, Jay is wondering if they tend to grow juniper slow or maple fast. They grow ballistic. If you if you fertilize them the best way of approaching kind of like growing azaleas in my opinion is to take the approach of. Like giving a five-year-old an energy drink just just send it wild just fertilize it like crazy. Well, so what the I just stand back and watch it go and then you've got to kind of deal with all the growth and then come back push it you push it you push it and then you can hammer it back hard. So what's the best fertilizer schedule or recommendation start fertilizing in the spring if it depends on what you're looking to do. Okay, if you're looking to kind of you know to exhibit the tree. Then you're going to be wanting to really kind of like hold back on the on the fertilizer for that year that you're that you're going to be exhibiting because you don't want that new fresh sort of spring growth getting all up in there and in and amongst the flowers. But otherwise just start fertilizing in the spring because the trees is going to flower and is then going to get a little bit tired out by the flowering. And then you need to then we're going to be pruning it like we are now. And then it's going to need. To recover from that and so it's going to need the resources. That's sort of cope with that and then just with the flower colors. Chris notice that there's two different colors of flower. Okay, so we have pink we have we have deep pink. We have some white. We have some in-betweens. We have all sorts. Yeah, Chris is wondering if you should strive to have a uniform color or variety or what's the difference? How much of a geek are you? We're hardcore here. This does the question. Okay, if you're a hardcore geek, then yes. You absolutely want to be trying to get develop a very good balance across the entire tree of one color. Oh, well, this is where it starts becoming variety dependent. Okay. So this is a multiple color variety. What you want to be doing is getting good distribution within the same branch. So we'll have a branch where we have pink. We have white. We have deep pink. We have light pink. Now we have all of those different ones within the same branch. That is where it starts becoming really kind of like geeky and that's where the satsuki. People have their own kind of rules and ideas and aesthetics and they'll be able to look at that and appreciate. And also, you know, they're not really looking at the overall shape of the trees. It's like a bonsai, but they'll be like, wow, that flower distribution. They're like that is nailed in. Wow. And that's where it sort of takes a kind of a different appreciation from from from sort of traditional bonsai. And so yes, it's always a good idea to do that. It's very difficult. To kind of wait at the moment. It's almost impossible for me to be able to do that. But it is kind of difficult to how would you go about to kind of keep that on check? You need to know which we need to know which variety isn't it? And they're sort of tendencies for which way the flowers are going to go. And it's almost always they turn to 10 red. So they create the all these different varieties by hybridizing them by crossbreeding. So we got a white tree and we got a red tree. Put the two together and we from those seeds. You're going to get some which are going to be pink. You're going to get some which are going to be red over some which are going to be right. And so, you know, that's how they sort of create them. But there's always like a stronger, you know, when you have a mother and a father, there's always a stronger side. It's almost always the mother. Okay, and it's almost always red. That's the strongest kind of like color and will start to take over if you're not careful. So if you start to you'll often sort of see. Like a cajo or something with it just an entire red apex. Okay. These are the kind of trees that get sold to foreigners kind of like worthless in Japan. So yeah, you once you if you if you're looking at and you start to see one sort of dominant color. You've just got to go in there and cut that entire branch off not cut the leaves off. Just cut that entire branch off. Just go in cut the whole thing off and try and start to grow it again from a new branch that will come out which seems sacrilegious to the. Shape of the tree, but that that you're talking about. If this is like a hardcore geeked out really satsuki specific practitioner oriented, but you're like we're going by the satsuki like guidelines of quality. Yeah, I think the thing that you would probably you would see it most with would be the the Kinside variety where you have these tasseled like tassel like flowers the flowers kind of like come out and they're they've been like most around about 11 tassel. They come out and they're really these very sort of fine delicate flowers and they look really quite nice. But then every so often you'll see these these large big one same same sort of size as this just kind of in the middle of it. And that's one of the that's the that's the mother DNA sort of starting to come through. And if you leave that branch is its influence slow slowly starts to spread. So it spreads to the next branch. Then the next branch eventually this whole thing just starts to turn and it starts in go across the whole tree. Mm-hmm. Wow. And so getting in and removing those very very quickly as it is is something that should be done interesting. But as far as Kaho is concerned, is it a fairly stable variety? Yeah. I mean, this is one of the oldest ones. This has been around for like 150 years. I think there's a lot of old trees like this and so it's it's it's a fairly stable variety. Paul was wondering if mature azaleas could be thread grafted to replace a lost key branch. Yeah, you can. You. Most of its approach grafting as opposed to thread. So but yeah, you can definitely do that. There were there were quite a few trees like for example, the I mentioned earlier Hoshi no kagayaki. If you see like a really thick trunk specimen of those you have to just check the branches because they'll all be grafted in. So they take like a thick trunk variety of something else which is, you know, very very self-sufficient. They pretty much have all the same kind of like bark characteristics and then they approach graft in. Branches of that variety. So they take the thick trunk of something else with the flowers and the branches of a much more desirable variety. So yeah, approach grafting does work, but those branches will always be weak. I'd say if the tree ever sort of suffers any any stress those branches are the first to die on you. Because they're not tied into the primary vascular system. They're kind of on that exterior. Yeah, they're just connected skin skin on skin. Yeah, interesting. Wow. That's really interesting. And so yeah, what a weird little world within bonsai. Absolutely. When you start delving into it. It's just freaky and you get people who just become obsessed with it. I mean I mentioned earlier about the hanagi type to type trees, you know, these are the ones which are basically kind of just these big flower towers. You saw some of them at the the world convention. Yeah, and you know, you look at them. You're like, they don't like bonsai. Where's the where's the interest there? But it's again, it's that flower distribution. It's the the purity of those flowers. It's like how brilliant they've got them to blossom the timing of them and you know things like that that people really kind of appreciate. All right. So what I'm doing here is pruning all of this new growth back right to where it started. So like last year's growth because we are when we sort of look at it from the side, we've got a bit of a kind of like a punch back situation going on here. This area is clearly sort of stronger than the apex. So what we'll do is we'll look to we can afford to push this one about this. This is perfectly strong enough here. So we can start to push this one back. Push it back. Push it back. Hoping that this is going to we're not hoping it will do, you know, expecting this to grow up because we do want a little bit more height from this. We do want a little bit more of a rounded apex in there. We did lose that branch, unfortunately. And so we're looking definitely to sort of push all of this back. Down very hard on this side. Yes, it's higher up in the tree, but this is a vigorous area that we could we can cut this one back. So would you typically not cut the higher up areas back as hard as the lower down or is that not necessarily a generalization that should be made? If this apex was as strong as this area, which is which is on a lot of the trees that I work on that I've been working on for a number of years, then I would cut this one back as hard as the bottom branch. I would not give it any thought at all. It's only when the trees and a little bit. Of a kind of like touch and go sort of situation. Maybe I've been a little bit weakened and you have sort of starting to think plus we also have to think about the fact that you're going to want to repot this next year. Yeah, so we do want to have vigor in the tree. Okay, so we don't want to be asking the tree to do too much in too many different areas. Gotcha. Okay. So so some of your you know, and this is where those nuances come in some of your reservation about pruning or the length and the amount that you're taking off now is in response to knowing it's going to be repotted next spring. Yeah, and if this wasn't going to be repotted next spring, you go perhaps in some areas. We'll be cutting back a lot harder. You go a lot harder. So we'll see that perhaps once we get down to the bottom particularly these front branches. These are going to get cut back a lot harder. All right, so we're going to cut those back a lot harder than than these back branches. Matt's wondering when removing branches. Do you cut them concave or flat? Just flat. In terms of cutting branches off. The trunk does he mean or just these these tiny little shoots? We'll have to see Matt. Matt will get back to us. You can clarify. All right. Because cutting big branches off an azalea is a risky procedure. Okay, can you I mean that you often hear that right? You cut a big branch off and it dies back all the way down to the root system or you cut a big root and it dies back up the trunk to the branch. Do they develop that vein delineation like a juniper? Really? Yeah, very much so. So they lack that ability to laterally. Transport that is that on a very sort of short term short time scale. Yeah, they do. Gotcha. And so if you're basically like if you're going to remove anything low down on the trunk, let's say bigger than again species dependent Vigor dependent history dependent. So it is a broad broad. But say for example, I'm going to remove anything low down on the trunk. That's about thumb size off, you know finger size. If I cut that off in one we're going to see die back. Okay, if I cut this branch off here and I've got another one down. There we might see die back until it until it reaches another branch and stops. Okay, if you're looking at removing something like of that sort of size with nothing underneath it, you will get die back all the way down to the bottom of the roots and things like that. So removing thick branches is something that should only be done when it's taken straight out of the field. Well, it's got all that vigor. Well, it's got all of that vigor or by putting a lot of vigor into the tree, particularly that one. So I'm going to cut that branch and maybe going through like a two or three stage cut. So cutting halfway through that branch going through starting to cut through the top of the branch. So say for example, I wanted to remove this one here. I would come in and I don't have a saw but this is a saw I would come in and I would cut halfway through I would make a V out of there. Okay with the keeping the bottom section connected by keeping the bottom of this of the branch connected to this live vein. Separating it at the top. Okay, allowing this branch just to go crazy to grow and grow and grow. So there's lots of nutrients flowing backwards and forwards. So this vascular system is still being used still being used wait until that starts to callus up on the top. Once that starts to callus up on the top from all of the energy that's flowing from flowing down from above it. Once we start to see that we start to see the live veins from underneath come up and start to rejoin that flow and come up all the way around it. And then I can come in and remove that branch and this live vein still has got demand on it because it's coming up and it's going around that callus is going up into the top. And by doing that over a stage of maybe a year to two years again, depending on the bigger and things like that. You can remove a branch a thick branch quite successfully. Wow. And also, you know sort of when you are doing that perhaps putting a towel sphagnum maybe a bit of sphagnum moss underneath there put a towel around it just to keep that that whole area. Moist that doesn't dry out and then you tend to start so to see a lot less sort of die back. It's a very good technique for maples and things as well. Wow. And then how would you after if you were to make a big operation like that? How would you go about healing that scar or? You just have to have activity above it. If you've got activity above it, then you got you know energy sort of flowing down carbohydrates flowing down if they go near to that callus then it starts then it will just callus over. I mean so satskis are really a process. Of over the course of time. You really do have to kind of like think about the sort of the time aspect and you know plan ahead. You know, you're thinking on certain timescales the you know, the rejuvenation of the branches pumping the tree so full of energy. If you you know knowing that you're going to then kind of like cut it back hard. The year that you repot it for example, then you wouldn't be cutting it back. It's really a you know, kind of a. Delicate balance between all these things as I sort of said earlier about the more energy you pump into with the fertilizer allowing the vigorous growth the more that you can do like in a single year. And then if you get in a situation where your trees reacting poorly to something that you did say it's turning light green or just showing signs of poor health. What do you do to get it back into health? Make sure it's an environment where it's not going to be too stressed. So, you know, like the weather pot isn't going to get too hot. So if you've got problems. With the roots, you're not making those any worse. So perhaps some sort of semi-shade if you live in a very sort of hot area. So when you start to get to like, you know, high 80s mid to high 80s during the day. So 25 26 degrees centigrade. Once you start getting above that stress trees will get more even more stressed. So you really have to focus on cooling it down or yes. So watering like, you know, twice a day minimum sort of thing but not less so but watering to kind of like cool the tree off. It's a good way of, you know, sort of approaching it. And then in terms of the you mentioned put it in the shade. Greg was wondering some people I guess sell Satsuki is shade type versus sun type. Is there a tolerant shade tolerant, but if it's if it's so strong and healthy and you live in a kind of an area where midsummer you're going to you're only going to get to like mid 90s tops for like a week. Then full sun is fine. Like in England. I just full sun is no problem. So we. We barely get any sun, you know, so I want to maximize. It never gets up. It never gets above 80 or 90 in England. Well, we did it. Well, we did the other day. But they were they were fine. But yeah, they are sort of shade tolerant. But again, like it depends if the trees in a weakened situation, then then definitely kind of like don't put it in anywhere where it's going to get even more stress and just allow it to kind of like grow. If it's really weak, then just having any kind of green on there is ideal. You know, anything to kind of like draw the moisture through the tree. This is another kind of thing. That's another one of those sort of fallacies that we have about us. Huskies. But what I'm going to just just sort of show you here is we have this this this long sort of vigorous shoot coming up from here. We just sort of just check that it's not coming from, you know, sort of too close to this branch separation in here. So we have a slight sort of separation there. This is this is one that we can use to sort of begin to fill in and round out that foliage pad. I'm just going to sort of hold it into that sort of position, cut it short. And then we can maybe put a bit of wire onto that either now or in, you know, in October and just sort of get it into that position. So is that kind of a clip and grow approach? So thinking of the skeleton structure. Okay, that's going to go in there. Cut that there. We're going to start to ramify here. We'll start to see shoots coming off the top of that branch. We'll see shoots coming off the bottom of that branch. We'll remove those ones off the bottom of the branch. The ones that come off the top. Once they reach the outside of the foliage pad, you come in and stop them. And then you sort of build up that foliage pad really quite quickly. So are you, you know, like you're pruning right now and you're talking about the fall. Are you going to be pruning the growth again in the fall? I mean, when are kind of the primary times to prune? The next time you're going to be wanting to prune is like once it starts to respond from the work that we're doing now. So we're going to prune it and it's going to start to grow very, very quickly. And you'll start to see new growth. And some areas will start to shoot away. Other areas will start to grow a little bit more weakly. So those areas that start to, you know, that are going to start shooting away. You want to get in there and take the tip off of that same way as you would do with like a maple. Fairly, fairly quickly. So once it starts to get outside of that sort of, you know, foliage pad silhouette, you just come in and clip it off. And then you probably get a third flush of growth, you know, after that's been cut. Particularly if you're fertilizing heavily. And, you know, the trees, the engine of the tree is good. It's capable of pushing out lots and lots of growth in a year. So every time you cut it, it's going to send out another flush of growth. So we'd be looking at? A couple, three weeks. A couple, three, oh, okay. For the strongest shoots, you know, a month for the other ones once they start to really kind of extend out. Wow, okay. So this is, I mean, when you start to really talk about helping a tree turn the corner and enter that refinement, you're going to be paying a lot of attention to that. You're paying pretty close attention to strength balancing and allocation and stuff. Yep. Well, I mean, if you want the quickest result and the best result in the shortest period of time. Yeah. The more attention you pay to it on a more frequent basis, the quicker you'll get there. Same as with any other tree. Yeah, sure. So even in terms of knowing we're going to be repotting next spring, we would still be wanting to take that strength out of those strongest shoots. I think with this tree, then yeah. I mean, other than just, you know, that top area, you know, if you cut back those strong shoots, you're going to have a big foliage mass on there, you know, because it's just going to send out another flush of growth. And so you're going to get very, very dense foliage pads, which are going to be quite tight looking. Right. And so you're going to have that foliage mass on there, which will be able to kind of like power it through the, you know, the repot next year. So then repotting next year, do you prune differently after you repot next year? Well, you know, see how it responds to the repot, read the tree, but don't go too hard on it. Don't go too, you know, deep on it. So you would be cutting back and, you know, making sure there's a good amount of foliage on the tree. But cutting back, you know, to the base leaves or maybe, you know, leaving one set of new leaves. That's interesting. It's just interesting to kind of see that although Satsuki have their own nuances, you really are still abiding by them. Yeah. You really are abiding by that kind of consistent consideration of not abusing them. Absolutely. Not overly doing it, not really hammering them too much in one season, letting the tree tell you how it needs to be treated. They can be very forgiving. Like, for example, we snapped that branch off at the top. Sorry. It could be forgiving of that because we're going to get a new shoot come out of that and we can grow it back and we can fill that apex in within a year. They can be very, very forgiving in that kind of aspect. You bend a branch, you're trying to bend a branch and it's really brittle and it snaps off. As long as you've got the base there, you can grow it out and within three years you can take it, like, from a stub of a branch. You can get that skeleton structure and have a foliage pack with it. So they can be very forgiving in that aspect. But you start to mess up with, like, how much energy in the tree and that horticultural aspect allowing the soil to become compacted, not fertilizing enough, and then it's very unforgiving. So when you're saying fertilize a lot, we're talking, like, monthly application of pretty heavy doses. Pretty heavy dosage and continuing to rotate locations in the container. We're aggressive. Yeah. Fairly. You know, you want to be fairly aggressive. Okay. If you're looking at pushing the growth and keeping it really vigorous, if you're able to stay on top of it, then that's always the best way of approaching it. If you're not able to stay on top of that growth, you can't go around or you've got a thousand trees to look after, then you have to perhaps be a little bit less aggressive with it and just sort of suffer with the consequences of not being able to perhaps make it as quickly as possible. Yeah. Okay. So then you're just talking about backing off and having a slower development. Having a slower development. Gotcha. So it's a gas pedal. But it is. It's absolutely a gas pedal. Brian's wondering if you prune after summer, if you risk cutting off flower buds for next year. As long as, I mean, not really. I mean, again, like, if the tree's really sort of super healthy, you'll get flower buds. Realistically, you don't, I mean, the rule of thumb that we always kind of, like, were taught and went by was never prune after. It was kind of like July 17th or some ridiculous day. But they just kind of sort of said, otherwise you won't get flower buds. But I've pruned azaleas back in, you know, pretty hard in October and then still have flower buds the next year. I wouldn't go too hard on it later on, you know, sort of after August. But you will still get flower buds as long as the tree's sort of healthy. One thing that I was going to sort of say, sorry, I'll get back to that question. No, you're fine. About the kind of like the, one of the fallacies that we have with azaleas. In terms of, you know, allowing it to flower or not allowing it to flower with it sort of weakening the tree. Realistically, I mean, there's never been a tree that I've removed the flower buds off in, say, the fall or the winter or early spring to save the, like, the energy on the tree. Okay. Allowing them to flower creates that draw. That draw of energy up through the tree. And it makes them work. Okay. So I like keeping, you know, even with a weakish tree, allowing them to get to that point of flowering is a good idea. Because it creates that demand for moisture up in the top of the tree, for nutrients up in the top of the tree. Kind of like sucks it all up. And then that gets redistributed to other parts of the tree. You know, you take those flower buds off of the tree and what, the tree has no kind of like reason to get up in the morning. It's just to work. So not, you know, so taking those flower buds off in the winter. If people sort of tell you to do that, I'd kind of like recommend against it. Joe had a question about what you're pruning right now. So when you're cutting off a lot of the older, darker leaves, are you depriving the tree of necessary auxins? Not so much. I mean, by cutting off the tips of the branches. That really sort of does stimulate new growth to happen on the tip. But removing the leaves, perhaps not so much. Sort of cutting off the stronger shoots in favour, or cutting back the stronger shoots. So that we're getting like balanced growth. So let's try and find a good example. Or like maybe here. Okay, so we have like quite a few sort of strong shoots coming in here. And we can imagine our future. We can imagine our sort of foliage pad where we want it to be. Kind of around there. So we're going to literally just kind of like cut back to shape. So cutting that one back to say two leaves there. We want to cut this one just beneath it. Because there's two coming from the same spot here. The same kind of length. And a similar kind of thing over here. Okay. And by doing that, we're getting a similar kind of, we're getting the same sort of length. The same amount of leaves all around, you know, those areas. So it's very similar to like the amount of needles that you have in, you know, with pine trees. Around each, you know, sort of the end of the branches. That's the same kind of idea. And by cutting off those tips, you know, we are sort of removing that auxin producing tip. We're forcing it to back bud. And we're going to see an explosion of growth on the inside as well as at the tips where we just cut. And then it's up to us to then manage those, you know, that growth. So Ryan talks a lot about this concept of energy positive, Ryla. Yep. Matt was wondering if that concept plays a role in the trimming that you're doing right now. Absolutely. But they soon get into like a, I mean, if there's a lot of foliage on the tree and it's sort of a good root system on the tree, it soon gets into like an energy positive situation in a year, particularly if you're fertilizing it well. And so, you know, you are kind of like reading the energy levels. And if you're seeing, you know, long extension growth, then you're confident that there's enough energy within the tree that you can cut it back. And be able to get it to respond very, very quickly. But it's kind of, you know, the ideas of becoming like sort of energy positive and things is exactly the same. But, you know, we're talking as well about the amount of energy that the tree has in it to recover from repotting and from pruning and from flowering and such like. But as I sort of said earlier, you know, that's like taking that approach of just fertilizing heavily and just having all of this super vigorous growth all over the tree. Puts it in a massively energy positive way. That's the situation. So, Paul was wondering if you, Paul's trying to strengthen the crown of a tree. Okay. So, is super feeding to kind of transfer that a good thing to do? Yep. And then fertilizing heavy, is this during just the summer period or when is this happening? Pretty much any time when the temperature is above like 12 degrees centigrade. That's probably about, what, 50 degrees Fahrenheit. Oh, okay. You know, whenever, you know, like, whenever it's kind of like in that active kind of growing period, you could be fertilizing. And if you start getting any kind of extensions up on the top, just let them go. Just let them start going. If the top is weak because there are older branches in there, as soon as you start to develop kind of like older, sort of newer shoots, look to remove the older branches. So, we've kind of got a bit of a situation here where we've got this lovely little new shoot. Can you see that one bit in there? We have this lovely little new shoot and we've got these old branches behind it. All right. So, as soon as you start to get those new shoots, come in and take off the older bits. Always look to replace those older branches up in the top when you start getting those new shoots. Okay. If you don't have any new shoots and you just got the older branches, then you just kind of like nurse it through. Nurse it through. Okay. So, one way of kind of keeping the top kind of happy if it's in a weakened situation is like quite constant misting. They do respond well to a high humidity environment. So, as I said right at the start, you know, like this tree's got kind of like these tiny little air roots sort of starting to form on the branches, which shows it's in a very sort of high humid environment, which is one of the reasons why it's so healthy. So, if you're in a very dry area, make sure you're misting that top. Keeping it nice and humid up at the top there. That will help it to kind of like recover some strength. So, you mentioned anytime it's hot enough, that's when it's triggered to grow. So, it's really temperature dependent? Yeah. I mean, once you start dropping below that temperature, then the activity, the bacteria in the soil isn't really breaking down the fertilizer. It doesn't make it available for the roots. And, you know, the temperature. You know, the tree's starting to slow down around about that once we drop down past those sort of temperatures. So, basically from spring or, you know, all the way through fall, you can fertilize. So, what we're going to start to look at now is like cutting back some of these lower branches back quite hard. Looking at the tree from the side, we can see a slight imbalance. You know, we've hardly got any strong growth on here. So, I've left a lot of these branches here. I've not cut anything off of these. Okay. The tree is clearly up against like a wall or something. And these back branches are not getting any, you know, nearly enough sun. All right. So, if we start pushing these branches back, you know, they're not like super weak, but they're not going to respond from a hard pruning in the same way that these branches will. You know, these branches are getting a lot of sun. We've got lots of sort of very sort of strong extensions on here. All right. So, we can push these ones back quite hard. Looking at the tree for like from a style perspective. We've got branches which are coming around sort of the front of the tree and starting to hide the trunk. It's starting to become a bit too sort of too powerful in there. So, we're cutting them back from a health perspective. And we're also sort of cutting them back quite hard from a style perspective. You know, this branch in particular here, we can't see the trunk. We can't see the base of that branch. We've got a nice interesting thick branch in there which we can't see. Matt's curious if Satsuki experienced summer dormancy. Not only if it's really, really hot. Like 90 and above, like you were mentioning. Yeah, but even so, I mean, I sort of see them just growing straight through that. I see. In my experience. And then Tanya wants to know if you ever fully defoliate azaleas. You can do, as long as it's super healthy. I've... So, for example, like before I came here, I was like, oh, I'm going to defoliate. I'm going to defoliate. So, when I came here, I was working on a collection of azaleas where there's like 350 azaleas, 400 azaleas. And some of those got cut back to without a single leaf on of them. Some of them got cut back so that they were barely anything cut back off them. And some were halfway in between. The ones that got cut back to be completely defoliated were repotted, say, for example, two years ago, were really strong trees. But those branch tips were starting to become very old and lignified. And so they needed to be rejuvenated. They needed to be cut back hard and have those older branches removed so that they would then send out lots of new shoots, lots of youthful, new vigorous shoots all across the branches and keep the energy levels up, the efficiency of the branch tips up. And so, yes, it is definitely possible to do that. And so I'd be looking to do that perhaps like in the second year. You know, like a four-year cycle of a tree which is very, very sort of healthy. Right. Well, you mentioned earlier that the tree can do well to get branches cut off when it's coming out of the ground. Why is it? Is it just because it's so healthy at that point? Yeah, it's just so full of energy. It's been growing in the ground and it'll have been like fertilized and watered very, very heavily. There was one particular grower just north of Tokyo. Yeah. Who was very good at growing sort of raw material in the field. And I mean, I never sort of experienced it. So this is all kind of like, you know, secondhand talk. And I don't really kind of like to see how it's possible. But they used to say that, for example, they would take a raw trunk, you know, a raw piece of material. And when it was sort of dug up, the circumference of the trunk was like 60 centimeters. So two feet. And then a year later, after a year of cultivation in the pot, that tree would have shrunk down like to 55 centimeters. I don't know if that's really true. But it's kind of like it does kind of happen. You do see them kind of like shrinking a lot, which is kind of what's happened here. Okay. But when they come out of the field, they are absolutely just full of energy and they can callus over very, very quickly. They're just ready. They're just full bursting of energy, just wanting to send that out all over the place. And so you can remove some big branches. You can't, again, species, variety specific, it makes it much more difficult to do it up in the top. It's always difficult to remove heavy branches up in the top of the tree, even when they're just coming out of the field. So again, it is kind of like species and specific. Right. With the branch cuts, Gary wants to know if there would be less dieback if the cuts were sealed with cut paste. Yes, there would be slightly less sort of desiccation of the wound. They would heal over a little bit more attractively. But when you're removing a big branch, it's about having that draw, something drawing the moisture up and keeping that live vein fed and in demand. Okay. And if there isn't anything like that, it doesn't matter whether you put cut paste on it or not, it's still going to die back. But the cut paste will, you know, any kind of wound sealant on it will definitely help it to heal over in a more attractive sort of efficient way and slightly less moisture loss and damage to it. But, you know, any kind of big thick branch removal, anything sort of thicker than a finger thick or sort of thing should be, you know, should start to think about trying to do that in two stages. So here, for example, we've got a very sort of vigorous area down there. Branches coming off at the bottom. We don't want those. Okay. So we're just going to snap those off. Come back, actually. I'm going to have to cut that off there. Okay. And then we can just kind of like cut those to, they're all of a very sort of similar kind of level. The pruning kind of like the technique of it is much less kind of, I don't want to say much less important than the ability to read the tree and to figure out what's going on. You know. And as I sort of mentioned earlier, like the more energy that's in the tree, the more you kind of like pump it up, pump up, the more you can do, the more forgiving it will be. So just it's more a case of kind of like understanding how strong a branch is, how hard can you cut it back. So as you're pruning now, what are you keeping in mind in terms of thinking when this tree is going to be in flower? It's more kind of like thinking about the shape of the foliage pads, the density of the branches, the age of the branches. So what I'm looking for is to always make sure that the branches are kind of like ramifying two by two by two by two, looking for branches which are coming like in here, for example, we've got a branch which is coming sort of directly upwards. We want to try and get rid of those. We've got one here which is coming off the bottom of a branch, getting rid of things like that. So we're always looking for that sort of real fundamental two by two structure, things sort of coming outwards like this. And that's the skeleton. From that two by two structure, we then get lots of little shoots kind of like starting to come up off halfway along those branches, which is fine. And we might get them from like a branch separation area, branch division area, so we'll be having three from that point, which is fine for a short period of time, for a couple of years. We're going to get those shoots all starting to come up. Once those shoots come up, we stop those very, once they reach the silhouette of the foliage pad that we want. And we can keep those there for a couple of years. And then we'll go in and sort of thin them out, particularly the older ones. And so this tree, this specific tree at the moment is still very much kind of like in that, the skeleton has been, has just really been kind of like reset with the previous work that Ryan had done on it. And we're just looking to try to develop some of that meat on there, some of those, you know, the cells. The secondary branches, the tertiary branches on there that are growing in the right direction. Chris noticed that the design of this tree, the trunk is leaning very far forward in a curve. Is that considered good design or something that you would want to shift? Or was that intentional? This is kind of like, this is where personal taste sort of starts to come into it. I mentioned this to Ryan when we first got the tree and he was like, well, you know how much I like the apex of coming forwards. And so it's kind of like his way of styling a tree. His thing. It is perhaps just a touch too far forward. And so maybe just, I mean, if it was me, I wouldn't go too crazy, but maybe just like a five degree change of planting position. It's going to be very difficult to do too much. You can't go in and restyle this tree. You don't want to be going in and cutting the apex out and redesigning it because it's just going to start to collapse a little bit. It's going to start to collapse up there. If we change the planting angle too much, then this beautiful Nibari is all going to be starting to kind of like exposed out the soil. You can't expose the Nibari on it too much. So we're only going to get at most like a five degree angle change. And so you just kind of kind of like work with what we have. So just a few little tweaks to that with the planting angle and just looking at maybe pushing that back and developing the apex a little bit over there at the time would be perhaps, you know, that's what I would look to do. But maybe not what Ryan would look to do. But that's what makes it interesting. Personal. And then when it comes to pots and azalea, could you, Brian wants to know if you could talk about pot selection from an aesthetic standpoint? There's no real kind of like hard and fast rules. I've seen azaleas put into unglazed pots and they look really, really good. I've seen azaleas put into glazed pots and they look very, very good. The only thing with putting them into glazed pots is you've got to kind of give a bit of sort of consideration to the flower colour. And so you want to be, if you've got a white flowering tree, you don't want to put it into a white pot because it's just going to look a bit kind of like overkill. So there would be some consideration from that kind of perspective. But the same kind of considerations that you would have with any tree. So, you know, this tree. If you would. It's in that kind of like area. Is it masculine? Is it feminine? It's neither one real kind of like strong. It doesn't have those sort of strong characteristics. And so this pot is kind of ideal for it. It highlights the masculine aspect of it, but it's not overpowering. We've got the sort of the soft curved edges. There's no real sort of dominating sort of features to the pot. And so it matches the tree quite well. And so just applying those same kind of ideas that we would do to any other tree. In terms of the strength of the character of the tree. Is it kind of like masculine? Is it feminine? Obviously with cascading style, which are fairly uncommon, then we would be looking at cascading style pots and things like that. But really the biggest kind of overriding factor with a pot selection should be that kind of horticultural consideration. So making it just a little bit deeper, making sure you've got at least two fingers sort of, or depending on the size, like a finger's width between the edge of the pot and any kind of like significant root mass. So they prefer a bigger container. But Paul was wondering if for show, are azaleas put in shallower, smaller pots? Some people will do. I mean, like in Cockerfoo, you'll see them in slightly shallower pots. But in Cockerfoo, they have a very sort of slim variety of... Very sort of... I don't know. Slim variety. They don't have as many different sort of varieties at Cockerfoo. But a Satsuki exhibition, a Satsuki specific exhibition, if you put a tree in a very sort of shallow pot, people would be like, damn, that tree's going to die. Because they're looking at it from a different kind of perspective, not an aesthetic perspective, but from like, how is that tree going to survive in a small pot? Right. Like, is it worth it to have it in that pot just for show? No. But like, for example, at Cockerfoo. In certain varieties that are, you know, like the older varieties, Osakazuki and things like that, they do get shoehorned into tight little show pots and things like that. That does happen. What about deadwood? Jonathan wants to know, is it possible to create deadwood? Again, if you're a Satsuki enthusiast and you see deadwood on a tree, like a genuine proper Satsuki enthusiast in Japan, you see deadwood on a tree, you'd be like, that tree's worthless. Why? Because they just don't consider it like, you know, deadwood on a Satsuki is like... It's not something that they seek aesthetically. No. Because if you see deadwood on an Azalea, generally, it means that the tree is about ready to die. There are some varieties, say for example, Acan, if like you start to see any dead on it, you basically, you've got like two years before the whole tree dies. Oh, wow. It just starts to, it's just a sign that it's going to start to collapse. The only trees where you tend to see any kind of like deadwood features would be some of those really old varieties, particularly Osakazuki that I've mentioned a couple of times that are very vigorous for varieties. And they can have, you know, like naturally you can find them. You know, there are some garden trees, Osakazuki, that have been around for 300 years. And, you know, they've been sort of cut back or branches have died off and they've actually got natural deadwood features on them. It's very rare, but there are a few of those around. And you can create deadwood features on Osakazuki type varieties. But the wood on them is incredibly soft and it will rot away very, very quickly. So, any sort of deadwood features on an azalea will be relatively short lived. Even if you put effort into keeping them clean and putting wood hardener and things like that on them, there's still going to be a, you know, five to sort of ten year limitation on them, which, you know, when you compare to junipers and, you know, a lot of the other species that we have with deadwood on them, there's this, you know. Are azaleas used a lot? Are they used a lot in shohin? A few varieties. Which varieties? Could potentially be. But it's very unusual to see them within like, if you were going to like a Japanese shohin association exhibition, you would, it would be very unusual to see one. You might see like two out of a thousand, three out of a thousand. Is there a particular variety that they tend to make into shohin? Anything with small leaves and small flowers. I see. That will become very, very dense. There are a few. One of my favourite varieties, which is called Akininoski, which is a beautiful, tight, compact growth habit and a really nice sort of, the flower type is quite beautiful as well. They will make very tight, compact little trees. And so they can be created into shohin style trees. But what you will see at a Satsuki exhibition would be a shohin section. So there would be, you know, they basically have like 101 different awards. And so there would be a shohin sort of section for shohin style trees. And they would be quite a limited variety, you know, number of varieties. So how are we doing for time? We are at an hour and 40 almost. Okay. We got a couple more questions from folks online if you want to. Yeah, yeah. Keep going. Keep going. Okay. Trey was wondering if you could explain the difference between Kurume. Am I saying that right? Yep. And Satsuki. Kurume are like a wild variety. Slightly different. They are rhododendrons, something or other. You can ask me the difficult questions and we can come up with it online. It would be great. And then I will remember it. Kusukuk, something or other, beginning with a K. And they are like a wild variety. They are like a wild variety of Satsuki. So as opposed to these kind of like heavily hybridized cultivars that we tend to use. And they have a much smaller leaf. They have a purple, like quite a small purple flower. And they flower earlier. So I was sort of saying earlier about the Tsuji, which is another type of rhododendron that they have in Japan, which flowers first and then sends out the new growth later. Like the Kurume, a bit more like that. And they do not withstand like hard pruning. As much as the Satsuki azaleas do. You do tend to see quite a lot of those with deadwood on them. So they are like one of those varieties which is pretty strong. And you will get some deadwood kind of features on those potentially. They have a different growth habit as well. I have not had a whole lot of experience with those. They are kind of a bit of a separate. So with all these different varieties. Cathy was wondering if there is a way to group the varieties? Yeah, there are different sort of families. Flowering time? The flowering time is pretty much all kind of like you have got maybe like a month separation between them. So how do you go about sorting the differences in the groups? Or maybe what are the main groups? Leaf type. Leaf type. Is a big talk. And the flower type as well. So you will get like one of the big families is kind of a Nikko. And there is a lot of different varieties of trees. Which are kind of like underneath that. So that is like the parent tree. And then they kind of get cross bred. And so then you have got like Hakurin, Shin-Nikko, Nihozan. There are all sorts of different varieties underneath that. And they all kind of share the same growth habit characteristics. The same kind of desire for drought resistance, drought tolerance. And things like that. So there are some sort of similarities that you can kind of put together. And with the way in which you prune them. You know like how hard you can cut them back. And how much ramification you can expect to get. And the density of foliage and things like that. There are like quite a few families of varieties. But it is just a question of kind of like getting. Getting to know them. We mentioned that book with like 800 varieties in there. That has like the parent trees on them. You know where they come from. And things like that. And so you don't necessarily need to know exactly. Because like people. You know people send me a picture of an Azalea. Like in you know in January. Where there isn't a single flower. And they are like what variety? What is it? Like I don't know. You can take a stab at the family. But you know sort of knowing specifically. You have to sort of see the flowers on it. So you don't necessarily need to learn 800 different varieties. You just kind of like. If you get like 20 of the different main varieties. And you know that cover all the different flowers. Then you can have a pretty good stab at how to. To cope with the others. But it is just a question of kind of like getting out there. And learning. There are quite a few. There is one very good kind of English language book. That the Japanese Satsuki magazine. Kansatsuki published. And that gives a lot of. You know that good information on the main varieties. That we tend to see abroad. Folks on the chat are wondering if you could repeat. The variety name of the shohin. Akiminotsuki. Whoa. It is a beautiful name. Basically anybody who kind of like. How would you spell it? Because. A-K-E-M-I-N-O-S-T-S-U-K-I. The moon of Akimi. I am going to do my best on that one. A-K-E-M-I. Okay. Then separate word. Oh second word. Okay. T-S-U-K-I. The moon of Akimi. I did my best everyone in the chat. So basically anybody who comes up with a new variety. When they come to register it. They can put whatever name they want on it. And so that one was named after the guy's daughter. Who was called Akimi. The moon of Akimi. So it is kind of like. So the varieties are just people. Messing around with the genetics. Yes. You know people hybridizing. And trying to find those new different varieties. And things like that. And when they. I mean maybe not so much now. But like Satsuki's went through like a huge boom period. And like the new varieties coming out all the time. And so people were just like going crazy for it. Like you could take a cutting of some new variety. And like within a year. That would be worth like 150, 200 dollars. Just a cutting. It went crazy for new varieties. And things like that. Eric wants to know if these can be grown under a 24 hour grow light. I have never tried. No. Let's see why not. Hmmmm. You are looking at the wrong guy. Why don't you experiment with that Eric. And let us know how it goes. Let us know dude. It might impact. Flowering. Usually flowering. They would go crazy. They would probably start flowering at all like random times of the year. I mean. Quite often you will like. If you have like a real hot like Indian summer. At the end of the end of the year. You will see azaleas like blossoming. And then you would keep growing. like blossoming in like september october time sometimes and they're kind of like a little bit okay they get a bit confused yeah and then we have some folks who have some follow-up questions about the transplanting an azalea from the ground into soil um so if the tree wasn't originally grown in kanuma do you recommend do you recommend just transplanting it immediately into kanuma and bear every single piece of field soil off okay as long as that tree has come out of the ground and it's super healthy and it's full of energy wash every single piece of field soil off because otherwise you're just delaying the the problem you're going to then have to come back and wash that field soil off three years later when the tree is weakened because it's been cultivated in a bonsai park for several years so you want to immediately get it every single bit of it off when it's still able to recover from it so that transplant is pretty intense that first transplant yeah yeah i mean you it will be kind of like you've got to wash everything off and then for kanuma specifically what particle size do you suggest i would always go with the quite a small particle size um as opposed to really coarse because then you've got a much higher surface area um so it's able to hold a lot more nutrients a lot more moisture um the course rotate around here so we can see you're beautiful thank you no i was just saying so i can watch you work um so i would always go for quite a small size um but the smaller the size the quicker it breaks down uh so then you have to be sort of very careful about the um the compaction issues and things like that what i have tended to do um with a few clients and my own trees and um my senpai akiyama has also started to do this in japan uh it's put about maybe five to ten percent uh pumice in with the mix um same sort of particle size pumice uh just so that um you know there's something there to to help when you come to repot because when it breaks down you know you're trying to sort of separate that get you know break all the old soil out from the roots it was very difficult when it's when it's sort of super compact so having that pumice in there something solid uh just helps it to to when you when you come to repot uh and also allows that sort of you know the percolation of the water through uh the old soil so it's very difficult when it's super compact so having oxygen to get in there as well so that's you know using sort of small particle size maybe chuck a bit of pumice in there a bit of charcoal as well is always a good idea um you know that's that's what i tend to to repot with uh some people will put it's quite been quite a traditional thing to do to put um some sphagnum moss or like yamagoke it's called but i've never really kind of subscribed to that um so what we have here is a very sort of strong branch uh we have a point here where we got three branches all coming from that same point so I'm just going to remove that one so we just go back to that two by two structure okay so always kind of like looking for that um okay so Paul was wondering if you prophylactically spray yes and how much before uh and for what and for what everything it depends where you are um if you're if you're suffering from a lot of problems then I would always prophylactically spray as I said uh in Japan we used to spray like once every 10 days with various different things right uh to combat uh all sorts of mites um thrips as I'm saying like shinkui mushi all sorts of things that were like just hundreds of and new ones were coming up like year after year and particularly like a lot of the the um hadani uh mites uh so we will be prophylactically spraying all the time um there were there have been years where I have not sprayed once not had a single problem uh so prophylactically spraying you're saying you are slightly responsive in the UK having fewer problems but in Japan they they lean on it very heavily because they know they're going to get the problem gotcha and also because they're quite heavily dependent on the sprays as well so that right kills off a lot of bugs a lot of good bugs with the bed yeah uh so I would you know if you if you're having problems with with them then then definitely kind of like taking it would be a good idea um if you if you're seeing kind of like scale which is a tiny little white dot on the um on the trunk uh if you're seeing lots of little white spots on the trunk then you know that's the azalea scale which is can be very difficult to kill unless you get some quite specialized um chemicals so lime sulfuring in the winter is an absolute kind of like must when you start seeing problems like that so mixing up lime sulfur to a 30 to 1 solution so 30 parts water to lime sulfur and spraying the whole tree trunk included don't worry about a little bit getting onto the soil wash it off if it gets on the pot but that will that's kind of like probably the best prophylactic as a door as a dormant during the winter period yeah uh doing it in the winter so the soonest you would be able to do it would be kind of like late November if you are in a very kind of like well it depends you know where you are in the cold air once you once the tree starts to hit that dormant period then you can spray do they need the winter dormancy Eric wants to know is that necessary the the cold like I've seen I've seen trees where they've been sort of kept warm all winter and they don't do as well as ones which have been allowed to get close to freezing so I would say yes oh yeah it's good for them to let them just just chill out a little bit over the winter it does definitely kind of like help them and it also helps them to kill off bugs as well you know it's like keeping I mean one of the big problems that we're seeing with like bugs and things is because just like we're not getting cold windows like we used to so nothing's getting killed off sort of naturally so yeah allowing that winter dormancy allowing them to get cold is always a good idea um so Brian bought an azalea in April um and Brian says the seller recommended root pruning and pie shaped wedges each year and not to do it all at once could you explain this recommendation uh I've never done it in my entire life okay um it's you you just just say don't do it yeah just don't do it uh you basically you you you want to focus on that that surface layer of roots and making sure they're combed out if you have got one area of the roots which don't get combed out uh they don't get kind of like combed out for say nine years they're just going to die they're going to die quickly um so in terms of pie sets uh shaped sections don't touch the bottom section of the pie but touch the crust boom there you go that's the winner there it is now I mean I don't know how you handle repotting but I you know there's a lot of people that subscribe to the pie shape and doing some of that stuff and it feels to me like it never really addresses the the core problem the core problems or or not even not even before it even becomes a problem it feels like it's um knowledge to some degree because that that surface making sure water can get in when you get that accumulation of organic content on the surface and then you know setting that sheen up to be really healthy or that core under the trunk at an early stage in the tree's life and then uh just reducing the width of the side so that you got some space in the container is that kind of your is that kind of your belief in methodology yeah absolutely feels consistent you don't see people in japan cut pie wedges out of root systems and all the crazy things that we've come up not recently i mean like i mean looking at a lot of some of the old old textbooks that you know that kind of stuff you saw pictures of it but i've never seen anyone do it right one thing that um with the reporting uh when i first was in japan we would still do quite a bit of post-flowering reporting um but we were seeing trees just dying post-flower so like right now so yeah and you would you would be repotting and you don't recommend that or we just like traditionally people in japan would it would be quite common to do that to repot after so to repot after flowering would be possible okay but what was what was happening was trees were just collapsing and dying because it's just too hot you know like with the the increase in you know sort of global temperatures just the intense heat the trees were just not capable of being able to kind of like come back from that that's interesting they were just boiling okay so what is the best time to repot just do it in spring spring and there's a pretty wide range you can you can do it after the new shoots have started to come out if you if you if you hit you know get it late you can do it kind of like january time as long as you protect the trees from any hard frost and things like that so you've got a pretty wide um you know window of opportunity in the spring so interesting so just kind of do it alongside your maples and things like that and you won't go wrong since azalea seems fairly um sensitive to temperature are there any varieties that grow well in the tropics sujata wants to know probably not i don't know i mean azaleas and that's but this is the weird thing to me about azaleas as uh as a species you do see azaleas growing in super hot humid areas right i mean there are there are species that do grow down in florida bigger bigger leaf varieties definitely but satsuki as a species is typically a cooler higher mountain or or the epicenter i've seen them in the himalaya like pretty high well i mean the rodent family is like it's big it's massive right it's huge yeah and so this is just one tiny little part of it uh but like the epicenter for the satsuki in japan is is kanuma city uh which is a fairly cold place you know it's it's a little bit further north from tokyo they get fairly cold winter temperatures um the the summers aren't i mean they're pretty harsh but maybe not as harsh as living in in tokyo um so yeah they do they do really kind of like hate extreme temperatures we would put weaker trees and under shade cloth during during the summer months so if you were living in india you'd probably want to be finding a larger leaf variety yeah there's i mean because maybe if you're in north india where it gets cold yeah i mean if you're in north india then absolutely there's definitely some kind of i would go for the native varieties and things like that um go down to your local garden center and see what you know what they they have to offer in terms of rhododendrons and things like that but you do really need to have something kind of like small leafed in order to get like a good um non-flowering image if you're just going for the flowers then you know having large leaves isn't a problem because all of those flower tower types they're all largely varieties the flower tower yeah clark is curious about foliar feeding do you recommend it uh i don't do it much i don't do it much i don't do it much i don't do it much myself i'm misting definitely you know like weaker trees uh really kind of like hot days and things like that when the trees are struggling to cool down i will miss the the foliage um if you've got a weak apex uh you're doing any kind of like you know heavy you know that branch removal technique that i mentioned earlier i'd be like definitely misting those you know the tree a lot more there but i i don't i don't do a lot of foliar feeding myself and then you mentioned a book with the 800 varieties what was the name of that book the satsuki guide to 800 varieties it's the there's like an encyclopedia it's the encyclopedia of satsuki varieties yeah the encyclopedia that's what it is uh and it's basically just all of it but it's all in japanese it's all japanese text uh there is uh an english language version of uh like a guide to to azaleas which was published by um the same um get kansatsuki publishers um i think it's just called a guide to japanese azaleas there's a japanese satsuki guide and there's like 20 30 varieties in the back of that um which would be the most common ones that you'll you'll tend to see um so but that just gives you kind of like the the parent um you know where they come from uh and kind of a description of the flowers and things like that as opposed to sort of very sort of species specific um care guides and such like that's kind of so peter let me let me go back and just ask you a question because um you know seeing this work right now you made a very important statement at the beginning of the stream which is to say you're trying to get young tips and keep the tips young and it might help for you to explain the work that i did last year that you kind of guided me to do on this tree where i did a much heavier cut back than this and the response are the young tips that you're keeping a lot more of yeah so the first year that you worked on this it was it was really quite weak and so i told you to basically keep everything yeah i didn't i did i virtually didn't prune it the first year i repotted it because the roots were compromised and it was a rebuilding year yeah and so and basically just keep any green that you had on it at all right um and that just powered you know you know that just started to get the engine to kind of like ticking over allow the some photosynthesis to occur to reduce the roots and then to start to generate these new shoots coming out of the the trunk and once you start to see that and you're confident that like the the roots are there the engine of the tree is there then you can start to kind of like okay all i want now is the efficient growth and so you cut back a lot of those those older branches shock the tree you know or tell the tree that you're wanting it to to send out some new growth so that was last year that was last year last year the pruning that i did all except for the apex was pretty aggressive taking back beyond green in some locations yeah keeping some green on some tips in the lower branches not touching the apex to continue to let it build uh and so what the the result of that is that most of the shoots that we have like the the tips to the tips of them are are brown and they're still flexible uh-huh and so you know that the one-year-old they're still highly efficient they're still transporting a lot of nutrients and basically we never want to go to a situation where those branch tips now are getting more than three years old okay okay into three years old So you don't want to see that beige color turn to that gray lignified woody branch? Once that starts to happen, then you start sort of going along that tightrope of the tree starting to become inefficient, starting to get a little bit old and starting to edge its way towards death. There's still a few areas like in here, so we've still got that, you know, the gray all the way to the tip and just a tiny bit of brown. So we can just come in and just take that one off. But really, we're trying to like with this, with the, you know, the kind of like bearing in mind that we have got the repot coming up next year and the fact that we're still working on the apex and still trying to build a lot of vigor into the tree. We're still only kind of like halfway towards getting it really kind of like tight with the foliage palette images. So it's still a bit of a bush. We're still leaving things a little bit longer than necessarily than we want to, particularly at the back. You know, you've got this weakness in the tree. If that branch dies, if that branch goes, then you've got to start developing something out there to fill in the back of it. So this is the weak link. This branch here and that branch on the top of the tree are the weak links with it. So we've really got to put a bit of effort into getting that strong and healthy, getting some energy in the tree to sort of power those two things to go forward. So having it a little bit bushy all over, but maintaining, but making sure that all of these branches are still with that basic fundamental skeleton structure. So we're not having like three or four branches growing from one point. And we're making sure that we're favoring weaker branches instead, the younger branches instead of the old ones. So we really, we really almost need to have in order for people to understand, understand satsukis better. You almost need to have several different scenarios where they would be pruning. I mean, it sounds like this is. Super complicated. Well, it sounds to me like there's nuance. There's a lot of nuances. A lot of nuance, right? Nuance that I guess I wouldn't find intrinsic just based on everything I've watched you do. It seems different. It is very different. And this is a species, you know, like I said, Peter's kind of guided me through bringing this tree. And in fact, I had to, I had to evaluate the trees that were purchased for this collection. And this tree I recommended that they don't buy. But the, you know, the, they saw it when it was in full flower. And they said, oh, my gosh, I have to have it. And then, you know, of course, I was brought on to curate the collection. And that means addressing the fact that they chose to buy this particular tree. And so getting it back to this point. So this is a huge learning curve for me, too, because, you know, the first year we repotted it, it just had to get healthier. Last year, it started showing some health. And Peter said, you got to get vigor back into the tips, prune back the really strong branches heavily and leave the, you know, apex and weaker branches with full foliage. This year, I mean, it is exponentially more healthy than it has ever been since I've had contact with it. And I see Peter keeping the engine turning because we're going to be repotting next spring. But also because it's still in a state where it looks like we need to drive a lot of energy movement through the tree. Is that correct, Peter? Absolutely. I mean, you've still got areas like here where this branch kind of got cut back really quite heavily. And we've just got some youthful vigorous shoots. They're sort of coming out. And we want to build those into more mature branches so we fill in that whole foliage pad area around there. So they're basically just going to be left uncut. We just want to let those grow out and grow out and grow out and grow out until you get a decent sort of pencil-sized thickness to that. And then come back in and cut those. Okay. And so when you've got these different areas of the tree, like, you know, you're working on trying to build this up. You're working on trying to build this up, build this up. There's no point going into, like, super fine details on the bits of the tree that are strong. And doing well. Because you go into there and you do lots of fine wiring on this. You do lots of fine. And you keep this tight. And you ramify this up. You ramify this up. And maybe over the course of, like, two to three years, you get, like, a beautiful exhibition-quality foliage pad on this. You're only sort of starting to move towards that stage on the apex. You're only starting to move towards that stage on this back branch. This is only just the skeleton structure has only just come here. Wow. Wow. So you just, I think you just kind of hit on a real. I'm trying to wrap my mind around the decision-making that you're going through with this tree. And so forever, like, here, you just kind of, like, you just want to tread water. Just tread water. Keep it ticking over. So you're playing to the weakest points on the tree. To a certain extent, yeah. And you're saying, look, if I invest all the time in these branches, they're going to be super amazing. But then we're just. In three years' time, I'm going to have to come in and just hit it all back because it's going to be over-ramified. Okay. So walk me through. Walk me through this tree and the decisions that you're making. I understand you're building branches in certain locations. Walk me through. I'm going to repot it next year. And the tree moves through that repot, blasts forward. Yeah. What do I do? What do I do next year? Then we'll see how the apex responds. We'll see how that back branch responds. It would be really nice if they would turn the tree a little. Mm-hmm. You know? Otherwise, we're just going to have to kind of, like, make a decision on, you know, do we let that weakest link just stop the development of the tree entirely? Sure. Or do we just get, you know, just come up with sort of a slightly different tree? Yeah. Or do we just get, you know, a different plan or just live with the fact that it's going to be weak? You know, that's something that the client has to kind of deal with. But in an ideal situation, this would strengthen up and get to the same, onto the same level sort of playing field that everything else is on the tree. Uh-huh. And then once we're kind of like all, once every single part of the tree is like at the same vigor, at the same point on, you know, the starting line, and everybody's, it's like a fair race. You know, you don't have Usain Bolt versus me. Yeah, right. You know? Yeah. You know, it's like the Olympic 100-meter final. Everybody's got a chance to win it. Then you go into trying to build up the fine ramification all over the tree. Okay. So then say I repot next year. Do I want to limit the number of flowers next year? No. Okay. So I don't limit the number of flowers and it flowers and I come back in next year after it's flowered and the apex is slightly stronger or the apex is in the same position. Do I do the same style of pruning? I would be looking perhaps to... Go a little more. To, yeah, maybe a little bit more. But what you'll be then looking to do is like immediately afterwards, you know, when you get that second flush of growth, getting in there and really kind of like stopping that and then wiring it later on in the year. Uh-huh. You know, that's where, I mean, the kind of like the level of pruning will be kind of very, very sort of similar. But what's going to happen is like now is you're going to get like lots of growth coming from all over the place. And so, for example, like here, we desperately want a branch. Yeah. And so we're going to get one. It's just a matter of time. Once that sort of starts to come out, you just let it grow out to the edge of the foliage and sort of like that. And so you're going to be doing a sort of a similar kind of thing going through and making sure we don't have too many branches all coming from the same point. But there's going to be perhaps a little bit more sort of ramification aspect to it in the kind of like the second pruning that you would or the second time you approach it maybe in a month's time. If that makes sense. So after this, it grows out. It grows out. I'm going to come back in and I'm going to work a little bit more detail. Yeah, do a bit more detail on it. So all of those new shoots that come out, I'm going to follow this silhouette and I'm going to stop them at the edge of the silhouette. Pretty much, yeah. Okay. All right. And then what you will then look to do, I wouldn't necessarily do it like this time because, again, we're not really at the same kind of like starting point. But when you do get to that, then you start to look to wire. Understood. A lot of the secondary branches, putting them into positions like that. So at the moment, I mean, like what you can do and what I have basically been doing is just kind of like holding things into position and just kind of like making sure trimming of things, making sure we've got good density. We're not, you know, developing branches that we don't want that we're going to cut off in a couple three years. So really what now what I'm understanding and maybe Kendall, tell me if you're hearing this the same way. This pruning is a really big pruning to continue to try and balance the energy. Absolutely. It's going to respond to this and we're going to take that response and we're going to use that response to continue to maintain the silhouette. But that response is going to give us more ramification. Yep. Will that be the end of the work this year or will I be looking at it again in the fall and trying to continue to maintain that silhouette? I'd say you probably will be looking to another thinning out in the fall. Okay. Of fours and threes down to twos. Fours and twos down to twos. And off the bottom. Yeah. And pruning that and pruning it back to the silhouette. Yeah. I mean, essentially, like, what you've got to do with is, you know, just go around every so often. When you get those things, just come in and take them off. There are a tree that respond to the walking around the garden with a pair of scissors and a cup of coffee type. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. Okay. So I'm starting to grasp this now. And it's almost like this work, we coined this work as post-flowering setting up for, you know, structure of a tree as well as structure for flowering. And really what this work has turned into is balancing the energy in a Satsuki Azalea, holding back stronger areas, allowing weaker areas to continue to hold their foliage, elongating shoots and gaining strength. Yep. And what you're doing is you're setting the profile of the branches that when we get the second flush out of this, we're going to be pruning that second flush to this profile as well. That's expanding our ramification. Yes. Each time we prune. And then we're going to be taking three, four, five shoots originating from one location, taking them down to two and taking bottom growing branches off so that our structure continues to stay at that level of quality. And ultimately what we're hoping to do over the course of two to three years, assuming that the tree is giving us the indicators that it's strong enough to endure that work and not doing too much at one point, is we're hoping to get all portions equal in strength so that we can come back in, go back to that basic structure. Okay. And prune it all at the same time and then start growing out that really fine ramification. Yes. That's... So that kind of wraps up Satsuki's in a two to three year process. As you're working on them, you guys now have the tools to be able to balance the strength, you're seeing how Peter is removing structural flaws, taking threes and fours down to twos, right? Taking stuff off the bottom. And you recognize that he's setting the silhouette for the second flush to be originating from the first and then going to the second flush. to be originating from back inside wherever he's pruning. When those second flushes of growth get to the exterior silhouette, he's saying, come back in and prune those to the silhouette that he's established now so that you don't let the stronger shoots get too strong and you continue to transition that energy. And then as that tree gets equal strength up in the apex and the weaker branches, there will come a point in order to refresh the tips where we're going to prune back those older branches back to structure again and regrow those fine, fresh tips. When we start to get those new shoots coming, I've sort of mentioned this when you were out, when you start to get those new shoots sort of coming from the inside, you don't really want to be too worried about, have I got three shoots coming from one point? Are they sort of so close together? What you're looking at doing is kind of like meeting up, like filling up that foliage pad. And yes, you're going to have maybe three shoots all coming from one point and things like that. But over that two to three year time scale, it's not a problem. It's very similar to how we would deal with taxes. You know, you get all of these shoots all sort of coming up, fill the foliage pad, fill the foliage, and you can keep it there for a while. With taxes, you can keep it there for a little bit longer. But after a while, those branches start to become very lignified and then start to become very weak. With azaleas, it's on a much sort of short time scale. And so then when you go back to it, and then you sort of go back to that two by two by two structure, which is kind of what we're doing here. We're just kind of keeping it on that structure. That's when you go in and you thin all of those out and then you have to be really kind of obsessive. About that two by two structure. And reset that. And then would that be the time when you would prune back hard? Yeah, prune back. And reset that? Yeah. Go back to minimal amounts of green and in some locations beyond the green to re-stimulate that push of new fresh growth. Wow, this is interesting. For the first time, I'm starting to understand Satsuki. And you kind of did that last year. Building your skills? Building my skills. I'm designing, growing, and understanding, folks. And you did that last year? And so we're building on that, you know, that flush of growth. Yeah. You know. Correcting some of those problems, but not cutting it back again really hard because, I mean, it would kind of respond to it. But what we'd then be doing is we'd be taking two steps forward and then two steps back. Yeah, right. You're not advancing on it, right? So we just, you know, after the pruning that you did last year and the flush of growth that we have, this is taking two steps forward. And now we're just taking one step back. We're taking zero steps back here. We're taking zero steps back here. Nice. Nice. Man, this is awesome. This has been really awesome. I want to watch Mariah live every week. Maybe I might start watching it. This is amazing. I'm so pumped, dude. Azaleas have been the greatest mystery of all to me, man. And you're always like, oh, they're so easy. They're so easy. They're so easy as long as you just kind of like pump them full of energy. You feed them. There's nuances, though, right? I mean, we haven't even dove into. You've touched on a lot of nuances of individual cultivars. But I think like what I'm seeing happen here is a real fundamental establishment of a real fundamental understanding of how to deal with the issues that we experience in azaleas because everybody's experienced a weak apex in azalea that's grown azaleas. Everybody's experienced aging branch tips on azaleas that's grown azaleas. You're giving us the tools to kind of develop a system to be able to deal with azaleas assuming that the tree is responding. Well, I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. Well, assuming that we're not approaching major operations that would demand we let the tree have that strength, right? Yep. You're more or less saying, all right, we've got these stopping points where it's like we're going to repot next year. The last thing we want to do is ask too much of the tree, right? We're going to cut back heavily. The last thing we want to do is ask too much of the tree. But by keeping the motor going, closing the gap of the strong and the weak, you're giving us a knowledge of how to build this structure and set this tree up to have a strong and have that really beautiful, highly ramified, fine structure in the next two to three years following this work. It's tight. And to be honest, I mean, like, I really kind of at the time working on azaleas, I've got a love-hate relationship with them. You know, like, they're great. They're fantastic and this stuff. But after like three weeks of pruning them, you're like, I don't ever want to see one another one again. Yeah. And through the apprenticeship as well. I mean, like, we had black pines decandling and satsukis deflowering at the same time a year. And so they were just carnage, just so hard work. Yeah, that's hard work. So I hated them. But they're very good at teaching you a lot of important things like the importance of creating that skeleton structure because you've got to just keep going back to it and back to it and back to it. You create that structure, you put some meat on there and you fill up that pad and then it gets too dense, the efficiency starts to rebound and then you just step back to that for that fundamental skeleton structure. And as long as you've got that there, you just keep going. You just go through that cycle, through that cycle. You do the same with tacks. You do the same with a lot of species. Yeah, yeah, sure. And you're just going through it. On other species, that time scale is much longer. With these, it's really short. So you're going through a lot of work all the time. Wow, wow, wow, wow, wow. And if you create those, if you create your skeleton structure poorly, so you use lots of tiny little branches all coming from the inside, lots of tiny little branches to create a foliage pad, once it starts to get out and out and out, it's really hard to kind of like get it back in and then rebuild it on a short time scale. Right. To get back to a nice big foliage pad. Interesting. So the importance of kind of like setting up a really good basic fundamental structure and then just having energy in the tree. If you've got the energy in there, like it's the same with the juniper. If you've got energy in there, you can do lots of things. Yeah. You've got to get that pumping full of energy first. That is so interesting. So, you know, for any Mirai students that come and study at Mirai, you know, I think what Peter's describing basically is kind of taking a lap around the vineyard. It's kind of like a vortex of development, whereas with a juniper or a pine, you might be talking about that five-year time frame where you get that, you know, primary structure set, you work on those secondaries, you get those tertiaries refined, and then you get to really enjoy the fruits of your labor. But then the fruits of your labor, they eventually grow to a point where you lose the proportion that makes a tree valuable. But what Peter's saying is that lap around the vortex is going to be primary, secondary, tertiary, but you're dealing with that on a two- to three-year interval. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It sounds to me like what I'm gaining from this is understanding that really protecting, I mean, although it's not different than other bonsai, really protecting that epicenter of strength and taking care of that root system so that you maintain the ability for the tree to continue generating the strength that allows you to follow through with the operations that continue to cultivate this tree as a quality bonsai are at the central point and focus of... Every action that you're taking on this tree. Wow, you really summed it up. Did I do that? You did. You did it very well. So I... Oops. Oopsie. I work... I'm like... I don't have a very flexible mind, so I've got to... I have to compartmentalize things in order for it to make sense for me, which can be too formulaic for some people, but I'm not trying to pigeonhole you into an equation because there's obviously a lot of nuances that you can... that you can expand outside of. But for me to be able to pursue satsuki without having pruned a thousand satsuki a season like you have, you know, trying to summarize your knowledge is the only way that I stand a chance of doing this well, right? It is. I mean, it's pretty much how you approach... How I approach every single tree. Cool. And, you know, just the little nuances, you're kind of like, well, I can go a bit harder on this or, you know, I basically edge prune this because it's, you know, it's going to have real short nodes and things like that. But the fundamental ideas are all exactly the same. Nice. It doesn't matter what variety you're working on. Nice. So we've got a couple more questions and I think we should probably wrap it up. Yeah, I've got a thing to catch. Let's do this. First one is what tool are you using with the blue handle? Wow, are those nail clippers? They are... They're very good as nail clippers. These are actually... They're kind of like sold as wire cutters, but they've got a slightly kind of like angled blade. And they're very good for cutting fine branches and getting in there. Can we get this tool in the detail? So they have kind of got an angled blade and they'll cut through decent sized branches. They'll also cut through anything... Where do you get them? Are they a bonsai tool? They're not specifically a bonsai tool. They're made by a Japanese company called Three Peaks, which make a lot of wire cutters and wire snips and things like that. Oh, cool. And pliers. Okay. But a lot of bonsai people in Japan have used them. Kikuma started to sell them, but they don't make them. They just buy them. Yeah, sure. I bought these off of Amazon. Nice. And then... And then they're called Three Peaks? Yeah, the company that make them are called Three Peaks. There you go. And you got them off Amazon? Pretty much, yeah. Ah. But they're just... They're very good because you can go through wire. So resourceful. And just the angle of it means like with very fine deciduous work, because they've got a very fine tip, you can get in there and in between like branches. So for example, in between two branches and you've got a bud or a shoot coming in there, you can get in there very easily and just nip those out. Nice. Nice, strong tip there. The only problem is that they're... They're... They're... The spring on them breaks very easily. Yeah. Okay, another question. So if someone has... Murph recently bare-rooted and transplanted a field-grown azalea into a one-to-one-to-one academic pumice lava. It says it's exploding in growth. Should I repot next spring into Canuma, even though it's healthy? If it works, don't fix... You know, don't... If it ain't broke, don't fix it sort of thing. If it's really going well, then I'd sort of stick with it. So maybe just wait for like the next repot. Repotting cycle time? Yeah, just kind of see how it's going. You know, it's clearly if it's working very, very well, then, you know, like nothing in bonsai is like absolutely hard and fast. No black and whites. There's no black and whites. Just keep an eye on it. The minute you start dealing in them, then you end up with trouble. But if you started to see signs of stress because of the soil, what would that look like? Like if there's not enough water getting to the tips, then you start to see, you know, browning of the leaves at the end. You'll start to see the, you'll start to see the things wilt first and then, you know, any kind of like damage. It's the same that you'd see on maples. You start to see a scorch from the leaf tips, particularly in like the most exposed areas. And then when you suggest like in the next repotting season, like try and get it in Kanuma. If you've got availability to, but like, I mean, there are people and I've seen people in Japan grow azaleas for many, many years in Akadama and be successful. If it works for you, if you're able to. Right. If it works within your region. If it works within your garden, then keep at it. But if you're starting to see problems with, with the, with the, you know, the vigor of the tree and the health in general, then maybe start to think about, you know, putting it into some Kanuma. Okay. And then last question, is there a fertilizer that you think works well for azaleas? I basically just use any kind of good organic or solid organic fertilizer. I use a mixture of a couple of different. I use a mixture of a couple of different kinds of things. I don't really worry too much about putting any kind of like ascendant. I don't use any sort of chemicals on them. I have no problems with a pH of the trees. And stuff like that, people obsess about what fertilizer to use and they're like, Oh you've got to use this fertilizer you've gotta use that fertilizer and then you see them apply it and they're like what have you done? You've not even given it a taste. Yeah. You know, it's the quantity is just as important. Show us the front of that tree. Show us that sexy tree. Yeah, I want to see it. It looks so... And so, like, pouring it on, you know, like, a good handful. So if you're using BioGold, for example, like, a decent handful, three, four decent handfuls on there, really push it hard. So I put on this thing, you know, you told me to go heavy. I go a tablespoon and a half. It's like 16 pellets per pile, right? Like, we've had this discussion a lot. I've had to count it out for Q&A people because they didn't believe me. Tablespoon and a half of fertilizer. Yeah, it's a good solid palm of your hand. It's a lot of fertilizer. And on this tree, I go five locations in a container that large. And you guys can see that clearly the tree is showing the fruits of that kind of aggressive fertilization. Can we turn it a little bit so it's... Square it up. Square it to the camera. And then there's a branch right on that. Yeah, it's hanging just on the bottom. Yeah, thank you. Yeah, it's so much better. I fully subscribe to pump it full of energy and just ride it. You know, you're going to get lots and lots of growth all over it. So if you have easier to control, vigorous growth, more easy to control that than it is to kind of like nurse a weak tree. If a tree is showing root-related issues, is fertilizer a way that you solve those? Or is fixing the root condition? Because I think... I think the risk that you run of saying just fertilize and it'll make the tree strong. Yeah, yeah, yeah. You're talking about first having a quality root set up, right? Yeah. If you have a weak tree that is probably... Poor soil. Poor soil or something, would you fertilize? Or what does that look like? I mean... No, I mean, then you would need to be doing things like... The same as you would do with any other tree, like looking at how much moisture it's taking up. Is it actually sucking moisture up? Uh-huh. Making sure that there's oxygen getting into the soil. And it's not just sitting in stagnant water. Okay. But at the same time, you can't let the pot heat up. So that's what we were sort of saying about if you have a tree which is slightly putting it into a kind of like a semi-shade situation where the pot isn't going to heat up too much. Uh-huh. It's going to be a good idea. Interesting. And you made a comment early on in the stream where you said sometimes you're watering to cool the tree. Yeah. Tell me about that because I've never... Like with a juniper or a pine, I would never water to cool it. Like if it's wet and you water to cool it still. Yeah. I mean, like a couple of days ago where I was working, I mean, it was hot. It was really, really hot. And so I was around in the afternoon and there were trees that had been buried that year and brought into the country. And so they weren't... They didn't have like a full pot of roots. But you could just tell that that pot was kind of heating up because it was in full sun, you know, just because of the situation that it was in. And so just going around, making sure that the top of the tree was misted off, and then going around and literally, not necessarily putting water into the pot, but just kind of like water in the pot to try and cool it down. Cooling it down, cooling the surface down. Just put a little bit of water into the pot as well, making sure that there's, you know, it's kind of like going through, but not just drenching it. Yeah. But just making sure there's something there to try and take that temperature down. Interesting. Obviously, if the whole area had been covered with shade cloth, wouldn't necessarily have needed to do that. But... So in some of the more intense areas, of the country, like Colorado, you see people wrap the containers in tinfoil to deflect the sun and stuff. Is that something that you feel like for... Works for a lot of people in Spain. Yeah. Okay, so in Spain they do that as well. And with Satsuki, this would be a species where that would be a good thing to do, potentially, in really hot areas or intense sun. Yeah, if it's really hot, then yeah. Cool. Interesting. And you can't put them in sort of shaded areas. That would definitely be a technique to make sure they don't overheat. Wow. All right. We got to wrap it up. Peter. Love you, man. This was awesome. There it is. A lot of love for you. Yeah. A lot of love for the live family. Yeah. Thank you so much for sharing your knowledge, man. For making a mess here. This is hard-earned knowledge. Peter put in a lot of time in Japan. And, man, we just... The generosity tonight. Very, very much appreciated. Please. Yeah, okay. For you, anytime. Peter doesn't take compliments well. But, yeah. So, for all you guys that are watching, I hope you enjoyed it. The archive video will be there for you to reference the plethora of knowledge that was poured out here. And we appreciate you guys' support very much. We hope you shower Peter with some love as well. Let him know how much you appreciated what he's done to share his technique. And we will see you guys on Tuesday of next week. Correct. For Mirai Live. Indeed. Good night, guys. Bye. Good night. 
