what is up everybody super tuesday super tuesday the best day of the week thank you guys for joining us got a crew in the house again does it feel does it feel abnormally echoey in here it does still feel a little echoey well we got we got to give space feels echoey is that what it is we're all far away oh man anyways uh have yvonne the mic this evening in studio live and in the flesh whoo whoo got josh on the cameras this evening jesus producing the stream from afar and uh nico joining us as well new member of the team excited to have him here mariah is a bustling and uh i've been continuing to dialogue with you about the fact that this has been just a long bleed of late winter that has never really stopped we've gotten like a few warm spells spring kind of happened summer's never really happened today it poured we're in sweatshirts most of the crew i don't even know what to say i don't even know i don't even know what to say that's why we asked david to group to come because we're inspired by his work but also he's used to this and he could shed a little bit of information on that and how we get through these abnormal weather patterns that are becoming more and more normal we'll go uh back to that in in future discussions tonight bald cypress now i will sit start by saying hey we're late we're late to the party you guys have seen this tree before it's been a very iconic piece for mirai it's interesting to come back to a tree over and over again because we get to see its evolution we get to see it reach different milestones um definitely a tree inspired by the flat top form that exists in the swamps of the southeastern united states definitely an iconic form that exists within the growth habit of bald cypress and pond cypress specifically bald cypress tax sodium disticum pond cypress tax sodium ascendance two of my very favorites and this is a pond cypress this is tax sodium ascendance we understand that we've had a lot of dialogue back and forth exact same thought process technical application applies to both the pond cypress as well as to the bald cypress as well as if we want to extrapolate and utilize this information to apply it to our dawn redwood dawn redwood metasequoia glyptostroboides right be specific about that not coastal redwoods not sequoia sempervirens dawn redwood metasequoia glyptostroboides all three of these deciduous conifers coniferous in their reproductive capacity deciduous in the fact that they shed their leaves in the fall they produce new leaves in the spring we have to get on to this same page and we come to a point right in this point in the season when we get to this point is not triggered by a date on our calendar and i just want to come up into the canopy here and i want to have josh focus on this piece of ramification and sort of what is happening around this piece of ramification first and foremost josh bring me in tight up in here and i want to look specifically at the ruby red color that we've got here okay because when we start to talk about when do we partially defoliate bald cypress pond cypress when do we have the ability to partially defoliate and prune our dawn redwoods when you see this elongating growth showing that slight ruby hue to that stem this is the official formation that change of that color and if you look just above it you'll see that it's not the same color as it used to be but if you look just below it you have a little bit more of a juvenile younger less defined shoot here notice it has ramified growth it has different fronds occurring from it you'll see a singular frond existing right here no ramification to that frond just a singular frond an immature frond that's still green and now a mature frond that is red now what causes this red color this is caused by the formation of phloem and when we start to talk about the physiological response of a tree we have this massive movement of water that is occurring which means that the cuticle or that waxy covering that protects that leaf mass from excessive water loss cannot be formed yet if that needle or that that that frond or that piece of foliage is still elongating and when that piece of growth is elongating massive water movement from the roots from the vascular system strengthen our deciduous conifers comes from vascular system much like and in in congruency with the elongating species genre we have this massive movement of water that will continue to move and as we start to see the changes in the growth tip the water central to the growth tip is the el mitigation activity is what's creating sugars and starches and the breakdown via photosynthesis and the cellular division with the challenging of the sugar and the production of that sugar at that meristematic that cellular dividing growth tip is what gives rise to that elongation now we know that water is really the major resource it takes that's what provides all those resources that's what causes the elongation we don't see hardening off quote unquote hardening off formation of cuticle but more than that mature establishment of the phloem until that has fully finished elongating and started to actually return the energy back to the tree we are in the very first week of july a full four weeks later than i would typically expect to see my bald cypress and pond cypress ready for this pruning but i have to wait until i see that ruby red color in the most vigorous branches and most vigorous pieces of ramification in the tree before i can expect to be able to prune those pieces and have them produce another flush of ramification and this is where we really get into the strategy so let's stay right here let's stay in this thought process let's stay in this information okay we're talking about this ruby red color and we're saying this is the only piece that exists on this this portion of growth right here that we can actually effectively prune and have that prune give rise to another piece of ramified growth, okay? And you might say, well, what's the big deal? Bald cypress grows so rapidly, why do we need it to produce another flush of growth? Because we're talking about creating, in the pruning process, ramification. Now, ramification is to say, I have this singularly elongating shoot, okay? I've got that guy, I'm going to put it against the white backboard. I'm going to cut that singularly elongating shoot. And from that cut off of that singular shoot, I need two pieces of ramification, two branches, at the very least, to occur, okay? So if we cut this while it's still green, if we cut this before it's fully hardened off, if we cut this before phloem has formed in that tissue and shown us that change of color and that maturity in that tissue or that branch or that stem, then we don't get ramification coming from that twig that is supposed to be exponentially increasing from one to two, to three. Two to four, four to eight, eight to 16. This is the enhancement of our highly ramified deciduous form, okay? What we get, if that's green, we cut it, we get shoots coming from the base, and we lose that piece as that transitional component of that building process of ramification. And so we say on bald cypress, in the spring, we cut all of the growth to the desired length for what stage of ramification that particular piece we're cutting is. In this instance, we're out of the spring. We're out of the spring. We're out of the spring. We're out of the spring. We're out of the spring. We're out of the spring. We're out of the spring. Here's the st nào, gonna put that on the standard bunch. Here's the st now, cuz I don't know the name of this, but we're out on a secondary branch, and this piece of growth, coming back to this, this becomes a tertiary piece of growth. I've got my structure back in here. You can see my finger through that foliar mast. I've got my bifurcation of secondary right here, and now coming out here, I have another bifurcation. I've got my bifurcation of secondary right here, and now coming out here, I have another bifurcation. I have immature pieces around it that are still green. I've got a mature piece that's taking on that Ruby color, and that's what I'm going to be pruning. And because I know that this is a tertiary branch, tertiary piece of ramification I'm going to be choosing a length that is appropriate to be creating a more refined transition of length from secondary that's a little bit longer to tertiary that's slightly shorter to sub tertiaries that are even tighter and more compact which is what allows us to build that transition of taper that step down of length and that finer and finer enhancement of strength okay now there's more to this puzzle and stay with me here because I want to just dump all of this knowledge on you I want it to marinate as I start to work through the tree and then I want your feedback I want to know where are you confused where is this hard to understand where can we clarify this for you to actualize this knowledge okay just because I prune in the same way that we talk about with our deciduous species like a Japanese maple like a trident maple like a beech like a hornbeam okay larger leaves or ample amount of photosynthetic surface area when we start to talk about a pond cypress we talk about a bald cypress we talk about a tree like a tree like a tree like a tree like a tree like a tree like a tree like a tree like a tree like a tree we have a fairly significant amount of length that exists inside of this foyer mass and if we come in tight here we start to recognize oh just by pruning this I haven't decreased the photosynthetic mass I haven't decreased all of these solar panels to a significant degree in fact when I look at what I took off I took off this much growth and when I lose that there's still a majority of the green mass on the tree so in order to get this piece to actually push ramified growth I've got to be coming in here and I've got to be partially defoliating in the same way we handle our other deciduous species to shut down or slow down sugar starch productivity that gives rise to the necessity for this tree to push another strong flush of growth. We're back in an energy positive as indicated by that ruby red color. That's when we also understand these are the only twigs that we can prune and partial defoliation of the leaf mass has to be a part of that action. Now, when I look at this, okay, I want to be thinking about the desired branch habit of my tree. On a bald cypress, having branches coming off the bottom, not necessarily a very fruitful thing. And in fact, when we talk about bald cypress, we would much rather have branches coming off of the top of that piece as opposed to the bottom of that piece because bald cypress tend to form this up and then this up and then this up, layered effect of vertical branches as well as alternating branches that exist. So when I, when I come back in, stay in tight for me, Jesus, when I come back in here, right, and we're in this area, I've got this piece of ramification I've cut to a very short degree to give me that nice step down. I've got this immature piece that feels like this is my bifurcation, one, two, from that one behind it. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to clean off the other pieces that exist around that ramified growth. I've got my two branches at that junction and then I want to stagger. I'm going to be staggering, boom, boom, alternating, but alternating right, alternating left, as well as alternating vertically so that I make sure I set myself up with that next flush of growth to have the best chance to be usable in terms of its position, in terms of its strength, and I don't create the worlds of growth that will give me ramification, but give me ramification in directions that might not be applicable or utilizable in terms of that final structure that I'm aspiring and striving to achieve in my tree. Okay. That was a lot. I just fire-hosed you, and I understand, but I want to break it down one more time. We wait until the twigs show that they're in a post-flush hardened state. That comes with the change of the elongating strong branching turning from green to ruby red. Boom, phloem is formed, energy is positive. We cut that branch back, and the length of that has to reference the branches that it is coming from, and their length, always stepping down that length, and has to represent whether it's a primary, a secondary, a tertiary, or some sub-tertiary level of branching after that, or else we'll leave that ramification too long or we'll cut it too short. Okay. So we have immediate bumper rails. We have immediate criteria upon which we can execute this. Okay. We know when, we know the indication and why, and now we know how we go about deducing that. And the final process in this is partial defoliation because we know closing down sugar starch productivity forces the tree not just to produce needles, but to produce branches that hold needles to be able to achieve that productivity in their photosynthetic surface area, their leaf mass, to get the sugar starch productivity that tree needs. Okay. Eve, let it rock. Awesome. All right. Up first we have Douglas. Douglas wants to know if the ruby color signals the start of the work window, what signals the end of the period of this work being done? Right, right. Love this question. I love that question, Douglas. When we start to talk about this and when we start to talk about the actions that we're performing here, okay, we're really looking at the timing of daylight length over the course of the year as well as temperature triggers in our environment. For example, if we were in Florida, we would have been doing this work probably sometime in May, maybe even late April because it is so much warmer and so much farther south. Okay. So we recognize the ruby color indicates the beginning. Now, if you're in Florida, native region, obviously it's going to be the strongest area for growth when we start to talk about a bald cypress or a pond cypress capacity to produce the kind of growth that gives us ramification. We may have the ability in native regions, southeastern United States, Louisiana, Georgia, Florida, these areas, Alabama, Mississippi, these are the areas where we're going to see the potential to maybe do partial defoliation, not just once a year, but twice a year, depending on if we get that same in that second productivity of foyer growth, the ruby color, and we look at how much time until we typically see that growth fall. For us in the Pacific Northwest, I know if I go past the first week of July in terms of temperature norms and daylight length being this far north, the second flush will not have enough time between that period in July and when they start transitioning into their drop of foyer mass for the branches that occur to harden off. I'm going to say that again. If I wait in the Pacific Northwest past the first week of July, temperature norms, average temperatures, and daylight length will not give us enough time for the next flush of ramification to harden off, and it will drop as a deciduous piece of material. I only get one twig that year. I want one twig bifurcating into two every single season. Every single year, I want the first spring growth cut, two pieces of growth at least on that, that I'm going to come back and look to have existing on the tree after it's dropped, its foliage in the fall. And if I miss that timing and I wait too late, I only get that one twig that fully hardens off and stays on the tree as a product of that year. So you see how it's important, but there isn't an indication in the tree of when it's too late. There's nothing that the tree is going to do that's going to say, it's too late. It's the timing after that pruning for that next flush to harden off. And for us in the Pacific Northwest, this far north, that cutoff for that timing is the first week of July. I literally just hit energy positive. This is one of seven bald cypresses in the garden. It's the only one that has hardened off enough to prune. I don't get to prune my other ones this year. I'm normally cool. They're all green. This is the cutoff week for my daylight length and temperature extremes here. I just got to do the one that I can do. And that's why we're using this one for the live stream tonight. All right. Up next, we have Gary. He wants to know, is the ruby color indicator the same for Don Redwood? Yes, definitely Don Redwood. And this is really where, and I've told you guys this a few times now, we are almost at the point where we have a Don Redwood that is developed enough and achieved the developmental goals to be getting to the point where we're going to be able to execute this and show it on the stream in terms of Don Redwood handling. I want to continue to reference the fact that we have a similar behavior. We've got like-minded trees in terms of how they produce growth, how that growth matures, how that growth demonstrates its maturity. And because of that, we can apply the exact same techniques to a Don Redwood that we would be utilizing on a bald cypress or pond cypress as a criteria to base our actions on and help that tree really ramify and develop over the course of time. All right. Up next is Danny. Danny wants to know, what is the fertilization timing for bald cypress prior to, during, and following this work? Yeah, great question. So anytime when we start talking about, and this is where there are definite nuances to bald cypress if we start to talk about twig thickening, if we start to talk about a highly refined bald cypress that we're preserving in that refinement stage, there are nuances to being able to apply less fertilizer and have that be a fruitful decision that is productive in terms of that tree stage of development. But outside of those nuanced decisions, because we are trying to get a flush of growth that is strong enough on this tree to produce ramification and we're using the hardening off indicators of the vascular tissues formation, creation of phloem creates the ruby color. That's where we start to say, let's go ahead and fairly aggressively fertilize bald cypress knowing that if we fertilize aggressively and we're in a warmer region, we're in a more southerly region, that just means we have the ability now to maybe get two partial defoliations and even add more ramification. But if we're in a more northerly region, we use that aggressive fertilization to go ahead and build it up to have a very successful second flush after that push. And in general, aggressive fertilization when we're going to be planning on leaning on partial defoliation as a tool is a very smart technique to apply when we're dealing with a conifer. And this is really when we get into the discussion because you would say, well, hey, how come you're not applying those same techniques to deciduous trees? Deciduous trees, you're going to be doing partial defoliation on and you're saying moderate, moderate or light applications of fertilizer. Well, because when we start to talk about deciduous trees, most of the time when we're partially defoliating, we're trying to create the finest degrees of ramification, but we're dealing with a 100% pure through and through deciduous tree, higher water mobility, even than a bald cypress, less cuticle formation, greater surface area, higher rate of transpiration. We know we can move so much water that we can really defeat the formation of those finer twigs if we overly fertilize or we fertilize too aggressively. And this is where we have to change our approach and our thought process when we alternate between a deciduous conifer and a pure deciduous tree. Aggressive fertilization on bald cypress. Okay, I want to come in tight here because I am making some decisions and these decisions are based on where my branching is existing. Josh, is this possible? Yes. Nice. Okay. Okay, I'm in here and now I'm coming off of a primary branch here. I've got my primary structure. You see my finger back in there. Okay, I'm going to rotate just slightly. Stay with me, Jesus. Okay, I'm going to rotate just slightly. Now, I've made a pruning decision but my branch right here is roughly three inches long. Okay, and I'm just going to fold it fully lateral. You can kind of see. Roughly three inches long here. Now, the prune that I made out on the tip prior was roughly a quarter to a half inch. This one is three inches. Both of them have the ruby color. Both of them are fully hardened off. Why leave this at three inches when I prune the other one at a half inch? Okay, this is where we come back to this notion that what is so challenging about the pruning of bald cypress is you have to anticipate what length do I need at this stage for this type of a branch. The branch that we pruned initially as we were discussing, tertiary piece of ramification. I had a structural, I had secondaries, and I had a tertiary. Tertiary naturally is going to be shorter. Okay, the piece that I left three inches long, I had a structural, and now it's coming off of a structural. This is a secondary branch. I can't prune a secondary branch back to a half inch long. Secondary branches hold tertiary ramification. They are scaffolding. They are the moderately sized, moderately thickened, moderately long branching that holds that step down into the tertiary and bridges the gap between that big, long, thick, coarse structural piece and that really fine, short tertiary piece. Three inches for my tertiary, seeing it coming off of one of my primary branches, a half inch for my tertiary, seeing that come off of a secondary piece. If you're not thinking, what is my branching hierarchy? What is my system? Where does this branch, this piece of growth, which will occur from the trunk of a bald cypress or pond cypress all the way to the very tip of it, we've got to be thinking, what am I doing? Where is this coming from? And how do I utilize that knowledge to select it? And how do I utilize that knowledge to select it? Because we're not cutting to a bud. We're not cutting to a needle. We're not cutting to anything. We can cut it all the way back to just having a twig without any vegetative growth on it whatsoever. And let me go ahead and just paint this picture a little bit more clearly because I think that is probably the most effective, okay? So Josh, go ahead and come right in here. I'm going to hold this right there. Jesus, bring me in close when you've got a minute. Okay, so when we start to look at this, if all of this is gone, okay? All of this is gone and this is just a component. Maybe I have foliar growth out here. I can cut this to this length if it's a secondary and I don't have any fronds on that piece. Now, I'm not saying pluck off all of the needles. We're saying partial defoliation. But just to say, what if all the growth was from here out and I cut that growth so I have no more needle growth? This piece, being ruby red, being energy positive, will produce multiple pieces of ramification that are going to come off of that bare stem. So when we start to talk about that reduction, if I'm not thinking this is a secondary piece, I might cut it back here as if it were tertiary piece and I completely lose the function of that branch, right? Because we don't have to cut to a bud, because we can cut anywhere on this tissue, boom, boom, boom, I'm going to get ramified growth as a result of that. The length of that branch has to be considered in terms of where does it exist in the tree and what is its function in the hierarchy of branches. All right, keep going. All right, up next we have Chuck. Chuck wants to know do we treat tamarisk similarly with tamarisk shift to burgundy analogous to the bald cypress tree? Yes, absolutely, absolutely. And tamarisk is one of these weird ones, right? Because we do typically call tamarisk a deciduous tree. It's technically not a conifer, but it maybe has more clear relationships to the bald cypress and the growth habit than any other deciduous conifer that we deal with and it is a true blue deciduous tree. We handle tamarisk exactly the same. All right, up next we have Bentley. Bentley wants to know if you were doing an air layer on a bald or pond cypress, would you do this pruning on the branches above the layer or only the branches below? Just the branches below because when we start to create air layers, we need the most photosynthetic mass possible producing the highest quantity of sugars and starches so that we're able to really direct in that air layer, direct that accumulation of energy, right? If we're going to air layer right here, I don't want to reduce any of this because that's all the sugar starch productivity that's going to gather, form that callus and form those roots. I want to max out that root formation capacity, the speed, et cetera and that comes with more needles, okay? But if we're trying to get that done, we definitely can be doing partial defoliation and pruning below it and that will start to stimulate more energy here which is going to generate more sugars and cause a higher success rate in that air layer, okay? I want to bring you back to one area here. Just inside, Josh, can you zoom right in here from where you're at? Okay, perfect, okay? Now, this is a perfect example of where I've achieved ramification because if we look in here, right, I've got this beautiful little branch right here. You can see it just above. Kind of put my finger in between those two. I've got a beautiful branch here. I've got a beautiful branch here. So I have bifurcation right at that area. Now, I've got this whirl of needles that are occurring right at that branch and bald cypress, much like any other species, loves to produce growth right at that junction where we go from a single branch into that fork, right? That junction right there becomes a catch point of energy. We want to come in and we want to strip that of needle mass because we don't want yet another shoot shooting from that junction where our sugars and starches get caught on the way back. Our water and nutrition get caught on the way out. But when I look at these pieces, okay, even though I have bifurcation here, I don't have a ruby red color in any of my shoots. Notice how that's still green, right, still very green. And notice how this is a lot weaker, much, much smaller, even than look at these fronds above it and the length that we have here. Look at the shortness of these pieces below it. Definitely something that's being impacted. This is an area where in partial defoliation, I'm not going to be pruning. I'm also not going to be partially defoliating those pieces that I'm trying to get that strength in. They exist in a little bit less photosynthetically efficient space below this branch here. We've partially defoliated, opened up air as well as light circulation to this piece below it. And with that reduced needle mass and that reduced needle size and length and vigor, we're going to leave that. That stays just as it is, okay? So these nuances start to creep into this and we start to say, oh, this isn't that much different than a deciduous partial defoliation and pruning. It's not. But for Bald Cypress, Pond Cypress, and Don Redwood, we have to understand the indications, we have to understand the strategy, and we have to be able to implement it at the correct time to elicit that positive response and really build our trees. Cool, all right. Up next we have Max. Max wants to know how much percentage of the branch can you defoliate? How much percentage of the branch? So here's the thing, right? And I'm glad that you asked that, Max, because this comes back to a very important discussion that needs to be had in regards to these species, okay? If you were down in the southeastern United States or if you talked with common practices that exist around Bald Cypress, Pond Cypress, et cetera, most people would say, oh, I don't even waste my time partially defoliating. I fully defoliate, I prune, and I water, wire in the middle of the hottest portion of the year, and Bald Cypress respond well. They grow again. Okay, cool. Here is my challenge to that discussion, okay? And if there is some degree of disagreement, I'm fine with that. I'm fine with a little bit of disagreement. I'm fine with some counter discussion to what I'm saying, right? But when we start to talk about that, if full defoliation, much like the same thing we talk about in deciduous, if full defoliation were the best technique, where are all of the highly ramified, highly refined, beautiful silhouetted, deciduous forms of Bald Cypress? Where are all of the legendary collected Bald Cypress, a species that has existed in North America for as long as bonsai has been being practiced and of species that has been iconic to the southeastern United States from as long as bonsai is being practiced, okay? If those techniques, if this discussion were appropriate and was eliciting the best, highest quality response, full defoliation, because they're so strong, right? I cut them back, I wire them, they grow again, and I do it again and I do it, you can do it two or three times, and it's great and it's amazing. Cool. Where are all of the best Bald Cypress? Where are all of the iconic Bon Cypress? Okay? And the answer is they don't really exist. Of course there are individuals. Of course there's a Guy Guidry. Of course there's a Von Banting. Of course there's a Gary Marshall. Of course there is an Ed Trout and other very talented, Mary Madison, very talented individuals. But still, have we tapped into the highest level of ramified growth, design, and capacity in Bald Cypress? And have we done so with a sustainable technique that works in the energy-positive system of Bald Cypress, of Pond Cypress over the course of time that this tree not only thrives, but dependably behaves and survives the prolonged execution of the Bonsai design in the containerized environment of that confined space? And the answer that I have seen, right, and I'm not saying any of those individuals I cited are wrong by any stretch of the imagination. I'm just saying on a grand scale of the quantity of Bald Cypress that have been put into Bonsai cultivation with I think the dogma of they're so durable we can do this has caused more failure than success and you do have these talented individuals that have produced those high quality Bald Cypress, but there are so many more Bald Cypress than what those talented individuals have had success with that have failed that we really need to consider and look at the system and understand how do we get it to work and how do we work with the tree. And that's where I'm coming from this evening in terms of trying to deliver knowledge that is sustainable, dependable, and over the long run going to continue to prolong the health and longevity of your tree. All right, up next we have Leonard. Leonard wants to know, what have you given if you know the age of this tree and how many years it's been in development? Yeah, I do not know the age and Bald Cypress is tough. Bald Cypress is tough to understand the age of because much like or when we talk about a Rocky Mountain juniper, when we talk about a Ponderosa pine, when we talk about an Engelmann spruce, you have core samples that exist in the regions where a lot of those trees are collected that can be referenced. Those can be great references in fact and I'm not really sure with Bald Cypress. I'm not really sure how old this is. I do know that it's at least 80 years old, at least 80. Do you know how many years it's been in development? Yeah, so this was collected by Mary Madison back in 2011, I believe, and it's been at Mirai since 2012. So I've been working on this for eight years and this tree has been a part of the Spectrum Exhibition at Wieden-Kennedy, which was I think a very powerful utilization of the tree. It's been a part of the Future Perfect Exhibition down in Los Angeles that had I think a really, really profound impact on people that had not experienced bonsai, especially bonsai of this interest and diversity as a very unique, authentic interpretation of a North American iconic species. And it has gone through a life cycle and transition. There's a lot of scars on the trunk that are starting to callous up and sort of heal over in terms of these regions where they used to be big open wounds. You can kind of see here that one's closed up. That used to be a very large open wound. And this one is an iconic piece that if you look at the image of this tree on our gallery on bonsaimari.com, you'll see that this is such a big feature and it's slowly disappearing because bald cypress is so incredibly strong and aggressive in terms of their vascular productivity. Elongating species, strength is in the vascular tissue. Storage of sugars and starches. We get that callous formation. But it is a relatively old bald cypress. All right. Up next we have David. David wants to know do you partially defoliate the entire tree or only the refined branches? I'm going to partially defoliate every portion of the tree that I'm going to be pruning, right? And so even the areas where, you know, the only area I'm not partially defoliating was that weaker area where we didn't necessarily see the indications or have that energy positive status. Other than that, I'm partially defoliating almost every region of the tree that has strength, that has vigorous foliar mass. Because if I just prune selected areas of the tree and I only partially defoliate those areas, I won't have a shutdown of sugar starch productivity that forces the tree to produce another flush of ramification and really utilize the stored energy that it's created via that reaccumulation over the course of the spring season with that expanded foliar mass. So I like to apply it as a holistic application of technique to the entire sugar starch system of the tree. And I'm only leaving those really weak areas, the select few weak areas that exist, unpartially defoliated so that I make sure I don't try to get them to grow when they're showing me that they don't have the strength to be successful. All right. Up next we've got Bentley. Bentley wants to know if you did this work too late and ended up with one big twig, will next year's growth be ramified? Well, so, and Bentley, perfect segue into the next portion of this growth, okay? And again, I'm up in the apex here. And let me, before I transition into Bentley's question, let's just kind of dive into where we're at here. Because now in the apical region I'm starting to get a tremendous number of shoots that are ruby red that are elongated. I've got four or five just on this one singular structural piece here, okay? So I've got one here that was a secondary and it's now turned into two pieces. So I'm going to prune those relatively short. I've got another tertiary right next to it. I'm going to prune that short. Now this is opening up light to these branches that exist below it. These pieces back here, these are secondaries. I have to leave these longer. These are going to be the scaffolding that's going to hold my tertiary ramification. And when I start to look at these, these two pieces being vertical on the actual branch, and let me rotate just a little bit for you, Josh, okay? These two pieces being relatively vertical here, this vertical piece or this lateral piece I'm now going to diversify and I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take this guy back there and I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to cut my lateral just a little bit shorter so that I diversify those lengths and create a little bit more, less of a pattern, less of a predictable length, a little bit more of a natural vibe to that layout of those pieces that are forming that ramification and structure, okay? Coming back to Bentley, if I let one of these grow, gets huge, right, big old shoot, when do I come back and I touch that? Or say, for example, I cut here and I get a growth to occur, it doesn't ramify or the pieces that grow off of this ramify but they don't fully harden off, okay? This is where we come back and we look at the next opportunity to handle our bald cypress, our pond cypress, our dawn redwoods, and that is in the spring as the buds swell, okay? A lot of people come back in the fall, come back in early winter, prune all of that elongated growth, clean off those dead needles, wire that piece out, and what we tend to find, over the course of winter and into that early spring, unless we're in the warmest regions of North America or the Northern Hemisphere, what we see is a lot of that fine ramification dies back, okay? And this is the same if we talk about the deciduous conifer nature of larch, this is the same if we talk about the deciduous conifer nature of dawn redwood. We really want to leave that system, all of our hormones intact, all of our sugar starch productivity intact, and not open that system with a wound that it has to evacuate those stored sugars and starches and compartmentalize it. We really want to leave that system and not open that system with a wound that it has to evacuate those stored sugars and starches and compartmentalize that when the tree's at a very low metabolic rate. So if we wait, although our winter silhouette isn't as sexy as it could be, over the course of time, as we get that finer and finer ramification, what you're going to find is that winter silhouette is going to become more and more beautiful. When those buds start to swell in the spring, we cut those pieces back to the desired length based on if it's primary, secondary, tertiary, or sub-tertiary, and then we get that flush on that. So you have one piece, it doesn't ramify, maybe you just leave it like that and next spring it starts growing, or maybe you cut it back a little bit more, really fine-tune that, wire it out as the buds are swelling, and then you get ramification to occur and you start the process again. We prune in spring prior to growth, we prune in the early to mid-summer, depending on where we're at in the northern hemisphere, right, or southern hemisphere, but they're in winter now, so they're going to be looking more at spring pruning. Okay, we prune prior to growth, and at that point of post-flush hardening, where we have that energy positive, those are our two things that we prune two times, those are our two sets. We prune here, we get two, we prune here, we get four. We prune here next spring, we get eight, we prune here in the summer, we get 16. In two years, technically, we should be able to go from one to at least eight, if not, ideally, that 16 mark, and you recognize, wait, I've never seen that happen on a bald cypress, that's why we're going over this, because it is possible, it is fully possible. All right. We've got David. David wants to know, by the looks of that container, it looks like the roots can be reduced much farther. When repotting from a large nursery pot, do we repot like we would a deciduous, or do we need to keep the root ball intact? Yeah, that is a great, great question. Okay, I think you can be more aggressive with a bald cypress or a pond cypress or a deciduous conifer than you can a really low water mobility conifer, like a pine or potentially like a juniper, but I also think that you have to be very, very careful, much in the same way that we say, hey, you can go ahead and fully defoliate one of these, you know, bald cypress or pond cypress, and it'll bounce back just fine, and you say, sustainably over the course of time, does it bounce back every time with the same kind of vigor and health, or do we wear it out? We will wear it out. If you take that risk, and you fully bear root, you wash the soil, you do all of that stuff, there will come a point, it might tolerate it once, it might tolerate it twice, there will come a point where it will bite you. But if we can actually get a good root system and have a good root system, then we can get a good root system. And so I think that's really, really important. The other thing that we need to understand is that we really need to respect the fact that there is a coniferous component of this, and that coniferous component really does apply to the root system and the tolerances that really does apply to not pulling on those tolerances in the foliar mass and not fully defoliating to ensure the chances of success. We have to respect the fact that this tree is a conifer that acts deciduous. a deciduous that acts like a conifer okay and inside of that we always err on the side of never fully bare rooting always leaving some portion untouched and taking that in a staged approach to be able to execute the kind of things that we're aspiring to achieve in the repotting process all right uh linda in florida says that she missed the first pruning would she be able to do the pruning now and if she can do it now is she looking for the ruby colored stems now wherever they may be yep yep ruby color stems and you definitely will have them in florida linda and if you miss it oh i missed i missed my spring pruning i didn't understand that window that's fine that's fine because now you have more strength and this is really where you start to say hey listen lemons and eliminate in the bonsai practice if we miss a timing of application for a scope of work guess what you just added more strength to that tree okay oh my gosh i missed the timing i oh shoot did i screw it up no no no no i didn't decandle my black pine this year did i screw it up no because you're going to get a better response next year i missed the first pruning of my bald cypress did i screwed up no because you're going to get a better response after that after that pruning that you do in the summertime right and next year because you have more strength in the system you will need to prune in the spring and again in the summer and that's how we start to create sustainable transitions to finer and finer growth but if you miss it one time it just means the tree is going to respond with that much more strength the next time and that's where we turn lemons into lemonade and get those beneficial productivity of energy okay and up next is marcia marcia is in san francisco and wants to know if since their winter is later would they still be okay would she still be okay to do this kind of work i think so again even in the pacific northwest i am pushing pushing the tail end of this workload but i feel very very comfortable and very very confident that this tree will produce a second flush that fully matures this year i'm right at the tail end of being able to do it but i'm still in the window i still have the daylight length i do need a little bit more temperature i'm banking on the pacific northwest summer showing through for a week or two to give us that temperature increase but i think that you're okay definitely in the bay area i i know that you're okay you're farther south you have a warmer average temperature and your daylight length over the course of winter doesn't taper off as fast as it does for us here all right um david wants to know could you put your trees into a greenhouse and install grow lights to get more time to successfully partially defoliate yes you could yes you could you would have to start very early though because the triggers it's not like once we see the tree starting to behave that's that's not when things started that's a product of that that being catalyzed by those changes very early on and continuing to ramp up and and move in that direction and we've already passed the summer solstice we're already past the longest day of the year we're getting shorter now in the northern hemisphere if you're in the southern hemisphere obviously you've already passed and you're starting to get longer days are getting longer right and so when you're in the southern hemisphere you're starting to get longer and we start to see that that transition has already started to happen now is the tree responding to photo period so strongly right now that we need to start putting it in a greenhouse and adding to that daylight length no definitely not we're not even close to being there yet but we do see the typical transition just as a rough guesstimate and every species has a little bit of a different response to this but generally the first of september is when photo period starts to change the behavior of our plants and really starts to trigger different behaviors mainly the transition from foliar to vascular in the northern hemisphere and then the transition to the southern hemisphere flip that around six months and you have your southern hemisphere in terms of how you handle how you can dictate how you can manage and manipulate that a greenhouse always gives you more control always more control and in bonsai that added time that added certainty that added dependability is really golden when we're making that highest level tree that we can possibly create all right up next is damien damien wants to know um how do you maintain the balance between water and air with the species taking into account the size of the soil yeah so i go solid akadama on bald cypress and i think this is another really big discussion that that has been had i think there are a lot of um i think there are a lot of counters and controversial um feelings about this my experience with this is this is mainly based on dogma or the way that we've done it to this point in the areas where bald cypress are more commonly grown and i think we've got to move past that because if you put bald cypress in a very coarse soil you put bald cypress in a very organic very heavy soil whether it's potting mix um whether it's a decomposing pine bark or some of the the commonalities that we see typically used in regions of the country where bald cypress are prevalent what you get is you get big singular when you talk about bald cypress bald cypress big singular long elongating woody roots but if you go back and you look at the forest repotting that we did this spring on the bald cypress forest we did a lot of repotting and we did a lot of repotting but the fun part of it that we did was we did a lot of repotting deforestation so we did a lot of repotting of the forest again we did the repotting of the forest that we created of all those pond site i say bald side pond cypress taxodium ascendance okay we did this massive forest the fine structure of the roots because of the scalability of occadama we talk about that tubular structure we talk about that finer ramification we talk about that root expansion changing the dynamics of that soil system over the course of time it compensates for the water necessities over time with a finer root system and a highly ramified tree it equals that which a tree with finer roots and finer branches and a greater amount of foliar mass needs more nutrition, everything is taken care of by that Akadama substance being utilized. And it elevates the quality of bald cypress to a degree that I have not seen consistently executed without Akadama. But for this container, there was a discussion, yeah, I could shrink down this container. Well, aesthetically, this container is quite nice. It allows for the buttress, it allows for the flare, and it compensates for the height. Could I use a smaller container? Sure. Would I have to water more? Absolutely. If I use Akadama, does that help me? Without a doubt, okay? And that's where we start to see that balance of all factors contributing. All right, Corey wants to know, once you do this work, if you get buds popping up in places you don't want, do you go ahead and let them run or remove them? Let them run. Let them run. Because now we're saying, hey, you did all this work, you're back in an energy positive state, I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna take away some of your ability to sustain yourself, and I'm gonna push you to flush again. And it's gonna, okay, I'm in an energy positive, so I can go ahead and I can make that happen, but I need everything that I'm gonna be pushing for growth to get my energy system stored up so that I have the vascular productivity that allows me to continue to perpetuate the strength of this growth next season. And that's where we don't wanna be overly managing. We make this action, we perform the action in an educated fashion, we manipulate the action to give us the best aesthetic, and then hands off. Tree gets to do what the tree wants, you gotta let a tree be a tree. Don't try to overly manage, don't try to dictatorially control because the strong pieces of the tree are going to run whether you reduce the other portions or not. That's already set up, the hierarchy is already in place, and we're really letting the energy system catch up because we're doing a lot in partial defoliation to decrease that system that allows the tree to be a self-feeding organism. So we've gotta take our hands off. After we perform this, we take what we get, we utilize it to the best of our ability, and each year, if we take that approach, we can sustainably maintain the ability to aesthetically evolve Bald Cypress, Pawn Cypress, and Dawn Redwood over a prolonged course of time with these techniques as our executable, actionable items. So does that also apply to buds that might appear on the trunk or primary branch locations? I would say buds on the trunk would be something where I would feel a little bit more comfortable saying, you know, if a bud pops out on the trunk and you don't want to branch there, take it off. I don't think that's a big deal. What I would hate to see happen is in this canopy, now that I've taken it, I've taken off 70, 80%, and all of a sudden it starts to flush again and we're in here taking off, you know, 50, 60% of those and just leaving a few. That will cause devastation to this tree in terms of the energy system. Okay, up next is Max. Max says, being Bald Cypress is very apically dominant. Should you defoliate more in the apex or treat the whole tree the same? Whole tree the same. Let's go for an even distribution of energy and even distribution of transpiration or water movement. Let's go for an even distribution or even productivity of sugars and starches even though we know. We know beyond a shadow of a doubt the apex has a greater exposure to sun, greater exposure to wind, and in that greater exposure the apex is going to transpire more and it's also going to photosynthesize more. You still will be able to because I'm removing more from the apex. It's dumped more energy into the apex. I'm removing more from the apex. As a result of that, that's where I strike the balance and I don't need to leave an lopsided distribution of foliar mass in any one region. Even it out, you're going to be pruning more in the apex. You're going to be partially defoliating more of a quantity out of the apex because it already has more needle mass present there and that's where we get that energy distribution to really start to zero out and be even. Okay, Bentley wants to know when you build a flat top, do you start with a primary line based to tip and build secondaries off of that or is it more broom style? I do. I start with my defining line every single time. Where is that highest point that's going to carry the directional insinuation of the top? Of that apical region. And one of the big changes, if you go back and you look at this tree early on compared to where it is now, when I rewired this tree and I'll come back to the front once I've got this all finished up because we're getting really close here. Okay, when I rewired this tree, one thing that I identified is that I did not have clarity when I originally styled this as my first bald cypress in the very beginning of my exploration of the flat top form. I did not wire this so that I had that definition whereas in my other bald cypress I have continued to. Maintain that that is an important part of the structure that I need to continue to respect regardless of the design, okay? And consequently, I got to this point where I didn't understand when I was creating this that I really needed to be careful and strategic in the lengths of branches when I was pruning, right? A lot of this information I'm giving you is exploratory information that I've gotten working on this very tree and this past spring I took this very tree back to the structure. I took a lot of the secondaries and tertiaries because they were haphazardly pruned in terms of their length and not necessarily appropriate for where they existed and I pruned it all back and I started again. Not from zero but I started from a much more mature position of understanding what I needed to do to really actualize the best possible tree and willing to take that step based on what I had learned. So it's exciting to get to share this tree with you because what you do see is you do see a very defined apical leader from base to tip and that, that piece is one of the new additions to this design that gives me, I think, the most appropriate kind of sustainability in terms of the long run of this piece. Okay, up next is Chuck. Chuck wants to know, does Bald Cypress graft well? Can one graft branches onto the trunk? This one looks great with only the top growth but is grafting a feasible option for trees that call for a more proximal branching? I think so. I think so. I don't know though. That is something that I have to say, hey Chuck, I don't have a lot of experience or if I'm just being totally up front and transparent, I don't have any experience grafting Bald Cypress. I did buy a cultivar of Bald Cypress that is a dwarf cultivar that has very, very short fronds, very tight, compact growth. Juan Andrade, when he was here, we were talking about the fact that the specialty conifer field of plant material has some very interesting Bald Cypress. I just had a piece here that I had pruned and it flushed all the way back here. I'm going to cut that nice and clean and I do like to come back and patch Bald Cypress in terms of just a little bit of liquid cut paste unless I'm doing something really big. Liquid is all I need. But Juan was saying, hey, I really want to experiment with Bald Cypress and grafting and I think that makes a lot of sense. Coming back to, just to draw attention to this definition of the high point here, I did create, this piece used to go to the back. Josh, can you go ahead and focus in here? This piece right here used to go this way, towards the back. I brought this piece all the way to the front and elevated that to be the highest structural element. Now, it is very gray because I have all these other pieces, but notice that this piece comes up as the most dominant structural piece, highest structural element and from that, I define my line of the apical region, which is structurally sound now for the maturation of this tree's design. Okay? Now, when I get to this point and I've relatively pruned now, if I compare the foliar mass on the ground to the foliar mass on the tree, I've removed roughly 60%. I still think I have a little bit more to evenly distribute my energy across this tree. I feel like I left some areas dense. I feel like I have some other areas that are thin and once I get pulled back and I've done that selective shoot or foliar thinning and I've done that selective pruning, I want to go back and I want to take a more detailed look at what I did to make sure I'm happy with my lengths, happy with my ramification and happy with my density. So, I'm just going to go through that as I continue to ask questions and respond. Okay, Gary wants to know, when repotting a Dawn Redwood from nursery stock, what are the indicators, state of buds, et cetera, to tell us that it's the optimal time in the spring for a repot? Yeah, I think that when you start to see all the little green BBs just starting to make themselves visible, just starting to make themselves visible, this is when you are at max capacity for significant root work. Okay, now Dawn Redwood, Bald Cypress, Pond Cypress, these are durable species that can tolerate with high water mobility a fairly dramatic repot, a fairly aggressive root reduction. We talked about the fact that you may roll the dice and do a bare root and have it be successful, but I've also seen bare roots completely fail and have a Bald Cypress completely die because of bare rooting and this is where we say, hey, listen, respect the coniferous nature of it, don't roll the dice. Do what you know is going to be successful. Always leave some portion untouched, never bare root. I believe in that. Okay, but when we see those green BBs starting to form before they ever start to frond out, that's where you have the greatest opportunity to do the most significant work to really reduce into a smaller container, make the transition out of some of that native soil or garden soil that it's been grown in in the recovery container or the nursery environment, that's your moment right there. All right, up next is Bond. Bond wants to know, if I have a Bald Cypress in development and I want to remove all lower branching and leave just the new leader to start the flat top design, is now the right time to prune located in the Northeast US? Now would be, I would say, we're almost a little bit late. So just the same as we say, hey, I've got a deciduous tree. I want to be doing a big heavy cutback. I'm worried about it bleeding in the spring because of high water mobility. Energy positive, which we typically tend to hit right around that May, maybe June at the latest, best time to do it. When we get into July, it's a little late. You're in the Northeastern United States. Winter comes on early. We're kind of past that point where we're going to get a lot of time on that growth to really get it to harden off and be something we can depend on. I would go ahead and wait until next spring, or if you're still apprehensive in the spring or your spring is erratic, wait until energy positive starts to happen around that May, June time next year. All right, next is Damian. Damian wants to know what are the indications in the foliage, sorry. What are the indications in the foliage that indicate that the plant needs to be transplanted? Yeah, great question. I think it's more a product of percolation is water entering. We know bald cypress high water mobility high water Necessitating species is water freely entering that soil system moving through that soil system I push the bald cypress forest too far I push the bald cypress forest too far and the reason that I know I pushed it too far is Because one of the trees in the bald cypress forest Started getting a little weaker and a little weaker and a little weaker and that was the root environment not being plentiful Enough in terms of space for it to expand not getting the water not getting the resources That's really where I made an error and I had left that tree in that container for six years This tree really started to get really weak I had left it in here for five years in this container initially went into the Jonathan cross now It's back in this container So so there is a threshold right and one of the things that I was told When I initially started engaging with bald cypress is you have to repot them every two years Well, I don't see that being enough time to scale the Akadama system. Give me the finest ramifications It's too aggressive. Okay, maybe in warmer portions of the country or the northern hemisphere Maybe in Australia South Africa some of these regions in the southern hemisphere We might be able to see that kind of rapid root growth But even then you need to allow the roots the time to move into the sheen to scale that central core of soil Because that's where your refinement that's where those finer branches are preserved is right under the trunk That's the last place your fine roots are going to occupy if you repot it right when the walls are compact and you haven't occupied That central root mass that's where when you repot it it blows out into coarse growth again And we lose all that ramification though. There's a balance there, but we see weakening as a result of that Infrequent repotting being too long between those operations Okay, max Max wants to know what is the best way to heal a trunk chop on a bald cypress flat or angled cut? Yes, this is a this is a big big discussion, right? I think that the angled cut allows you if you have the callus form And it's handled correctly and I and I would always go back to I was very very Observant of Gary Marshall and that group's approach way back in the day and the old bone side today Magazines where they were doing the angled cut and allowing the callus to roll up over that diagonal cut They actually carved it in a convex way It had like a bulging dome at that diagonal and the callus on bald cypress so vigorous It's rolling over the deadwood here so vigorous it rolls over that and really becomes Aggressive in the covering of that and merges those trunk areas so you lose sight of that cut over the course of time I think the diagonal cut and I think a little bit of a convex or outward protruding Formation of that wood gives you the best opportunity to create a seamless transition from the base into a more rapid transition of taper for those upright trees Right. We're all caught up on questions for the time being that's great because I think we are pretty much there in terms of the pruning of this piece and Getting to see it now where you actually have visibility of the structure Do we have a before picture Jesus just to be able to do it? Yeah. Oh good. That's perfect This is the best one. Let's show it. Let's can you show them that before picture? That's a great screenshot Look at that screen grab Man stellar. He's really hyping you guys up for what you're about to see Okay So now you can actually see the structure here and obviously when we start to Look at that branch on the right we see that definition of that movement to the right You can see that heavy reduction of foliar mass You now see that defining line in the apical region to see some of this structure in the foreground But the high point being back here and that asymmetry created here Yeah, definitely So to see this high point being back here highest structural point coming from the highest structural component Even though these are giving us foreground we see that height established here And then we see that asymmetry on the right side of the tree pushing in this direction And if we just go back to sustainable design concepts as we discuss them We have this big beautiful and Josh. Can you show this right here? This is one of the shining lights and characteristics of bald cypress pond cypress that we really tend to appreciate But this is a knee right and and this knee when you start to talk about a knee the knee is an outward growth There's a lot of theories about what knees do you see that kind of upward growth and it transitions into the root mass? knees are thought to be an Oxygen fixing device because bald cypress typically grow in submerged water for at least a portion of the year and Because they are fully submerged in an anaerobic environment They have an oxygen fixing Component in the knees that allow them to continue to sustain themselves via that balance water and oxygen through those alternative means Okay, there's other theories about the buttress and why it happens There's theories about why knees occur that doesn't involve oxygen fixation But that's probably the most likely at least as far as the botanical community the physiological Explanations kind of have the capacity to wrap their minds around it and you always go back to saying hey listen plants have to the known scientific environment 24,000 hormonal responses and chain events that occur inside of them and we've tracked 1,200 of those responses. Okay, it's probably greater now Maybe we're in the twos or three thousand, but we still have 21 22,000 unknown enzymatic hormonal paths that are triggered by different environmental stimuli that cause the behavior of plants To occur there's so much that we don't know and I think bald Cyprus is one of these mysteries We're talking about bald Cyprus is one of the true ancient old growth trees that still exists on the face of the earth in the southeastern United States It is a very special, a very iconic, and a very representative species and handling it in a way that we maintain the energy of the tree in a positive fashion we work with the tree as opposed to against the tree and we really sustainably build a tree this is the focus of the this information that will give you the chance and the ability to have success all right leonard wants to know at what point will you prune and shape the apex um i did i did prune and shape the apex so let's talk about what happens after this right let's talk about what happens i don't want to put wire on this tree right now i would destroy the foyer mass that i have remaining right it would completely because it's not strongly attached very easy to remove in fact i would completely destroy the needle mass that i've left on the tree not an ideal time to be moving and wiring these soft fleshy although they are showing ruby red and they are hardened off they have more hardening off to be done before we apply wire to them i leave this untouched it produces a second flush over the course of the year i'm going to be fertilizing relatively aggressively so that second flush elongates as much as it possibly can and has all of the resources to harden off okay i'm going to get to the fall it's going to shed its foliage i'm going to clean that out but i am not going to cut i'm not going to prune and i'm not going to wire at that point in time because i will suffer too much dieback in the ramification we work so hard to achieve next spring as i start to see just the beginning of those little green bb's of the foyer growth starting as those buds swell i will prune i will wire and i will set my ramification system up again to respond to what we get as a result of this action i will fertilize aggressively over the spring to try and get that first flush to be nice and strong i will prune again in that period of time when i see those branches take on that ruby color and then i will do the same cleaning it in the fall pruning again in the spring pruning in the summer cleaning in the fall that will be the process for bald cypress pond cypress and dawn redwood for the rest of your life and if you follow that process right and again warmer areas of the world australia south africa southern california texas the gulf areas alabama mississippi southeastern united states florida you might be able to do this twice where you partially defoliate prune get a new branch and then you're going to do the same thing another flush that turns ruby red partially defoliate and prune and have it elongate harden off before you get fall leaf drop that might be possible not possible for us this far north in the pacific northwest but it is worth exploring and understanding the indications the timing after that that we need to be invested in in our environment to have this be sustainable and if you're thinking on that level you are doing your bald cypress a positive service to really helping it be the highest level of refinable bonsai you can create in a sustainable way and i will see you in the next video okay douglas wants to know have you heard of any way to create knees to grow in a bonsai container i have not i don't know how to duplicate the knee process and because we know so little about it i don't know that anybody else does some people say grow them submerged in water i will be really honest with you in a bonsai container i have over watered a bald cypress and killed it okay so the submersion in water as as as a realistic technique maybe i did something wrong i've tried it in in two different instances and i have not been successful with it we do have to be careful with our bald cypress particularly these older collected bald cypress or pond cypress we've got to be very careful with their recovery in terms of balance water and oxygen and not keeping them so saturated by mindlessly watering because we have found that to be a recipe for failure all right chuck wants uh chuck says that he loves the bark on this tree um and some look really great with the bark peeled off can you talk about the pros and cons of that yeah i i'm really curious to know how you do your of that? Yeah, I mean, I think that when we start to talk about creating the visual interest, and this does, I mean, this has an extremely, incredibly old bark, really beautiful texture, deep, thick plated. You're going to have different regional diversities of bark characteristics. We did the spring styling of the true Taxodium disticum, the bald cypress on Mirai Live, and we looked at how different that bark was than the Taxodium ascendans that we're dealing with here. And this is a really, ascendans, pond cypress is a very beautiful bark. But I think when you get to a flakier bark, when the bark is not necessarily a discussion of age, that contrast that you can create by cleaning the bark becomes a discretionary action, an interpretation of the individual that they want to communicate through the medium of bonsai, a situation scenario, or a contrast of color that potentially gives more visual interest to the tree. Do I have judgment about that? Absolutely not. To each their own, and that is an opportunity. That you can utilize. I do tend to find that the cypress that we're working with at Mirai, the bark is a very important discussion and demonstration of age, and I like to keep it. Kurt wants to know, how far out do you perceive the flat top will go? So, like I said, I reworked this whole thing, and I pulled it back in because it had gotten, it had gotten too far out. It had gotten disproportionately wide, disproportionately tall. It had kind of turned into a big ball, like a slight globular asymmetrical ball. And when we really defined that apical region, when we started to create that asymmetry again, and when we pulled it back in, to some of the initial proportions, honestly, that this tree was created with, I felt it enhanced the aesthetic of the tree significantly. And now we're building ramification with an enhanced knowledge of how we create secondary, how we create tertiary, the methodology, the technique, but also that aesthetic consideration of a secondary being that three inches for a tree of this scale, and the tertiary being that half to three quarter inch. For a tree of this scale. That's a big evolution that had to take place by making a secondary six inches long, and tertiaries two or three inches long, and all of a sudden, in three, four, five years, you've got a tree that is not even realistically in scale, not highly ramified because it's so coarse, and that understanding is what's going to allow us to make this second iteration even better. Corey says, I acquired my bald cypress last year, and it's in turfus and pumice and lace. One, one, one. This is its second year in that mix. Would you still wait longer before repotting, or would you get it into full akadama the next spring? I want to repot as it was in the mix already when purchased. Yeah, I think I would probably, if the tree is growing strong and healthy, and you're ready to start building some of those secondary, tertiary, finer ramified branches, I think moving into akadama greatly assists, and in fact, is necessary to get that done. I would say if that's where you're headed, that would be the action. Akadama as a repot, application of these techniques, timing, and strategy, and you'll be well on your way. All right. Miss Mel is in the subtropics and says that they don't get these to lose their leaves in the winter. Mostly, I don't defoliate, should they? I don't know if you should fully defoliate, although I'm sure that fully defoliating would potentially be something that would not harm the tree in any fashion. I would more look, though, to multiple partial defoliations and prunings to really enhance the presence of that ramified growth. Because you don't go fully deciduous in the tropics, that gives you opportunities that are really, really affording a significantly more refined bald cypress. I would expect, and this is not to apply pressure to you, I would expect for you to have the best bald cypresses in the world. As if that's not pressure. You do have the ability to build a bald cypress faster and more ramified than anywhere else if you're working on it. All right. Raffi wants to know if you could discuss the winter hardiness of bald and pond cypress. Yeah, good question, Raffi. Well, I mean, we know in the northern hemisphere, we know that there are bald cypress that exist in the ground as far north as Minnesota and the Minnesota Botanical Gardens. That is in the ground. There's a high buffering capacity to that, but that does speak to their diversity, speaks to their strength, speaks to their capacity to tolerate cold. I left my bald cypress out all winter. This year, we dropped into the low 20s, and I left them out and kind of, I guess it was a roll of the dice, but I felt very confident in doing so, and they seemed to be very happy with that. Would I go much below 20 degrees Fahrenheit or much below, say, a minus 5 degrees Celsius? I think I would feel uncomfortable at that point in time, and it was even a little uncomfortable for me, but it was such a short period at that temperature, I felt okay. 25 degrees Fahrenheit would probably be more in my comfort zone, but I do find that they push out too early if you leave them in the greenhouse, and that's also why I wanted to give them a little bit more winter because it was mild and not super severe. I would probably protect them below 20 degrees Fahrenheit, though. Okay. Leonard wants to know what you think about the mixed look of having strip bark and partial bark on certain trees. Yeah, I guess that's not something that I would find to be something I would do, but I don't have a strong opinion of it one way or another. I guess I would ask why, maybe, a little bit. Feels kind of where I would go, like, why would you do that? But I've seen people do it, and I think, oh, half the bark's rubbed off. I don't quite understand that, but okay. All right, and up next is Bentley. Bentley wants to know, when moving a bald cypress or pond cypress from the field or nursery pot, would it be better to build a two-by-four box for root development or straight into a bonsai pot? I would definitely, I would go into a box, and I would go into a box that has a mesh bottom that allows a lot of oxygen exchange, that allows for you to be watering it really aggressively, but have that oxygen exchange present, wider, flatter, get the buttress going, get the finer roots going, create that root pad formation in that recovery from the field, because you know you get to prune those roots more heavily coming out of the field when they've got that stored energy than any other plant. So, you know, when you're at that point in time, it's best to make big decisions at that point of extraction from the field, and then put it into a box that has a similar, not a size, but a similar depth to what you're looking for, so that you don't create this big, deep root system that you once again have to collect the tree again when you move it into a bonsai container. That would be my advice to really establish the buttress root system and start to transition that into bonsai cultivation. Those are all the questions for this evening. Outstanding. So, you know, just going back to that. Hey, at this point in time, when we see that ruby color, we know we have a hardened off piece of growth that's ready to be pruned. Sort of in the northern hemisphere, the farther north we go, we're at the tail end of being able to prune now and get that next flush to push out, but seeing that ruby red color is the stimulus to go ahead and make those prunes. Pruning decisions are based in terms of the length on what type of branch we're pruning. Primary, secondary, or tertiary. Where does it occur in your branching hierarchy? And to get that second flush to push out after that pruning, we're going to have to do a lot of pruning. So, we're going to have to do a lot of partial defoliation, staggering, alternating that growth in terms of how we partially defoliate, but that 70% reduction, paramount in order to get this tree to give you that next flush of branching that maximizes this operation. Hopefully, and the reason that I wanted to come back and do this as a live stream was because we've done this. We did this on this tree as a feature piece of content on Mirai Live back in 2017. We know more now. We understand more now. We've revamped this tree that we had utilized at that point. We've revamped this tree that we had utilized at that point. But I also wanted to be available for your questions so we could interact, we could collaborate, and we could talk about the specifics of how this knowledge came to be, how it's going to afford your tree the best future, and how this is a methodology, maybe not the only one, but a solid methodology you can start to apply experiment with and make your own in your region to have the greatest amount of success with these wonderful deciduous conifer species. Thank you all. Stay healthy. Stay well. We will do the same at Mirai, and we will keep kicking ass and taking names and enjoying the journey together. All right. Have a great night, everybody. 
