Whoo! Super Tuesday, guys. What's going on? Welcome to Boneside Mirai, Mirai Live. Super excited to have you guys in the studio tonight, and we have been chomping at the bit to get to this live stream. We've been waiting for our bald cypresses to grow and harden off and give us the indications that we can deliver this chunk of knowledge to you guys. I know Taxodium disticum, as well as Metasequoia sempervirens, our bald cypress, and our dawn redwood are massive mysteries, or at least we're not quite sure how we maximize their potential as bonsai subjects. And I hope that this stream tonight gives you guys a lot more clues and ideas of indications to how you can prune and handle the growth, and then also some ideas of how you can explore design with these species techniques you can use, and maybe the final product that we can generate. As always, got Ms. Kendall behind the keyboard. Hello, hello. Got Mr. Arthur on the decks. Hello, everyone. Lime making the sound so buttery smooth. Got Mr. Junior here taking photographs with his new digital phone. And Ricardo on the detail camera over here. We're working out some little last-minute tweaks because this tree is so big. Welcome to all of our appreciators. So Tier 1, super stoked to have you guys here. Hope you enjoy the new stream. We've had a lot of new members this past week, and we're super excited to have all you guys tuning in. Our Tier 2, Mastery, hope those archives are going well for you guys. I have and we have fielded a lot of feedback from you guys about creating a filtration function and some more things to help the archive become a little bit more user-friendly now that it's growing in its robustness. And we have heard your feedback and are actively working on that. So expect those improvements to continue enhancing your experience. For all of our Tier 3 innovators, thank you guys very much for tuning in. We've got some super cool tertiary content this week from the Bald Cypress. Some other Bald Cypress we handled in the garden and goes more in-depth into the techniques we can apply at this time of year. So we hope you guys enjoy and very much appreciate your support. Anything else? That we need to get to. Do we have a Q&A Thursday? Sure. Got that Q&A Thursday. Should we talk about where the Q&As live? We've been getting a lot of questions about that. That's right. That's right. A lot of questions about where the Q&As live. The Q&A each week lives inside the stream for that week. So we stream on Tuesday. We do Q&As on Thursday. That Thursday Q&A gets uploaded into the stream itself for that week. And we typically have the Q&A uploaded by Friday. So you guys have it for the weekend. So just if you're curious about where they're at or curious what a Q&A looks like, check that out. I think we're going to be offering a complimentary Q&A to allow everybody else to sample what that looks like and decide if that's of value to you guys in Tier 1, Tier 2, or anybody just checking out the Mirai Live website. I also wanted to just take a moment to thank all of you that are reaching out to us and sharing. How much Mirai Live is helping you in your bonsai practice or helping you to kind of reboot your bonsai passion or find that knowledge that's allowing you to pursue it at a higher level. Those kinds of emails and feedback that we're getting is absolutely what kind of compels us to continue doing that. All of the kind words and the good vibes and your guys' support means a lot. So thank you very much for everything that you've allowed us and enabled us to make happen with this. It's nothing better. We couldn't have imagined. It would be here as it is right now. Okay, so Q&A, Thursday, 5 p.m. We'll bust that one out for everybody. Sound good? Yeah? All right. That was just confirmed now. We're all nodding. Yeah, we're all nodding. We're all in. We're totally in. And I feel like there was one more thing, but I think, you know what, instead of just kind of hammering on all of these little pieces of minutia, let's keep comments focused to the topic at hand tonight. Kendall will obviously be filtering those. So that we make sure that we stay on point. And I just wanted to open this stream with a really solid fundamental discussion on the whiteboard about how we prune bald cypress, why we prune bald cypress, when we prune bald cypress to maximize the increase in ramification and the refinement as a bonsai subject. So we're going to blast into a few clips of different pruning theories. Got it. Container by Tom Benda this evening. If you guys check the web store. We just bought the past four kiln firings of Tom Benda. There's some pots that are available immediately below this stream and related content and a whole new selection of Tom Benda pots on the web store. You're going to want to check those out. I think it's his best firing and best work ever. And so you should take a look at that. Anyways, check out these clips. We're going to come back. We'll field your guys questions. We're going to dive into the work on this guy and see if we can't make something very iconically beautiful and Western in style. And we'll see you next time. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. So as we kind of pursue bonsai at Mirai and continue to explore what it means to use our native species, we've had to dive into the really depth-filled subject of horticulturally and technically how do we maximize the ability for the species to be trained and continue to refine that concept so that they better represent themselves and what they're doing. the trees that were and the species we're working with as that larger piece in a miniature form and bald cypress is one of these iconic American pieces and species that gives us so much flexibility and such a unique aesthetic and there's actually a point in my bonsai career in 2012 being at the national show in New York where I saw some outstanding flat top style bald cypress downgraded in terms of their scoring in the judging by a Japanese judge and I recognized at that point in time wow bonsai in the United States is going to have to deviate from what we commonly accept as traditional styles and forms because our species grow different and that was a real perpetuation towards bonsai exploration here at Bonsai Mirai. Bald cypress is something I've been putting a lot of time into and what I want to share with you guys today is how we go about effectively pruning a bald cypress to maximize their growth and ability to provide ramification. Because bald cypress is the deciduous conifer this is an extremely interesting study and subject and I assume that these techniques although I haven't broadly applied it over more than a dozen Don Redwoods I have played with this with Don Redwood as well and feel like this is a substantial and consistent aspect of how we handle Don Redwood and Taxodium disticum the bald cypress as deciduous conifers. So I want to talk about how we can get them to prune to maximize the amount of ramification we can get out of them in a year. So I don't want to focus on timing I want to focus on why in the indicators that the tree gives us that it's ready to be pruned in terms of how we prune them and then let's also focus on the theory of how we go about pruning them. So here we go. Bald cypress and we're saying with bald cypress we want to maximize ramification. So what does that mean. I think Hahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahaah cancer. What this means is we've got to be able to take as many flushes of growth as we can generate in a single season and prune them at the correct timing to be able to allow them to produce a second flush of ramification or in some areas of the United States a third flush of ramification. That will last harden off and be capable of withstanding that move towards dormancy. Okay. So for us in the Pacific Northwest we have the ability. The way we've been using daffodils for a long time. the opportunity to prune a bald cypress twice in a season and get two sets of ramification each year. Now our number one time to be pruning bald cypress or the first time we'll prune them in a season is in that late winter or early spring while the trees buds are just starting to swell. Now this is an awesome time to be able to prune back the growth that we allowed to grow from the previous season to a desired length so that we achieve that first starting point for our growth this year to start from. Our number two time to be pruning for us is during this portion of the year, so early summer, when that first flush of growth has started to harden off and have a vascular development that enables it to be pruned and produce a second flush of ramification from that first flush of growth. Now we run the risk if we prune this too early that we don't get enough of a vascular establishment in the first flush to be able to produce a second flush and we were on the risk if we prune it too late that the second flush of growth in the Pacific Northwest won't harden off and get to that point of vascular maturation to be able to hang on and actually become a lignified piece of branch prior to the dormant season. Okay so we're saying here in late winter early spring our indicator for the time to prune is when we see buds swell but prior to those buds actually opening up into the frond-like growth that we know bald cypress to produce. In the early summer or in the warmer areas of the country where you may be able to get three flushes of ramification the indicator that that first flush or that any flush of growth is reaching a point of vascular maturation is the reddening of the newest flush so that color transition from that really light limey green color of that elongating growth to starting to see the reddish color transition of that twig occur and what that reddish color transition is telling us is that we're having vascular tissue established that goes beyond that initial simple water distribution tissue that allows new growth to form and we're actually getting the structure for Cambiola or Eucalyptus. Here phloem sugars and carbohydrates to be produced and that tells us we also had adventitious buds present on that piece of growth that we can be pruning to and plan on another flush coming from that location. Okay so those are indicators when buds swell or when that flush of growth starts to transition from that green to that reddish color that shows us the advancement of the vascular tissue. These are the indicators so if we're in a warmer area you may see that transition of that vascular tissue happen twice or three times in a season if that's the case you have the ability to add more and more ramification. So now that we understand when we can prune we need to understand what are the aesthetic decisions that guide our pruning. So with bonsai and this is any bonsai across the board we have this concept of stepping down of thickness so we get a transition of taper from the base of the branch to the tip of the branch. Okay but what we also need to be thinking in terms of that transition is we need to be stepping down the incremental internode length of each piece of ramification so that we get that transition of that structural component of the branch to the secondary component of branch to the tertiary component of the branch to those really fine tips that ideally our bald cypress will be showing as we start to learn how to prune more and more effectively. Okay so that first structural setting of a bald cypress however we choose to do it whether it's the flat top form or it's a form that drops down maybe more reflective of you know a traditional form or a younger cypress. Okay. That first internode length we're going to want to be pruning where we want those secondary branches to be originating because those branches are going to originate very close to that cut site. So if we make that prune here we can plan on at least two if not more elongating pieces of growth to be originating from that cut site or very close to that cut site. Okay so for our second strength or length of ramification we're going to be pruning again thinking about the fact that we don't want to be duplicating that same length but in fact decreasing the length. So we may choose to prune shorter so that we start to step down our internode length and create that natural transition. Now we can assume that we will most likely get two in weaker areas we may only get one in stronger areas we may get three or four pieces of actual elongating growth that will generate a branch for us. Okay when we come back and prune this again we'll be pruning again to consider that step down. So that we get an ever decreasing size and shape of our ramification until we eventually start to form a very very fine highly ramified tip to our bald cypress. Now up to this point it's been very elusive to see bald cypress that have this kind of quality ramification but over the course of the past three years at Mirai following the operation that we're going to now show you of how we handle the foliage mass and we start to prune back that growth we're going to show you how you can maximize your bald cypress and dawn redwood to get the finest densest most highly developed ramification that would show the same quality of craftsmanship we've learned to apply to any of our other deciduous trees. Alright so take a look and we'll guide you guys through this process to help you better understand taxodium distichum. So as far as the way that bald cypress form their ramification to create this flat top really interesting canopy that we see in the natural environment they have a very unique ramification pattern and so we're typically very comfortable with in bonsai having ramification here and here and here and all of that laterally emerging now what bald cypress do that throw into the mix in addition to this is they will produce ramification that actually moves back on itself so that you get this stacking of branches with a bald cypress and it's a very interesting pattern that they form that probably has some some very definitive potential in terms of representing the species as it naturally occurs and grows and creates the canopies that we come to appreciate in bald cypress. What we really want to be careful of particularly if we're pursuing the bald cypress flat top design is that we don't build up too much volume vertically with this style and nature of branching and I would assume that this probably would be the case if we were to do something like this. It probably has a larger applicability to our secondary branching coming off of our primary structure than it does to our continued tertiary ramification so this is one opportunity that's been largely unexplored in the use of taxodium distichum that you guys may be able to implement and take that reflection of the natural environment and apply it to your bonsai to better represent the species as a whole in that miniaturized form. Something food for thought something to run with take it with a grain of salt but this is definitely something at Moriah that we're going to be exploring all right guys well I hope that was I hope that gave you a bit of an educated breakdown of what we're looking to achieve and some of the opportunities that we have pruning cypress. We actually pruned a cypress for you and we prepared some clips of that but I want to first dive into the scope of work here so when you guys go back to kind of that pruning process I can get some of the less interesting work done on this tree and then you can join me as we start to work this out. Now this is a an extremely interesting tree from the perspective that there's a lot of different opportunities for fronts and it was put into this container just so that we understood the limitations of the root system. I think it's an interesting composition I'm sure a lot of you have colorful things to say about the pot. For me this is kind of Tom Benda on the cutting edge and I thought it worked really really as an artistic expression of cypress very well with this tree. Where did this tree come from? So this tree came from Mary Madison the Buttonwood Queen in Florida. And this is a tree that oh actually no I take that. I thought you collected. So this this came from Mary Madison and one of her very close collecting partners. So yeah from Florida and it's a it's a very you know interesting bald cypress specimen. But this has been on the bench and I've actually conceptualized the design from this visible angle the entire time since it's been repotted. And just as we were sitting here talking between those clips. I started rotating it around and feeling like you know I really this is so interesting too it brings that dead portion to the forefront. Obviously the living portion moves to the back and I'll show you guys the side profile you can see how far this comes to the back. But one of the interesting things is is we've got so much length in the upper branching that we have the ability to potentially manipulate those and move those into a position and a design concept that functions very well with this is the front. And so I think this is the direction that we're going to start to go with this. Now when I start to look at this and we think about bald cypress, bald cypress generally have a high degree of asymmetry in their canopy which means as they get more and more mature if it's a cypress that's growing in a condition that would encourage that top to flatten out. We see that top definitively take on a movement in one direction or another. We very rarely see that as a central balanced symmetrical canopy. And so I see an opportunity here with this branch in the back and I'm going to rotate and show you guys this branch right here. If I can, and I believe I can, if I can I see an opportunity to bring that branch right over here and create that asymmetry in the crown by giving myself distance here and then to come back with this branch right here and actually bring that branch over and forward to create that canopy and pull that direction of the apical region more towards the front to be able to utilize this portion of the tree as opposed to this side that now I think we're considering the back. Now before we blast off into the pruning concepts and I start kind of preparing this tree for the work I know we got some questions so why don't you guys hit us with those and let's get a few of those answered before we dive back in. Vern was wondering if you always design a flat top with a site with a box. So with the material that I have here at Mirai a lot of it lends itself to that flat top style based on that buttressing trunk and that rapid transition of taper and so I do try to reflect that style of pruning. I like to think of taxodium disticum as it occurs in the natural environment and for myself that is my reference, my best reference to what an ancient cypress looks like and so for the time being yes I'm sure I will approach a piece of material in the future that doesn't warrant that design and at that time I'll have to adjust and adapt. Grant wants to know if you can artificially create knees. You know that's an interesting discussion now when we start to talk about the concept of knees for those of you guys that aren't very familiar with taxodium. Knees are actually this this lump right here is a knee that's forming on this on this cypress and knees are protrusions from the root mass or from the trunk that extend outside of the water level where this tree would experience flooding and be submerged in water for maybe fifty percent of the year and the purpose of the knees is for oxygen fixation because the roots are in the in submerged in water and they don't have access to as much oxygen as they may need. to drive cellular functions in the lower portion of the tree and so I'm not sure if there's actually an artificial way that you could drive knees except for it would make sense that maybe submerging the root mass in water could potentially do that. Now there's a few things that happen when we submerge the root mass in water and one of those is that you start to encourage the root mass to not just occupy the container but it starts to occupy the water mass of the basin that it's sitting in as well and and that I know for other species has proven to be a little bit of a challenge. A little bit detrimental to getting a more refined shape in the canopy of the tree so I would be careful with that. We plant our Bald Cypress in a hundred percent Akadama that has a large water retention capacity but more importantly a lot of organic holding capacity for those nutrients as they break down with that Akadama having that really high cation exchange and so that's kind of the way that we handle them and we water them obviously frequently but we also don't keep them constantly saturated and it gives us a really beautiful wonderful highly ramified highly dense canopy that we're achieving and you'll see that in the clips coming up. What else you got Deeds? Steven's curious what we do with our Bald Cypress in the winter. So Bald Cypress technically if they're in the ground and their roots are protected from significant freezes Bald Cypress do have a high degree of cold tolerance and they grow as far north I think there's a place a botanical garden in Minnesota that has Bald Cypress outdoors in the botanical garden. I know that you know Randy Knight has a big Bald Cypress from I I believe it's a Louisiana Bald Cypress and he leaves it out outside all year round here so it freezes very hard and it's never shown dieback from that I'm not willing to take that risk so I keep mine in the greenhouse and I keep them just above freezing so that they experience that full dormancy but also have the ability to avoid really really hard freezes. Anything else? Yeah one more question Luke's wondering if you would fertilize Bald Cypress throughout the summer since we're not going to have a family and they're going to lose their kids. So we're going to have to have some food to make sure that our crops are good for our crops. So we're going to have to make sure that our crops are good for our crops. not worried about leaf size? So fertilizing throughout the summer, the only thing that you worry about is salt accumulation when the tree stops moving as many resources. And you could potentially leave fertilizer on all summer, but bald cypress in particular in the heat of the summer relies a lot on that water uptake and that water transportation to cool itself. If we're fertilizing and it's not actively adding growth, we could potentially be competing for that water uptake. So I would recommend taking a little break in the real peak heat of the summer until we start to see shorter days and a slightly lower reduction in the temperature to fertilize again. And usually you have those two blocks of growth. You've got your spring, you've got your fall. Bald cypress is going to put on this foliage mass. It's going to hold that foliage mass and then it's going to start accumulating vascular resources to be able to prepare for winter and growth next spring. I would give it a little bit of a break if it were me just based on the fact that they need so much water to keep their system cool. We good? Yeah. All right. Okay. So we're going to blast into these clips of pruning bald cypress, how we go about it, the indicators in the branches that it's ready to be pruned, where we prune, the theory of pruning. When you guys come back from this, I'm assuming you're going to have some questions. I'm going to blast into some of the preparatory work and try to get this design moving in the right direction so that we can engage in how this tree is going to be styled when you come back. So take a look at these. We'll see you on the other side and look forward to gathering some questions from you guys. In order to be able to understand how to prune. Prune bald cypress, we first have to understand the growth and the indications the growth is giving us that it's ready to be pruned. So when we see growth first coming out, you'll notice this very, very young, fresh, most recent piece of growth has that really distinct limey green color on it. And that lime green color is saying I'm still a very, very underdeveloped, very primitive vascular system that my goal and my job is really to be transporting water and water alone to these elongating fronds until they develop the ability to start photosynthesizing. Now, as that growth continues to mature, we see that growth take on this very characteristic ruby color that's starting to indicate that the cambial layer and the phloem and all of the other vascular systems and tissues, as well as the structure of the xylem, are evolving and maturing enough to be able to transport sugars and carbohydrates from the photosynthetic process and facilitate the presence of adventitious buds that we can prune back to. Now, if that situation continues to mature, which it will and should, we start to see that red transitioning to this more straw-like color, which is the beginning of that exterior portion of phloem starting to age and be pushed to the outside as that vascular system expands. And this starts to form our very first layer of bark or exterior lignified tissue that's going to protect the tree from excess of moisture loss as this growth continues to harden and mature. Once we see that growth move from the top of the tree to the bottom of the tree, it's going to be a very, very, very strenuous process. Where does that need to be from that green color or that red color to that straw color? We know that we have the vascular system and the adventitious buds present that are going to allow us to prune, preserve that growth in its place and also produce another flush of ramification on top of that growth, which means the length that we leave that piece of growth significantly impacts how our ramification starts to create that incremental increase in size. Now, another aspect of this that I want you guys to focus on is to understand that bald cypresses are different species and they're different species. The complex species of cypresses, which is called the capella, is a group of cypresses that can be identified as or with an have a very interesting way that they form ramification and in fact if we start to look a lot of the pieces of ramification actually originate from the top of the branch and move back towards the interior of the canopy which is a very unique aspect of bald cypress. Now this isn't an actual characteristic that I've seen really highly reflected or utilized and may be part of the pruning process or decision about branch selection that we need to start to consider when we're training our bald cypress. We have a few interesting pictures that will show you about about this branch formation with mature bald cypress in the natural environment but hopefully now just by taking a look at this we start to understand the indications that we can look at in that new growth to know that it's mature enough to have those adventitious buds as it turns to that ruby red and to have that vascular system established as it turns to ruby red and from ruby red to that more straw colored lignified branch that's going to enable us to produce that second flush on that actual ruby red or straw colored piece of growth. And this is where we see the ability to get two flushes of growth in a year. One when the growth originates in the spring that elongates and makes this transition and one after pruning at this time of year or when we get these indicators hopefully leaving enough time between this pruning and the winter dormancy that this tree is going to go through so that this growth has the ability from this point forward to transition from that lime green growth that's going to go through to the next one. So this is a really interesting example of how we can make that transition to that ruby red and potentially even make that transition to the straw colored growth or lignified growth that will allow it to last over the winter season and produce growth next year. So you can see here the location that this was pruned in that late winter early spring season as the buds were swelling and the result of choosing to prune there as I get two pieces of significantly strong elongating growth. I also have a few branches that are starting to lignify that have secondary growth behind it and this is a really significant indication of just how much bald cypress will produce ramification for you if you treat them right. Now above it you can see a situation here where we pruned and on the length that I left I only got one elongating piece of growth. That's okay but that also needs to inform my pruning decisions in terms of the length that I need to leave to get two pieces of growth that will form ramification moving forward. Maybe that length selection was a little bit too long. So I'm going to leave that for now. Or maybe I need to prune back if I feel like my branch is getting too long in terms of gauging that segmented extension of our ramification. So when we're coming back in here to handle a bald cypress we never want a fully defoliated tree. We always want this tree to continue moving forward and a lot of what I'm going to be doing is cleaning out some of these frond like pieces of growth that don't have the potential to necessary elongate or become ramification off of the bottom of the branch and then selectively keep alternating pieces of growth that can contribute to ramification or alternating pieces of growth that are giving me foliar mass so that I have a little bit more of a better structure to encourage the next range and round of ramification to originate from. Now because we said branches coming off of the top of the tree could potentially play a role in a more natural form of ramification for a bald cypress, I'm starting to explore what it looks like to leave some of these pieces coming off of the top. Potentially it works in the miniaturized form, potentially it forms some structural issues that are going to prevent us from having the kind of miniaturized definition of pads or foliar mass that we need, but I think it's worth exploring and so you're going to see me leave some upper pieces and portions of growth as I go through this. So I'm just going to come in here and I'm going to selectively start to reduce some of the needle mass along this branch. Anywhere where I have pieces that are starting to show lignification in an advanced form of growth or ramification, I'm going to be removing any fronds that are on the opposite sides of those pieces so that I don't encourage a bar branch to form. So for example here I have this piece that has a few little smaller pieces of ramification on it and is showing me a very straw-like color. Now I'm going to remove growth that's around that, both on the top, on the bottom, and on the opposite side of it so that I start to give that the space to actually thicken and form ramification that can be used. Now this is definitely not giving me the kind of size and strength that that would encourage me to prune it right now. I'll let this form over the season and hopefully this will get strong enough with the reduction of growth around it that it will form into ramification that will survive once we go through that fall color change and foliar drop that Bald Cypress experience. But for the time being, leaving it and encouraging it to grow strong is going to be my best way to get it to turn to ramification. So as I move down this branch I'm just alternating again and trying to create that staggered pattern. At any of these junctions where I get ramification that I'm going to be keeping and utilizing for the design of my tree, I'm also going to be cleaning up any masses of foliage that are forming around those branch junctions. Now what we got to do when we get to the tip of this, these underdeveloped pieces are probably not going to be producing another round of ramification because like we said back here they're a little bit weak. But these stronger pieces here, I want to be making a prune close to the tip of this to have that continual step down to ramification, but also take the information that's being given to me by by the Bald Cypress's response to my initial decisions and the fact that if they're too small I only get one piece. So when I make this pruning decision I can pretty much predict and count on the fact that below these needle scales there are adventitious buds just waiting to grow if the auxin at the tip of this branch is removed by the pruning process. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to prune this to a length that feels like it is proportional to the length that I would want at the tip of this branch. When I prune the second one, I either need the second piece of ramification to be shorter than this initial cut or longer than this initial cut so that I don't create such a uniform length and distance that it looks artificial at the tip of the branch. And I'm going to say I'm going to go shorter than. Even though I risk only having one piece of ramification come from that point, shorter than does still give me that nice deviation from that synonymous length that would spell artificial. And then the one up here, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to leave this a little bit longer and these pieces will now produce hopefully two pieces of elongating growth that will have time from this point until we see the leaf drop in the fall that will fully harden and mature and become ramification we'll be pruning next year in the late winter early spring as the buds start to swell. Okay so now we've got the finished product which is a tree that's had a lot of the fronds and elongating pieces selected. Any of those pieces that were showing they were reaching that point of maturity and could be pruned to produce secondary pieces of growth or ramification were pruned to the size that falls in line with that step down of incremental internode length from secondary to tertiary to finer and finer ramification. And you can see that there's a lot more control to the growth. The bottoms have been cleaned. Any junction where ramification exists we've removed all but the piece of ramification we want to keep. We've got alternating left, upper right, left, upper really random in terms of a natural layout of the branch pattern but taking into account the way that bald cypress form their ramification as well as how we create ramification that's really valuable as a bonsai. Any of the pieces that were still very green or hadn't had the stem turn ruby red and were kind of moving towards that straw like color but still were very juvenile and weak and very green on a majority of the sides of the branches were left. We want those to grow. Those may be the only piece of ramification that we get this year. But generally when we do this kind of pruning and this clean out at this time of year if we continue to fertilize aggressively, we water the bald cypress in the way that bald cypress prefer the water, we're going to see a rapid expansion of a second flush of growth that is going to give us that ramification. And again, any pieces that were ruby red that we pruned we can expect two more pieces of ramification on those portions of growth. And this will just continue to increase the volume of finer ramification on this tree. over the course of the next several years. So I hope this helps you guys out with the pruning process and we're pretty excited to explore Bald Cypress Design with you guys. Whatcha doing? Focusing. So, essentially I was hoping while you guys were away, I would get through all of this and have it bent and be like, there you go. Because then if it broke, I could be like, you know what, I decided to prune it off, but that didn't happen. I decided to break it. No, actually, while you guys were checking out those clips, I was just applying raffia to the expanse of this branch that we're hoping to move out, have out here that's gonna define kind of that asymmetry in the flat top of this final product of the Bald Cypress and setting this structure first on this branch and then coming back to this apical piece that we really need to move in that direction to have a design that kind of pulls together as opposed to pulling apart. It's a big piece of this design composition for this tree. And so getting through these pieces and kind of setting that and knowing what we've got are the first priorities of a really major styling like this. So, the direction of my raffia, and I'm gonna apply raffia to this as well. So you guys will get to see that application of raffia. There's also some raffia application in one of the juniper clips that we have or the pieces of work from the very beginning of the Utah juniper. We'll be definitely creative. We'll be creative. We're gonna be creating a tertiary piece on how to apply raffia as a primer so that you guys have a reference. But tonight you guys are gonna get to see that applied to yet another species and kind of go through that process with me again. And for those of you that don't use raffia or don't know how to apply raffia in a way that gives you its maximum benefit, this is gonna be a really good stream for you guys because for structural setting raffia in my mind, above and beyond any other artificial sort of substance, horse wrap, electrical tape, et cetera is far superior and we'll talk about why. But for the time being, I'm just trying to very accurately apply this thick wire in the raffia and get this structure to a point where we know that we actually have a design that's gonna be able to accomplish what we want to accomplish. And a lot of that means getting this to where it needs to go. Now, bald cypress are flexible, but if we've worked with bald cypress at all, we know that they also have the capacity to break. They break very, very easily. And when they first start getting that bud swell in the spring and those buds are getting really big and juicy and green, that's actually one of the most sensitive times to be bending bald cypress because they don't have water really moving through the system with a lot of quantity yet. And so their tissue tends to be very fragile and in particular, the smaller branches tend to be extremely brittle right before they start to push out new growth. So that's something to keep in mind. When we come back to this time of year where you've got all of this foliage mass present, this is drawing a lot of water up through that system and that saturated tissue gives it a lot more flexibility. Okay? So one of the things I want to draw your guys' attention to just in terms of structural pieces of work, and we'll come back to Ricardo over here who's got a really good view of this. When we're working on raffia, we've always got to be thinking about the direction of rotation of the raffia. I'm gonna be rotating this counterclockwise to bring it to the position that I've conceptualized for this branch. And in terms of that counterclockwise rotation, I've also got to be using raffia in a counterclockwise direction so that as I twist and rotate this branch, the raffia tightens around the structure of the branch. Now notice that my structural wire as well is rotating in that counterclockwise direction so this also increases its hold on that branch as we rotate. All of the pieces to set this structure are set up so that we're gonna be working together as opposed to against each other. And this really requires that we have a significant concept of how our structure is going to end up and where we want to move that branch before we start the raffia application. Now another thing that I wanted to point out to you guys when using really thick, heavy wire, notice how my thick, heavy wire is entering the inside of each of these bends so that it's not on the outside of any one of these bends. Now this is really important because if you get this big, thick wire onto the outside of any one of these bends, what's gonna happen is you're gonna be creating a really significant distance of wire and most people would say, well but don't you want it on the outside of the bend so that it protects that bend? And the answer is no because even if you put it on the outside of this bend and we compress, what ends up happens is the wire squeezes together and pushes the wire off of the outside of that bend. So we wanna be hitting the inside of each of these bends to make sure that we're getting the shortest quantity of wire possible on the tree and the greatest holding capacity. So I guess now I have to bend this thing, huh? Moment of truth. Moment of truth. Moment of truth. Moment of truth. Whoa. Whoa, whoa, whoa. Everyone's side. Yeah, let's see if we can go a little bit farther. Okay, so I wanna talk you guys through a few pieces of bending in this process, not just on bald cypress but just in terms of bending as an application of technique. Now notice that when I'm bending here, I'm focused all the way out here on the tip and I'm rotating. Now, rotation only works so far because if we take tissue and we just rotate it, we generally will separate and then we'll start to tear the tissue at some point. So we can't just take tissue and 360 degree it. But we do have a significant amount of natural rotation that will take those vascular bundles that are generally tied up in a slight rotation and we can unwrap those vascular bundles and create a little bit of flexibility in the bend of that branch. So when I first started this bend, my hand placement was right here holding the wire against the branch and right here and I was really focused on this section of the bend. Now, as I started to feel that tighten up, I moved my hand out to here. And what ends up happening when I move my hand out to here and then I started supporting here is I transitioned the bend and the rotation from this point. To this natural bend that has that direction of movement already. And I started to use this and want to continue using this maybe even out as far as here. Not only as a kind of a leverage point here, notice that I'm holding the wire and my thumb is right here on this coil so that I'm not stripping the bark off the tree. So I'm using this as leverage but I'm also, I'm letting the tree distribute the force of this bend across an extremely large area. And what that does is that allows it, it becomes a point of tolerance and it tightens up to transition to that next point, to that next point, to that next point. Now, sometimes if we start to see a tear, we hear a pop or whatnot, we will become the point that actually, you know, when I start to establish here and I put my finger right there on that piece of wire, my finger now becomes the fulcrum for the bend. So then I'm focusing all of that bend right here on this piece of tissue. But when I'm here and I'm here, I'm actually focusing and distributing the bend across a very significant amount of tissue and that allows me to distribute that force. And this is how we take a branch that was sticking straight back in the back and now we've brought it around and around and around slowly but surely towards the front of the tree. Now, there's another piece that you guys saw if you were watching from the detail camera as I was bending and I'm going to do this again for you guys as I go a little bit farther. So notice how I'm going up and down here just ever so slightly. Okay, now what I'm doing here is I'm actually hardening the wire and bending the wire in planes that the original bend would not be tweaking that structural wire. So if we just take structural wire and we bend it in one direction or we bend it in one location, this is the only piece of wire that's contributing to the holding of that bend by hardening at this point. But if I take this and as I'm bending it, I'm just slowly moving that. I'm now moving the wire in multiple locations just a little bit not aggressive, but just a little bit just kind of distributing that force hardening that wire and it allows me to get a much more dramatic bend on that entire branch that allows me to get that movement that I wanted. So now if we blast out and you guys take a look at this all of a sudden, we've got that piece headed out in this direction exactly where we wanted it to go and already just that one move boom. We start to pull on that natural feeling and flavor of bald cypress getting that out there into that asymmetrical position to give us movement. So our trunk is coming here. This branch is moving back here. We're already adding some tension to the design and some interest to that design. And I'm sweating because that was so scary. That was really scary. That was scary. Junior, you were scared. I just like watching someone try to disarm a bomb. Yeah, it felt very bomb-like in terms of its, you know, direness. The red wire. The red wire or the blue wire. Yeah, exactly. The sweat dripping down. Exactly. All right, so I want to get this big upper apical piece dialed in in order to be totally comfortable kind of moving into the general styling. And you know, one of the things that you guys, that I wanted to use this stream to do, was to give you guys a real fundamental format for how a bonsai is initially created and how that styling process takes place. Now, I didn't go through all of the decision-making process of what prompted me to choose this as the front. And I feel like we do that on other trees really well. We've got to pick our battles. And this tree in setting the structure is a really big battle to be fought right now. But in terms of setting the structure or styling a tree for the first time, this piece with these big moves and these big decisive structural decisions, those are the pieces of the styling process that need to be done first. Because when we move this, this starts to change our concept of the aesthetic in the tree, and we respond to that movement, right? So you see a lot of people draw drawings and they have this beautiful image of what this tree is going to be and they bend it and it looks nothing like it. So they try to force the bend to get to that point or they are so stuck on that image that they may lose the opportunities afforded by the response of the tree to that bend and that new aesthetic that's created. So I'm just going to make sure that I get these two big pillars placed first. And this structural style of styling where we handle those big moves first and then move down through the styling process and maybe tweak our concept of what this tree could be. A very fundamental aspect of being able to handle any piece of material that's put on your turntable. Let's see here. I'm going to hop on the other side. Actually, I'll roll this around this way so Ricardo can show the use of raffia. Okay, so this one too, I want this rotating in this clockwise direction. Well, I guess this one was counterclockwise. We're going to be going clockwise here. Now notice that I have this little piece of gin right here. This is a great catch for my raffia to be applied to. And when I say a catch, it's a great place to start my raffia because when we're using raffia, we're trying to get as much compression on the tissue as we possibly can. A lot of people think that raffia is applied to protect the bark of the tree and that's not true. It really doesn't do anything for the bark of the tree and in fact, probably has an adverse impact on the bark of the tree. That compression, if you don't have a catch like this, and say we just start raffia right here, as we start to flex that branch, that raffia is going to pull up that branch and we're going to lose that compression. So you have to have a place either here or sometimes we'll even use the trunk if we don't have a place where we start that raffia so that we don't have the ability for that raffia to lose its compressive capacity as we bend. Okay, now watch how I start this because one of the big things about raffia is that you're showing the work that you're doing, okay? So when I go around this trunk and I take that knot up the trunk, one of the worst things that I see people do is they leave the knot intact and they cut it off afterwards and then you've got that ugly cut site. Well, I'm going to wrap over that to secure it and then I'm going to take that knot off so that I don't have that anymore and then I'm going to wrap over that cut site so that you don't even see where it began. And this is just a process of craftsmanship in terms of creating work that disguises the process. Okay, now once I get that wrap on there I'm going to have about a 30% overlap on every wrap that I make and notice how I keep this as a strap instead of pulling it together like a bundle. This allows me to get even distribution of the raffia on that branch and apply a uniform amount of compression to this tissue before I bend, okay? So every turn I make I'm going to support here and I'm going to pull here until that moisture squeezes out of that raffia. And that's how I know I've gotten the work done. That's the kind of compression that I'm really looking for. Okay, so watch again. I'm going to make sure I keep this as a strap. Get that 30% overlap. Ricardo, are you in here? Okay, watch this. Watch the moisture here. Oh, that one didn't do it. Let me get it. Let me get a juicier piece here. Okay, keep it as a strap. And notice that I'm not really struggling to keep that tension on the raffia. Okay, watch. See that moisture squeeze out of the raffia right there? That's that compression that we're looking for. And we want that compression. That's what is going to keep this branch from blowing up as we bend it. Okay, so I'm not really keeping a lot of tension on this. In fact, once I apply this, there's that water oozing out. Once I apply that, as long as I don't let it go, just a small amount of tension. Notice how relaxed that is? Small amount of tension keeps that compression in place. And that's really a significant kind of key to applying raffia in a beautiful way. And one of the reasons that people really struggle with raffia is because we feel like we've got to keep that tension on it regardless. And that is not true. We have the ability to loosen the reins a little bit as long as we don't let it go. And we don't see that compression relax. We're good to go. Because this raffia, once it stretches, it's kind of adhering to that branch to a small degree. Got some questions, Deeds? Yes, we do. What do we got? We have a question from Brian about... Brian's in Houston and talking about his bald cypress. They burn to a crisp every summer, lose their foliage. Sure. They've tried different parts of the garden in full sun and shade and just still having issues. Why do you think that occurs? What's the pH of your soil? Or pH of your water, excuse me. And what's the salt content, dissolved salts in your water? Because a lot of times if you're in Houston and you're dealing with a municipal water source, you could, particularly in the summer months where a lot of people are using a lot of water, the reservoirs or the resources where that water is being pulled from starts to become extremely drawn down. And you deal with a lot of water that's had a lot of evapotranspiration take place. And the remnants are a much higher salt concentration in the water that you're using towards the end of the summer. And the way that that conveys itself, in California when they were suffering from the massive drought, the pH of the water went from like 7 to 9 or even I think like 9.5 towards the end of the summer, the year that it got really bad. Because you were literally drawing from the bottom of the barrel and all that was left was this high content of dissolved solutes and this minimal amount of water that had that accumulation from evapotranspiration. So I would look at your water first, particularly if shading the tree is not helping with the burn problem. The other thing I would look at is wind. Because you have in Houston obviously a tremendous amount of heat. Bald cypress can take that heat. Once we put them into a shallow container or take them out of the ground, all of a sudden they are far more susceptible to that heat. So when we start to look at heat combined with what else could cause those problems, those dissolved solutes make probably a pretty good case for a potential culprit. But also, do you get a lot of wind and a lot of hot wind that would be drying out this really soft frond-like foliage that bald cypress have? If so, then maybe one of the priorities would be sheltering your trees from that wind in addition to some of the heat. Very, very common problem that you speak of right there. And even in Oregon, I got to tell you, I thought, OK, bald cypress coming from Florida, capable of tolerating the heat, love, love, love heat, they should be able to take anything. And that was not the case. We can burn a bald cypress very, very easily in Oregon in our 90, 95 or 100 degree heat. I mean, it's a given that we've got to shelter our bald cypress or we will lose all of them. And it's hard. You know, I know a lot of the technique for bald cypress in the United States centers around defoliation. We do not defoliate our bald cypress ever, right? And a lot of this comes back to the discussion that we've had about defoliation or partial defoliation of maples. And bald cypress falls into that in terms of if you fully defoliate a bald cypress, granted, nine times out of ten, it's going to respond to that with a second flush of foliage and never skip a beat. There are times where bald cypress are defoliated and their response to the defoliation is not a positive one, particularly if you're pulling on a tree that may be weakened by heat, may be weakened by issues in the roots, etc. So we're always doing that partial defoliation and that pruning as we showed in the video when the timing is right in order to ensure that our bald cypress really thrive. I feel like there was a... Yeah, Luke had a question about what's the best way of cultivating density on a bald cypress and a dawn redwood? Best way of cultivating density. So with a bald cypress density, and this is the same for any tree, and you guys really got to kind of key into how you get a tree to add foliar mass, etc. The best way to cultivate density is to expand the ramification, right? Now there's a big difference between density and thickness, right? Because when we start to talk about thickening, we have made comments about the coastal redwood and the coastal redwood's ability as a unique, very unique subject to increase its thickness based on its expanded foliage mass knowing that they have a genetic adaptation to try to get to the upper extremities of the canopy, right? So a coastal redwood may not produce a lot of foliage and stay very thin as it's elongating towards the top of the canopy. And this is why increasing its foliage mass increases the thickness of a coastal redwood and the pinching process can actually work in your favor for thickening. As far as density and increasing the density of your foliar mass as well as your tree, etc., expansion of ramification. And the big limitation that I've seen with bald cypress to date is that not many people have put a lot of information down and explored what the indicators are to prune and how you utilize that first flush, second flush, or I'm assuming potentially in the warmest portions of the country a third flush in order to be able to allow those flushes to add that ramification harden off and prepare for winter. And so, you know, one of the things that I was doing originally is I was pruning these too late and the second flush was elongating but it wasn't lignifying or developing the vascular system to be able to stay on when this tree started to shed its foliage mass for the preparation for the cold. And so we started moving our pruning back and pruning back and pruning back and we started seeing, ah, if we move the pruning back a little bit we get a little bit longer period of time and it seems to get the foliage to a state of maturity where it's going to stay on the tree. Now, obviously we went too far and we started pruning stuff that was too young which is how we explore the threshold of how many flushes we can get in a year. And when we started pruning things that were too young we failed to get ramification developing on those remaining pieces post pruning process. And so that was a really interesting discovery of the timing to how we handle this tree particularly in the Pacific Northwest but also the indicators that can be applied all across the country of that reddening of the growth from that green to the red and from that red to the straw color. And even in some of those weaker twigs we got that straw color but the twig was too weak to become a piece of ramification and so we went ahead and left it. So reading those indicators is a big part of advancing our understanding of Bald Cypress. So to follow up off that question Luke is wondering if the best way to thicken Bald Cypress is branch density or elongation? Bald Cypress is definitively elongation. They behave like a normal apically dominant tree in terms of how they thicken and expand their woody mass. But that is different than a coastal redwood. Now one of the other questions about this stream tonight is can these techniques that you're applying to Bald Cypress be applied to a Don Redwood, a Metasequoia Sempervirens? And the answer is absolutely this same technique because they're both deciduous conifers that have this kind of elongating habit that we can prune and get a second flush. Your Don Redwood can be handled in the exact same way as we're handling this tree in terms of timing for pruning, indications for pruning, places that we prune to create that ramification and that staged approach to ramification. So we start out big, the next inner node will be smaller, the next one will be smaller, the next one will be smaller, so we get that gradation of structure to secondary to tertiary to finest branches. Sujata commented that Bald Cypress in India are apically dominant as well. The branches at the apex are very thick but the lower ones are thin and straggly. How would you cultivate thickness in the lower branches? That's a good question. So based on how you saw me selecting and selectively defoliating where I'm taking off of the bottom and I'm alternating left, right, top, left, right, top or any number of patterns inside of that distribution of foliage mass, for the upper portion of the tree if you selectively defoliate and you're pruning for ramification and you let these maintain more foliage mass and don't selectively defoliate these, the accumulation of foliage mass down here will allow these to elongate and thicken more than here to catch these up to this or get these as strong as that. And this is just that simple discussion of foliage mass moving water through the tree, carrying with it minerals from the soil and creating more photosynthetic resources based on the increased density here as opposed to here. You'll transition that strength and draw a more even uniform strength across the tree. Let's see what we got here. And Grant was wondering if a weak non-elongating frond could ever become an elongating branch. That's right. That was the one that I wanted to talk about. That's a really, really good question. That's a super savvy question. So if you take the strength out of the elongating fronds and you open up that non-elongating frond to sunlight, bald cypress are very well adapted towards turning almost any type of growth into an elongating piece of growth. And this is different than, say for example, we've talked about the larch as another deciduous conifer that has two very different types of growth. In terms of it's got spurs that are growing a very minimal amount and don't typically tend to elongate and then it's got those pieces that do elongate and give us actual branching and contribution to ramification. So for a bald cypress, we can turn any piece of growth into an elongating piece of growth. If we leave it on the tree, we do that partial defoliation, we may prune those strong tips back and that can definitely stimulate some smaller, weaker, simple frond growth to become elongating frond growth. And then in terms of pruning, Brandon's wondering how much foliage can you take off safely in one time? Yeah. So knowing that we do have the ability to fully defoliate but not wanting to fully defoliate because we're not interested in rolling the dice, technically there's not a limit to what we can take off. But think about this. If we take off, say, 50% to 60% and we leave 40% to 50% or 40% to 50% intact, we've already developed a very significant amount of density or maintained that sap flow and that movement of vascular resources while we're transitioning the energy from strong to medium to weak or from strong to weaker. And so it behooves us to save foliar mass that's going to help us continue to expand that growth that we're trying to transition the strength to and in particular that second flush. We don't want to start all over with that second flush and have it have to rebuild all of the energy that it's putting in to just re-accumulating its foliar mass in the apical region. Why not use some of the foliage that's already accumulated to continue driving that forward as you prune to create new elongating pieces of growth and all of a sudden you start to recognize oh, if I defoliate I'm actually impairing the development of ramification. If I partially defoliate I'm continuing to feed the development of that ramification. Those kinds of theories about how we function with these trees are what allow us to kind of get ahead of these techniques particularly in species that are largely unexplored as bonsai subjects. Alright, so we want this apical region to be coming back over here and working with this branch that's giving us this movement. So I'm going to be bringing this over with a significant amount of force, torque, and rotation just like we did with this branch. Rotation to bring it to this left side of the tree or at least try to bring it over to the top so that we get that movement in the asymmetry here. Okay. And then this big piece that's been rotated to the back because of that clockwise rotation if you guys notice and I'm going to pull this apart and you guys are going to come back to Ricardo here the interesting thing that I did in terms of the structural wiring here and this is just a little nuance that you guys can use I hesitate to show these things without having fundamental wiring concepts established but notice how I'm spinning clockwise through here clockwise with the raffia, clockwise with these turns. And I come up here and I rotate counterclockwise here. Counterclockwise. Well as I was rotating clockwise it spun this branch because that branch was actually here it spun that branch to the back here. So by coming up and reversing the turn now I can bring this branch back over here to use it in this portion of the canopy and I get two different directions of rotation accomplished with one piece of wire. Now here's the best part about it. This is moving clockwise even out through this detailed piece so by making this a counterclockwise rotation and changing that pitch now when I come here I'm going to continue to spin clockwise with the raffia while being able to accomplish this while being able to rotate the whole structure clockwise. This is super, super complex in terms of executing you've got to have tremendous contact here with structural wire in order to get it to work. But this is a really interesting little technique that you guys can incorporate when you're starting to set structure to get these compound rotations in your structural pieces. So do you have that in mind when you start wiring? Absolutely. I know exactly where I want it to go and exactly what I want it to do otherwise I couldn't make those decisions. And that's where having clarity of thought in terms of your design is such an important part of structural setting. This piece of the bonsai styling operation is hands down the most complex and the most important. Okay, so I'm going to try to bring this towards the front. Trying to grab this so that I don't damage the branches. Let's see what that looks like. Okay, okay, okay, okay. Nice. Starting to get there. We're starting to create some layers. We're starting to create some definitive movements and directions. Let's see if I can move this a little more from the base here. Aha. Cool. Cool, very cool. You guys start to see the formation of that apex already. You're starting to see that shape that we were talking about. All right. What do you think? Arthur, what do you think? It's looking good. Yeah? Getting flat up top, we like that. Yeah, okay. So I want to give you guys a little bit of a picture, some images to reference of where we're headed with this design. I'm going to be wiring these smaller pieces with a six gauge. And when you guys come back, we'll be positioning those. But Arthur's going to take you kind of through a walk through some of the images of cypress that we use as inspiration. These were taken and generated by David Cutchins. David. Yeah. He's very excited and very appreciative. David Cutchins did a regional feature and focus on Florida and the incredibly diverse ecosystem that exists there to create all these wonderful environments and species of plants that are very, very unique to Florida. That'll be coming when the BonsaiMoray.com website launches, BonsaiMoray 2.0. You'll be able to dig into that and a lot more images from David. But we just wanted to share a few of these images with you as we kind of go through some of these more stagnant pieces of work. So take a look at these. these. Arthur's going to walk you through them, just some of the interesting photos that provide inspiration for this work. Yeah, here's our first one. Looks to be a lot like something you're working with. It's fully submerged at its base, and it's looking pretty epic. And that buttress, you know, that buttress, there's a lot of different theories about why bald cypress buttress so much. A lot of people have claimed stability, which would be a natural, you know, assumption when you're submerged in water, but it's not like they're not well anchored. And so I don't think that the buttress is stability, but what I do think the buttress is, is swelling of the tissue from a tremendous amount of water accumulating, and the fact that bald cypress need to be able to exchange water and oxygen through their tissue in order to get the kind of oxygen via the knee formation and some of the other adaptations that they've made. So it makes sense that the wood would naturally either grow faster or subside. Or simply swell and expand from being submerged in that first portion that's going to be imbibing a lot of that water. Kind of an interesting example of how they grow. I'm amazed that they're able to survive in a bonsai pot, just given the intensely different environment they exist in. This is crazy. Yeah, it's crazy. And, you know, in my mind, taxodium is one of the most adaptable tree species out there, because one of the interesting things about them is they actually, they may be submerged for six months out of the year, but then after that, they may be in extremely dry conditions for the remaining six months out of the year. So it's like this, almost like this process of extremes, when they go from wet to dry, wet to dry, wet to dry. Extremely, extremely interesting and constantly shifting ecosystem that they're existing in. What does collecting these look like? Is it difficult? I mean, it depends. You know, the collecting process depends on where you're gathering them from. Like, you know, the swamps of Louisiana, the swamps of Georgia, and some of the southeastern states outside of Florida have a very different kind of condition. And a lot of those are collected and then trunk chopped to build in some of the rapid taper. And, you know, interesting to be sure, big, thick, strong bases, big commonality. And characteristic of trees from those regions. Now, where some of these come from in Florida, they have a lot more rapid taper already built into them. And so you get kind of this natural, this very natural transition that we really value in bald cypress as a species, and makes them extremely, you know, sought after and unique and diverse. But either way, both of them have those portions of the year where they're extremely submerged underwater, and those portions where they experience that dryness. I remember you telling me a story about when you first styled a bald cypress and how that was like a pretty pivotal moment for you. It was. In terms of just thinking about bonsai design. Yeah. Well, and I think like, you know, styling a bald cypress was one experience, but I think the more significant experience for me was seeing a flat top bald cypress really well executed for the first time. And I think the first bald cypress that I ever saw was a von Banting tree at the Pacific Bonsai Museum that is still there today and actually is a part of the Natives exhibition. It's not the tree that is in front of the painting, but it is a tree that exists in that regional portion of the exhibition by von Banting. And I think, you know, von Banting being one of these pioneers of bonsai in the United States that definitely does not get enough recognition for his contributions to bonsai. And I think more than that. Yeah. I mean, he trained a lot of students that are extremely, extremely, you know, successful and iconic in American bonsai. David DeGroot, who was the original curator of the Pacific Bonsai Museum, was a von Banting student. Guy Guidry, who's probably the most well-known name in terms of bald cypress styling, was a von Banting student. And I'm sure there's, I think, Garry Marshall, who also has a very significant reputation, was a von Banting student. And there's probably, you know, countless others that have been really heavily impacted by von Banting. But that tree was like, oh, okay. This is bonsai as a natural reflection of nature. And that one... How did it look different than what you might have expected? So that was the first time that I had seen, you know, a tree really flatten off like that. And at first, I thought, I don't really like that. Because I was so used to the Japanese model of bonsai that I, you know, it didn't meet that expected standard proportion, etc. But then as you started to recognize, like, but it is interesting. They are hard to not look at and appreciate. I started recognizing, oh, this is cool. And it was almost like eating sushi for the first time for me. Like, the first time I ate sushi, I was like, no, I'm not into that. And then, like, over the course of the next couple of weeks, I was like, but actually, I kind of like that. And actually, I kind of want to do that again. And actually, like, how can I get that sushi, right? Like, you want that crab? You want the crab? Some days, you want the crab, right? So for the bald cypress, it was like, no, I'm not really into that. Actually, that's pretty tight. Actually, I want that. Okay. I want to work with those. And then the big clincher for me with bald cypress was when I was at the National Show in 2012. And my student, Michael Fadusha, from Plant City, Florida, had an absolutely phenomenal bald cypress that he had been working on as a flat top. It was displayed at Epcot. And he brought it up to the National Show. And his accent plant actually won Best Accent Plant at the National Show because he had this beautiful, it was a... nursery-bought orchid but it was an orchid that would recur native in the area where the flat-top bald cypress grows. And he had it on a piece of rotting deadwood or at least a decaying deadwood. And it was just like this beautiful, environmentally, you know, evocative accent piece. That was amazing. And I watched the judge, you know, the Japanese judge who was judging that show. that show walk by his bald cypress and shake his head kind of like in disapproval and um and that had a big impact on me because that was the minute that i realized oh we're gonna have to we're gonna have to kind of reset our concepts of what is good and what is not good in bonsai in the united states and because the the natural reflections of our landscape are not something that people that aren't aware of these landscapes may necessarily be able to appreciate or understand and driving back across the country from that exhibition was when i came up with the redwood forest and kind of decided to devote myself um to representing the landscapes that are native to me and that that was the change that was the change of our approach at mirai right there and it was all based on michael fiducia's flat top bald cypress change the game change the game change the game anytime you put a new idea out there and you give it enough time to really consider it you know for me removing my bias taking a moment to look at it and think what was he doing here and then getting it and it was like ah that's better that's that actually is truer to me and my experience is living here and gosh think about all the shapes that are not represented in bonsai that we could represent uh that that that that one changed the game uh john has a question about that buttressing that we saw in the wild photos um how do you help recreate that would submerging a bonsai in the water help recreate that yeah i mean that's a good question and again i i i can't actually answer that i don't i do not i do not know how to artificially obtain that and maybe that's to say like that is the special part about a collected bald cypress is that buttressing or maybe it is to say submersion could over the course of time help you achieve that buttressing now bear in mind that you know this tree here is probably well over 100 years old right um particularly the region where these come from this this is an old tree and so you know to get the buttress that you see here 100 plus years of submerging it in water in the water and then you can't achieve that container you might get there right um but i think it also speaks to when you find those pieces of material that have that buttress i believe that bald cypress have been abused as a bonsai specimen in the united states to date from the perspective that they have not been valued and appreciated for how special they are and and the reason that i say that is because you don't see a lot of them from florida or these southeastern regions that have actually spectacular bald cypress like it's like the same thing as talking about southern california and the california junipers where are all the southern california junipers where are all the spectacular bald cypress now i know there's like mary madison obviously has some spectacular ones ed trout i've seen ed trout you know has tremendous bald cypress for us he's had some amazing bald cypress i know there are people in texas some of my students in fact that are really doing wonderful things with them but bald cypress have been in collection for as long as people have been practicing in bonsai and a lot of those ancient bald cypress are no longer in existence. And I just, I think it's because we haven't given them the respect that they deserve and they've been something that's been available. And I think we're starting to recognize that they are something that are not going to be as plentiful moving forward. And we need to really value the material that we have. Well, they're so unique and just like jaw dropping. Very much so. And, and, you know, again, it's like when, when you're in a place where you have an abundance of them, maybe you don't value them as much as you should. And when you're in a place that, that you don't have them, you value them way more than maybe you should. Yeah. Maybe it's because we don't see any around here that they catch my eye so much more. They're very evocative, aren't they? Yeah. Stephen has a really interesting question about the balance. Balance of oxygen and water in the container. He commented that bald cypress kind of make a mockery of that in terms of they can survive in water, submerged or without. What is the best balance for this type of tree in the container? That's a really good question. So, um, before we go there and remind me of that, I just want to kind of catch you guys up on where we're at and what I'm thinking as I'm styling this. So notice now that we've, we've brought a lot of that visual mass back. Now we do have the ability to pull this more, right? We can always come more to this direction, but notice how we've created kind of that flat top. We do have some elevation difference here, a little lower here, a little higher here, probably needs some elongation and development of the apical region here, but that's okay. If this front is giving us a better front, which I do think it is, we've got a little bit of depth here so that it's not as two dimensional. This felt a little bit flat right here. We had this awkward root. That's always going to need to be alive because it's feeding a portion of this piece right here. If you notice the twists in the bark and that striation, I'm guessing this is what's feeding this branch right here. So we're always going to need to keep that if we want this second trunk to be alive, but we get more dimension over here. We get a much stronger hold. We get this kind of movement. We get this kind of movement. So we get front to back depth. But as a result, when you guys look from the side, you notice how far back this is leaning means we've got to grow that forward in order to have that still feel like the tree is bowing to you a little bit and pulling you in to look at it and enjoy its aesthetic. Okay. Feeling really good. How are you feeling about this? Junior, you in? I'm in. Cool. Cool. Okay, Kendall, so come back to that point that you just made. Yeah, oxygen and water balance for this type of tree in comparison to other species. Good. Good. And I'm assuming that there are scientific, scientific articles out there that would reinforce this idea, and I would invite you guys to explore this. Because any time, any time you guys hear us say something, these are theories that we've investigated, that we've done research on, but it does not mean that we are the, we are saying that we're exactly right. There was the Krumholtz concept that we had in the Alpine of what stunts trees, and there's an oxygen limitation up there. Now, that idea has continued to evolve. And I had, and there's further concepts and discussions about that that we can have at a later date. But I've got amazing things to talk to you guys about that. From that discussion, that stimulated a lot of back and forth about the actual conditions that do stunt trees at Timberline. But as far as Bald Cypress, if you're thinking about the fact that they have this tissue that is able to imbibe water and engage in a lot of oxygen exchange, which is why they're producing these knees that poke up out of the water. In order for those knees to fix oxygen, they've got to be able to take in oxygen. They've got to have a high porosity through their bark. The bark has holes in the bark called lenticels that allow gaseous exchange and moisture exchange through the living tissue as well as through the foliage mass itself. This is an interesting thing. This is why we don't debark a freshly collected juniper, because that may be protecting excessive moisture loss as that tree is reconnecting foliage to roots, right? But if it's imbibing all of that and it's starting to swell, it makes sense that it can stay in the water, that that would cause the thickening of the wood, but also balance of water and oxygen in the soil becomes a concept secondary to that moisture and that capacity to imbibe oxygen through the bark itself. So I would say that's why we can get away with it, and that's why balance of water and oxygen isn't as important for a bald cypress. And then Reni had a question about, to kind of piggyback on the buttressing conversation. Does that growth occur? Because of soil eroding away from the roots? The buttressing? Yeah. No, I think it occurs because there's standing water around the roots for half of the year. And again, the discussion, and I'm just going to say this, you know, again, one of the theories is that that is for stability when you've got water, but we all know if you've been to places where old growth bald cypress grows, some of the water can be fairly swift in terms of its movement, but a lot of it is not very swift in terms of its movement. Now, they don't, they, I think you see the best bald cypress grow in moving water. So the water does have motion, and that's what keeps oxygen rich, and that's what keeps fresh water around their base. But when you start to talk about, you start to talk about that buttressing trunk, I think, my feeling is, and from the research I've done, that's a product of the wood being extremely porous and that wood swelling or taking on more growth at the base as a result of that. Okay. And that's the result of that submersion in the water. So there's not, there's not erosion happening because bald cypress typically tend to grow very close to sea level with a very limited amount of elevation. Granted, they grow in fresh water, not salt water, but it's not like they have a lot of elevation for erosion to be taking place. And I don't think that they have a lot of, even though there's moving water, I don't think that there's probably a massive amount of erosion that would be removing so much water that you would expose that buttressing trunk. Aaron commented that the Vaughan Banting Bald Cypress at the National Museum died at some point. At the National? Yeah. Not the one at PBM though, right? I don't think so. So what I'm saying is the one at PBM was the one that really had, and I just saw it when we were up there last time. No, but he was commenting that he thinks that it died because there might be a link between the environment and the formation. So I don't think so. of the buttress trunk and the knee roots like maybe it wasn't able to it wasn't able to fix oxygen right you know um one of the things the knee root died not the tree ah the knee root died yeah and and you know what's interesting about that to talk just to talk about those knees is a lot of times when you take a bald cypress that's gotten got knees on it and you take it out of collection with those knees a lot of times the knees do die and and uh and that could be a direct discussion of their lack of necessity and inefficiency in terms of nutritional kind of uptake or demands um that also could be a discussion of just the fact that they need that submersion of water to maintain the water content in a less evolved vascular system because if you think about the fact that a knee is imbibing oxygen and it's fixing oxygen as it's as its purpose for a tree that's fully submerged that's a very very extremely simple vascular system that's a very very extremely simple vascular system that's a very very extremely simple vascular system and so if the vascular system is extremely simple and the tree says well i don't need you anymore it makes sense that that vascular system then could be replaced or or discarded of okay now let me talk you guys through kind of the fundamental movement that i put into these bald cypress branches because this is a very important point when we start creating lower elevation trees or trees that are having this expansive canopy and this is very similar for deciduous trees this being a deciduous conifer that's not what i'm talking about i'm just saying in terms of trees that are growing at elevations that are giving them these big full robust canopies etc whenever we're insinuating lower elevation in design right our first move from the trunk is always up and when we start to think about design the way that we reflect environment and design is from the shoulder so if you look at trees that grow in the alpine all of the colors of those branches the first move of those branches is usually down or at the most slightly lateral like a ponderosa pine would be slightly lateral because they've got memory in their tissue but spruce anything at the high alpine would be down really sharp angle and this is showing snow that's showing your higher elevation anything that's at sea level you typically tend to see up so this goes for our shore pines this goes for our sitka spruce this can go for monterey cypress this goes for bald cypress the very fundamental aspect of environment is the way that that branch emerges from the trunk and that structure is formed and that is expressing the place that that tree grows so my first move with these is always going to be up and then either out down or out up out up depending on where I need the elevation of that branch in in relative proportion to the visual design of this tree so as I'm placing these two one of the things that you guys should notice looking from the front is my lack of depth back here so I took this one because these are very very close together you would consider this a structural flaw typically and if they continue to swell we're probably going to have to make a decision but right now taking this to the back and starting to use this as depth and creating just a little bit more or less elevation and maybe when I look at this this front one that occurs naturally higher should be higher and this one may actually benefit from being lower actually I don't like that I actually I gotta say and this is like this is one of those like things where you say if this occurs higher it should be higher and then you do it and that that like one in a hundred times it works better this way this feels far more attractive that way I'm going to go with it maybe that's something I'll regret but it feels right right now okay notice even here the natural shape of this is that upward motion which is just a total testament to the way that bald cypress grow now this is the only living piece on this portion of the trunk if you notice and there's three branches emerging from this now deciding which one of these we want to keep right I definitely want to keep the stronger of the three branches so I'm going to take off the smaller of the two because it's coming across it and kind of hiding some of the magnificence of this trunk and I'm going to work with these two now watch how I wire this because when we get to a portion in a trunk where we've got one branch emerging from a trunk with nothing to combine to this is usually a conundrum for a lot of us and there's a very fancy way that we can wire this and have this look good and function at the same time okay I want to go ahead and show you the other side so I'm going to take off the smaller of the two because it's coming across it and kind of watch closely here so I'm going to bring one of these across the top here okay and I just want to support so that I don't do any damage to the vascular tissue of that branch as I'm kind of putting a lot of the torque and pressure from that wire on it okay so that's one across the top now I'm going to keep this as beautifully straight as possible and I'm going to come in on the bottom of this shoulder here okay now notice where my thumb is and if you guys have been watching the way I've been handling that foregauge or any of this structural you'll notice that my thumb is always holding that wire into the shoulder of that branch right now one of our tendencies a lot of times when we enter the shoulder is to make a really tight turn so hug that up against that and wrap that shoulder that's not what we want we actually want to come into that shoulder and come off of that at the same angle that we're taking on all of our other turns which for us is an angle beyond 45 degrees we put a steeper much steeper angle into our wire so that we apply less wire we work hard in it less and have more function left over so notice that contact and notice that similarity of these angles that's what creates the the aesthetic beauty of that methodology for handling that and all of a sudden you have one piece of wire that's just a small little band on that trunk and we've got both branches wired it gives us a lot of structural integrity in the technique and it looks pretty darn good too because what the typical thing would be it would be a little bit more of a no need would be to wire down here or wire up to here and you have this wire that look like a crap in it it doesn't function very well either because getting enough torque and enough bend on this thick structural wire when you're just wrapping up this usually ends up coming undone and scarring up your trunk and all that other stuff So this first time, I'm not super worried about really, really refining the growth on this. And I'm also not worried about my alternating, even though naturally as I'm wiring, I'm getting this alternating pattern and distribution because I've got to make spaces for that wire to get through. But I'm not necessarily super worried about the defoliation or the pruning that I showed you in the more advanced flat-top bald cypress that you guys saw in the tertiary clips. So if you're watching, I'm being extremely careful because I want to maintain as much foliage as possible, and I want to keep this tree moving forward, like forward, forward, massive growth, thickening, structural setting, etc. This is what's going to get me into that phase of refinement where I can come back and start pruning and making those decisions that are giving me one to two to four to eight pieces of ramification over the course of, say, two or three years. And then now, when we start to talk about, we have a trunk here that's down here. We have a trunk here that's down here. And in this dead trunk, we've got this transition of energy. This did have a tremendous amount of apical dominance that was suppressing vertical growth of branches below it, and they were looking for sun. Now, this has died quite a while ago, so we would have a trunk or a branch that's taken over as the apical leader to reestablish that apical dominance, accumulate that oxygen, and suppress growth of branches below it. But when we start to look at how a bald cypress flattens off, this is a direct... This is a direct discussion of how much can the tension that's placed on the water column raise that column of water against the force of gravity, and how tightly do those water molecules adhere to the vascular system that makes up the xylem of a bald cypress. So where they stop adhering, or where their ability to pull via evapotranspiration can't fight gravity any longer, that's when we reach the top of the verticality and we get lateral spread of our branching. And this is what creates the flat top on a bald cypress. Okay? But down here, this clearly hasn't gotten this high and doesn't have that flat top spread, so we're going to have this piece with this dead trunk above it that's going to show that next generation taking over that verticality of that trunk. I want to reflect a lot of these natural things that are happening in the shape of this tree, so I'm just going to kind of create some subtle movement and kind of start to insinuate the beginning of another apex with this piece. And I think the more that you guys spend time out in the mountains or out in the swamps or out in the woods, wherever your environment of choice is that you're studying, and there are so many of them in North America, so many of them in Europe, so many of them in South America, I mean, we really do live on an amazing, you know, floating ball of goodness called Earth. Like, there's a lot of serious stuff to be taking into. And enjoying and learning from. The more you guys are out there and the more you're experiencing this, the better the bonsai that you're going to make, period. Any questions? Yeah. Steven was wondering about that awkward root at the base of the tree. Uh-huh. He wanted to clarify first. So xylem cells have small holes that allow lateral movement of water in the trunk. Correct? Xylem. So xylem is a tubular structure, typically, right? Tracheids form xylem. Tracheids are cells that are tubular in shape. And at the top of that tube, you've got a thing called a sieve plate, right? And a sieve plate is a perforated plate that allows water to move vertically. So you've got a tube here. And there's a plate between the tubes. And it's got a bunch of puncture sites. And it's got a lot of holes in it, right? And water moves vertically. Now, what that does is if you get an embolism or you get oxygen entering that vascular system, as opposed to that oxen breaking the chain of water as it's moving up that tree and continuing to cause the breaking of that chain so you cut off all water transport, that sieve plate, boom, closes. Now, along the side of that tube, you also have holes that allow lateral transport, right? Now, in junipers and trees that have a lot of pitch, as lateral transport occurs, pitch starts to clog that lateral transport. And this is why we become very vein-specific with junipers, one root to one foliage mass in a lot of deadwood. Now, do cypress have a lot of pitch that they're moving? And do they lose that lateral transport? I do not know that. I can't answer that. It doesn't appear as though you see that kind of delineation of root to foliage mass as much. But even in this tree, I'm saying this root back here feels like it has that movement following the bark to that point where there's death. And so I feel like it's not capable. It's not capable of being removed, at least not right now. He was just curious if that lateral movement would be sufficient enough to supply that second trunk. I don't have the confidence in that to be willing to risk it and lose the value of this trunk. Because I think that this little piece here, you know, when we talk about a tree telling a story, this little piece here, that's a good story. How we doing on time? Hour and a half. Hour and a half. Hour and a half. Hour and a half. Hot dang. Dale was wondering about your opinion on sacrifice branches. Ah. I mean, I think they're, I think, I think they work. I don't know. What is, could you clarify for me what that is? Could we clarify a sacrifice branch? Sure. I mean, so I think that sacrifice branches are probably something that as Americans, a lot of times we are too impatient to be applying correctly. But a sacrifice branch is something that we can do. A sacrifice branch is typically, ooh, get that bark popping. So any time you have a heavy bark production in a branch, a lot of times the first time that you make a bend, the bark is actually the piece that pops. So you guys can hear that . That's actually bark. So as far as a sacrifice branch is concerned, a sacrifice branch is a branch that we would be using to achieve something other than a final piece of structure or a final piece of the tree. So we're using that branch either to increase thickening, increase elongation, heal a wound, or add foliage mass. These are all the things that we use sacrifice branches for. And so we could have a sacrifice branch, for example, if I just let one of these branches take off and I didn't intend for it to form the canopy of this tree, I'm just using it to thicken the girth of this as it gets longer and accumulates more foliage mass, I would eventually come back and cut it off when this reaches the thickness that I want. So that would be a sacrifice branch. And they're very effective towards the advancement of the quality of the tree, particularly when you start with something like this where I'm going to have to grow this apical region forward. I'm going to have to do some things to thicken this area that's very juvenile. So I will need sacrifice branches, and I use them pretty significantly. Mr. Kimura had a very, very interesting relationship with sacrifice branches. He really used sacrifice branches as a part of the design until they simply did not fit anymore. And then he would go ahead and he would shed them, true to their sacrificial form, he would go ahead and shed them and move the design forward without them. And that was always interesting to see a sacrificial branch that wasn't necessarily a sacrificial branch until it just wasn't necessary. necessary anymore. And Mr. Kimura would always sit with the design, you know, and he likes to smoke a lot of cigarettes, which is all good, you know, shout out to tobacco. Not a Mariah thing, but definitely a part of Japan. And he would sit, and he would smoke his tobacco, and he would say, in two years, this branch and this branch are going to come off. In four years, if this branch develops and this branch develops, I'm going to take this one off, or I'm going to shorten it, create a gin here. In six years, I would assume this will come off, this will come off, and this will come off. That will depend on if this does this, this does this, and this does this. Well, so he thought that far ahead. Absolutely. I mean, and you have to. You have to. You know, because one of the ways that we're so used to working on bonsai in the United States is you go into a workshop, workshop leader comes by and goes, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. And you've got like four branches left, and this tree that was like super robust and bushy, and you're like, oh my gosh, this is a great tree. You're looking at it, it's like Charlie Brown's Christmas tree, and you're like, holy crap, I hope this thing lives. And that is a very common occurrence. Well, the one thing that you guys have to understand in a tree like this, or a lot of the trees that we utilize in bonsai, this branch feeds this branch, feeds this branch, feeds this branch. Whether they're feeding each other because this photosynthetic material can move laterally and feed this, or whether they're feeding each other from the perspective that this is taking up water, this is taking up water, and both of those are maintaining water-oxygen balance in the container, which I know we said on cypress doesn't apply, but this is a general bonsai concept for pines, junipers, deciduous trees, it does. Sometimes that, that ecosystem that you're disrupting via that method of working is really, really detrimental. And so Mr. Kimura would always use those pieces to design with, and then if they evolved the way that he thought, which he did have that plan, then he would go ahead and he would make those decisions as it followed suit, or every time he sat down, he would rethink that design and take what the tree had given him over the course of the growing season, and he would utilize the new image to create a tree. Very, very, very, very enlightening to watch Mr. Kimura work over six years, and it has, I mean, obviously had an impact on the way that I work, but I mean, I think more than anything, you know, you guys watching tonight, we set the structure, we made those big moves, we're still setting the structure, we're going to come back to secondary tertiary, and then we'll finalize the design. That pattern of working was every single tree that came in, there was a format to work on it. There was a process that you went through, there was logic, every single tree that you designed, there was a process, there was logic, and having that consistency and sharing that consistency with you guys, it's what allowed Mr. Kimura to innovate, it's what's going to allow you guys to innovate. Do you think that far ahead with your trees? I do, I do, I definitely do, and that's why, you know, there's a lot of times where I'll be working trees with students, and they'll say, I want to take this off, and I'm going to say, not yet, not yet, maybe we haven't set the structure yet, so it's not time to take it off, because what if something breaks in those big moves? Patient, we set that structure, it's all good, then we take it off. But at the same time, you maintain a lot of flexibility with your ideas, like often you'll come in and say, oh, I thought I was going to do something different with this tree, and now I'm going in this direction. Absolutely, you know, because I think one of the biggest impediments to bonsai design is the drawn picture, and I think one of the biggest impediments to bonsai design is the drawn picture, because I think a lot of people look at a drawn picture and say, oh, okay, the design of this bonsai is already figured out, right? Like it's finished, final. Yeah, like this is it, once we realize this, we're done, our job is done. And I think my feeling in that is the drawn picture is just an idea, but the next time you sit down, you need to redraw that picture, and the next time you sit down after that, you need to redraw that picture, because every single time that you try to pull a tree back to a concept that was developed on a tree that had not as much growth, not as much maturity, hadn't given you input into the design that you chose. Every time you pull it back, you're taking two steps forward in bonsai design, and then you're pulling it right back to the beginning, and that's not how you advance a tree. And this is why we don't see trees in the United States that are as finished, or we didn't. And now that concept of how you build design, how you continue to revamp that design, how you continue to broaden that design and improve that design by being open-minded every time we sit down and we take that tree's feedback from the work that we do. For example, maybe I do this, and maybe one of these branches dies. If that's the case, we go here, the tree gives us feedback. No, I don't like that direction. Ah, but the growth here is so much stronger, and maybe we go back that way. That could be a response. So the long-term planning is more of like viewing the tree's potential, leaving options for potential, and then seeing how the tree responds back to you, and not some like, in six years it will look exactly like this. Right, that, and I think bonsai design, where it's gone to. From the traditional model to where you're starting to see it at now, is you're starting to see that there's not as much necessity to create left-right-back, left-right-back. Like that patternized, orthodox approach to bonsai, I think you're seeing people letting that go. You know, that was a concept that existed post-World War II, original sort of introduction to bonsai still exists in Japan to some degree because it is part of their tradition. But that doesn't mean that it's necessarily part of. Our necessity to practice bonsai, and I will still say this, practicing the orthodox style of bonsai, if you can make a good orthodox tree, which means an interesting tree that has an orthodox branch pattern, that takes a tremendous amount of skill. But there's so many other shapes that we can create that we need to be open to. That is not the end-all, be-all, and not the dominant way to style a bonsai anymore. And so I think that created a lot of those really sedentary. Design concepts, just to wrap that thought process up. So how would Mr. Kimura style this tree, do you think? You know, that's really interesting. I think if you took Mr. Kimura to see the Bald Cypress, he would probably be pulling on a lot of natural components. You know, and one of the things, again, like Mr. Kimura, as he's evolved in his career, his avant-garde-ness, if you will, or the necessity to explore, that hunger to explore bonsai as an aesthetic art, I think he has, I think he's satisfied his appetite to some degree, you know, and I think that that comes from just having done it for so long and the effort that it takes to explore. He's put that effort in, he's accomplished those things, he's at the top of the ladder, and at some point, you know, you can't continue to necessarily innovate at the level that he was innovating at for, you know, the majority of his career. And so you see his work becoming a little more passive, a little more traditional. A little more quiet and calm, and I think a little bit less dramatic and evocative. But when Mr. Kimura was at the peak of his creativity and was really pushing the envelope, he was going to the natural environment and he was reading natural trees, in my mind, more accurately than any other artist ever had. And when I say reading natural trees, he was looking at the environment. He was looking at the growth habit. He was figuring out how he recreated that in a miniature form, and that interpretation of larger to smaller to convey that characteristic that made that tree quintessential was something that I think Mr. Kimura started or at least continued to accentuate from that rougher Japanese model of the early 1900s through post-World War II. And he took that and he built on that, and that is really, really interesting to me. You know, there was, we had a discussion in our Pines II class this past weekend, which was probably one of the best discussions I've ever had about bonsai design. It got quite heated and contentious, and that's great, right? That's when you're starting to actually do something, when you touch a nerve and you start to have some spirited debate and a stake in the game of the ideas that are generated in those conversations. But one of the things that, you know, we started recognizing is as we're addressing... As we're advancing this bonsai design, Mr. Kimura never viewed the deadwood that he created as, or he never viewed what he was trying to do when he was creating deadwood as duplicating nature. And that's what a lot of people don't understand about Mr. Kimura's carving. Mr. Kimura's carving was a statement about art and sculpture and using wood as a medium that he reflected light and shadow. You know, and he compared it more to sculpting of marble than he did of sculpting of wood when he was carving. And the original sort of exploration of using chainsaws and power tools and developing these radical aesthetics and techniques. I mean, he was really, really set into the artistic practice of carving to explore those concepts artistically. And this last week in the class, what we discovered, or at least I think something that we started to touch on, was this concept that you have the ability to create bonsai that reflects a traditional pattern. You have the ability to create... You have the ability to create bonsai that reflects a tree in its natural environment and miniature. But then you also have these components, as we start to talk about bonsai moving forward as an art, that are a part of visual design that we adhere to because visual design dictates how we experience what we're looking at. And nature can be a little bit too random for us to see beauty in it. The traditional model can be a little too tight for us to see the freedom in it. And the concept of design can be a little bit... A little bit too nebulous for us to identify with it. And so you almost have like this triad of parts that you're like pulling on. And I... It was the first time that I thought about it in the group, our Pines 2 group. I mean, I really commend you guys, Linda and Doug and Keith and Jim and... Oh, Dan. You know, you guys really... Oh, Mark and Kathy as well. Shout out to Mark and Kathy. You guys really pushed me as an instructor to think about design differently. And I'll forever thank you guys for that. Because that was really incredible. Sorry, that was a rant. That was deep. That was a rant. No, that was awesome. I think this tree is very iconic. Iconic in my mind. Or this species is iconic in my mind. And thinking about starting to design from a wild environment. Because it's so strange the way it grows in the wild. It is very strange. Isn't it? Where it's like that windswept kind of like Krumholtz pine. It's like, oh yeah, that's a tree. But this is like, what? Yeah, what is that? Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And, you know, we've got a bald cypress forest on site that I, you know, had the pleasure of, you know, going and finding the trees myself. Or at least a portion of them, you know. And it's been interesting. Because that one kind of started out with the same kind of freedom of... And putting these pieces in place, kind of knowing where it would be in the future, but not really seeing the clear path right now until you start to expand that structure. And this is where, you know, bald cypress or dawn redwood and, you know, metasequoia sempervirens, we've talked about it a lot. Or haven't talked about it a lot. But it is... I'm using bald cypress and metasequoia sempervirens almost interchangeably tonight in my thought process. Because you can do this. It's the same thing. Although they do grow differently, you can do the same techniques and the same concept apply. Because now we're going from a conifer to a deciduous conifer. And that means that constructing the ramification that this tree needs to execute that final design is going to be giving us an influence of that final shape for... You know, we won't start to see that final product for at least two to three years. Where we're starting to get that real reflection of what it actually is. What it's going to look like. And there's going to be a lot of questions and discomfort in this design. And that's okay. You know, that's okay. That's a part of deciduous work where you say, this is what it looks like now. As soon as I have, you know, three times the branches on it, it's going to be incredible. And this tree will get there. It will absolutely get there. You mentioned earlier that with bald cypress design, big trunk cuts, trunk chops are pretty common. Pretty common. Could you walk us through the healing process of what that looks like? Or how you manage? That in design? Yeah. And I definitely... That's a great question. And I also need to say inside of this that there is a lot of exploration into how to do that more effectively right now. And I think there's a lot of people... Dale Brock, who's on the chat, you know, is always working on new techniques. And I know Gary Marshall, a long time ago, came up with the conical cut as opposed to what our standard flat or concave cut is. So the callus heals up around it and actually forms a cylindrical trunk. And Dale is, you know, kind of expanding on that. And there's a lot of different ways that you can do that. But bald cypress rolls so vigorously and produces so much tissue when we pull it out of the wild and we put it into bonsai cultivation and we give it everything that it needs. That you actually, when you start to heal a bald cypress and you make that trunk chop, a lot of times the best way to heal that trunk chop is to create the structure that you want that callus to heal on. To give you that continuation of that cylindrical. The cylindrical trunk all the way up through the apical region. Now, obviously, we're allowing the apex to grow freely, add foliage mass, which those photosynthetic resources cause the expansion of vascular tissue that heals that wound. But the big deal about creating that convexity, where we actually have the cut rounded so that the callus can crawl up over this, is the big point about bald cypress that allows us to achieve a final natural image. And that's, I think, for bald cypress, a very specific and unique technique. And then what about... Like big root cuts. The one on the back is cut pretty flat. Yeah, right here, right? Yeah. And so, you know, as we start to work with this, I'm assuming there's... Actually, I'm not assuming, I know. There's living roots at the bottom of this cut and this cut is probably going to rot. So what we'll do is we'll actually let this deteriorate ourselves and we'll pull out that pithy wood to get down to that portion of root that's still alive. And we'll allow that to turn into a natural feature itself. And I'm not in any rush. This is three, four, five years away from really showing you. I'll show you guys what the image of this is. I'm not in a rush to try and push that forward any farther. I'll let that rot naturally. I'll take that rot out. I'll save that living root because I know this needs to stay intact. And then we'll allow that to evolve and develop on its own free of my touch except for to remove what the rotten portions are. And the one on the back, are you going to leave it as is or do you have something in mind? So ideally, this one on the back here, what I hope happens is that I can transition. And Ricardo, if you can show the base of this here. Ideally, this is actually a living root right here. This is a root that's coming off of this. Ideally, what I would do is I would like to see the transition of this to become the primary root that's allocating resources through this. Now, this root is seriously underdeveloped, like virtually no fine roots and these roots here carried a lot of fine roots. So we save these. The hope is that this can develop. If we see this expand and we see this shrink, then we're going to know that that transition is taking place and we can hopefully at some point remove this or turn it into a little feature. At the base of the tree. So even when I'm kind of wiring here, you know, one of the things that is constantly brought up in just watching students work and seeing people work bonsai is there's not a lot of detail or there could be more, I guess. Let me put it that way because I know we're all trying our best. There could be more detail done in the manicuring process of a branch. But if there's a lot of detail to prepare it for wiring, then we actually take the time to do for the most part in the United States. And, you know, whenever you guys watch me wire on this stream, notice how much time, I mean, it's not like I sit here and take my sweet time doing it. But notice how much time goes into preparing a branch to be wired just so that I'm not crushing needles, I'm not breaking things, I'm able to work, and I'm going to pull this back here just so you guys can see here. I'm able to work within kind of the structure that I set out by that cleaning process. So I don't have to come off the bottom of the branch because I don't want branches forming off of the bottom of the branch so I can remove those and feel very good. But also because the bottom of that branch is the point where I can create definition between my pads, whether it's in a flat top style or whether that's in a juniper or whether that's in a pine, it's the same. But that attention to detail of creating those really clean spaces for you to be able to apply the wire, I don't even hear a lot of instructors talk about that process. And I was telling my students this past week in pines, because in pines, this is paramount, in pines, you've got all of these needles like this. If you don't clean off these bottom needles or pull those up, you're always going to have all these needles hanging between this branch pad and you lose that definition. And it's imperative that we make that happen. And I told my students this past week and I said, listen, you could be terrible at wiring and great at cleaning and produce a better quality result than being terrible at cleaning and great at wiring. So you might as well learn to wire as a part of your work. You might as well learn to wire as a part of the design process. And when I talk about wiring, wiring for me means the actual physical act of wiring. But prior to that, it means cleaning and preparing the branch. And after that, it means styling the branch. And as far as the vocabulary of wiring is concerned, that all is wiring. So never would you apply wire to a tree to not shape it. And never would you wire a tree without cleaning it. So the process of wiring is to say all of those are wiring. And I think our vocabulary in the United States in particular, but even in Europe, you know, we see them wire the whole tree. Every time I wire a branch, I style that branch. And this is dictating where the next branch is going to be wired and how the next branch is going to be wired in order to be styled in combination with that concept that created that branch that I just finished. So now I'm going to wire these two together. Their wiring has been dictated by the shape of that branch now. Sergio had a comment about design. He commented that, so there are bonsai designs that are more abstract in nature and others reflect nature more accurately as an image, like an essence. What are your thoughts on this, on the spectrum of super abstract to nature exactly? Well, I mean, so this is, you know, and this is where your reference to uniqueness in the natural environment versus quintessentially quality. I think that's really common and representative in the natural environment because you have pieces of material, particularly when dealing with collected material, that give you the opportunity to explore the unique, to show an environment, to show a condition, to show a natural element that's impacted the shape of that tree. Those trees that have those oddities and those characteristics that you don't typically see, if you don't capture those and you pull that back into normal, in my mind, you've done that material a significant disservice. And there's a lot of that that used to happen and is still happening. Where people try to pull that back into a more fundamental model of design. And then you have those components, right? Those growth habits that are quintessential, right? Like, for example, the flat top of a bald cypress. Now, Arthur took you guys through. Did you take them through all those photos, Arthur? Yes, I did. The only two that I have queued up are a picture of your forest that you made in the winter, the bald cypress forest, and a before shot of this tree. What about David Cutchins' pictures, though? Did you walk them through those? Yeah. So Arthur showed you those and you saw just this tremendous diversity of shapes that bald cypress can take, right? And so, in my mind, when you start talking about the more abstract, Sergio, I think you have the opportunity to do something special. When you're talking about the more quintessential or representative shapes, you have the opportunity to be very discussive and representative of nature and miniature. And both of those are opportunities that need to be explored. And I think the material is going to dictate how you choose to explore that. Now, obviously, there's some subjective decision making in terms of the person who's creating, how you see that material best being used and whether you see that uniqueness or you can read that uniqueness or not. But I see inside of that an obligation to do our extremely, our best due diligence to be able to know that we've exhausted all potential opportunity. And we have the best fundamental knowledge of what that species and what that uniqueness could be used to convey before we take a piece of material and we make decisions that could forever alter its ability to represent anything other than what it was meant to represent. And that's where, you know, I think at Mirai we take a huge amount of pride in spending the time with the tree to really suss out the very best parts of design. And I think because of that, you guys see us creating very few trees that look alike. And I will continue to work extremely hard, extremely hard, to create unique trees based on the material we have the luxury of having access to. Sujata has a technical question about knees. What do you got, Sujata? I'm going to try to pronounce this, but I know I'm not going to say it right. So are the knees in Bald Cypress, Numa tephores, am I saying it right? I don't know. Or aerial roots that you normally see in swamp trees. You know, that's an interesting question. Actually, I don't know the answer to that. I have no clue, but I will definitely research that. And I think that is something that we should explore and understand a little bit further. But I don't have the answer for you tonight. I don't know. Speaking of which, Sujata, Kendall is dying to come see you in India. Yeah. Just P.S. It's going to happen. I want that undulating feel of those branches just kind of and then we get this kind of stacking, which you guys see up here now. For example, I could take this branch back or I could stack this branch here and we start to explore this stacking nature that they have. Oof. Oof. What a treat to step back for a moment. Skip. So I think, where are we at for time? Just past the two hour mark. Just past the two hour mark. I'm going to finish this piece so you guys can kind of see the concept for that. And then we're going to save this. We'll time lapse it. We'll stick it on the archive video. I'll finish this off tomorrow morning so that we have it. I know I owe you guys a lot of archive videos. It's been a pretty stressful year so far this year. But we're getting through it. Let me kind of design the concept for this and then you guys will be able to see where this direction is going. And I don't know how you guys feel about this, but I am super, super excited by this tree and where we're headed with it. So if you have any further questions, get them in now because we're going to shut her down after I'm done with this and let you guys go to bed on the East Coast and other parts of the world. And we too have a lot going on after the stream. JT has a question about growth habit. They commented, so bald cypress typically grows in groups in swampy areas. They seem to mostly grow in the manner you're showing here, tall, relatively thin. Good buttressing with a flat top. Sure. If this tree was isolated and didn't have competition from neighbors, would it grow naturally flat or like an isolated conical redwood? Yeah, that's a really interesting question. And the answer is yes. Because you can find examples of both of those as independent trees. In fact, I don't know, I don't think Arthur used the image, but when I was in Florida, I found a whole stand of bald cypress. Bald cypress that were independent subjects. And all of them, standing alone in the water, went up and flattened out. And they were this huge, massive, sparse, cylindrical trunk. And then it went to this expansive upwards foliage mass. And it was like, oh! Even as independent, solely standing trees, that just happened. And that was a game changer for me because I was under the impression that potentially the canopy was flattening out because there was a competition for light. And that's what led me to believe that actually the flattening out is where we hit that vertical tolerance of the adherence of the water to the vascular wall of the xylem and also that tension rising against gravity based on how well that cohesion to that vascular wall exists. And so that changed the way that I viewed bald cypress in terms of how we handle them and style them. And also you'll find those that have a very pine tree shape. Now, typically when we start to talk about ancient, I would be curious if you see ancient trees, as a pine tree shape, or if the more conical form of the bald cypress is not more a discussion of youth than age. Because typically, and this is a broad brush stroke, and that's the last time I'm going to say typically, but when we start to see that, usually youth is indicated by symmetry and age is indicated by asymmetry. And you see the symmetrical pattern of growth in a tree when they're young is designed to maximize their photosynthetic efficiency. Because if you think about this, tree grows up, right? Buds form, they grow out. Tree continues to grow up. Buds form, they grow out. These lower branches have to continue to elongate and they have a head start. So as long as they stay out where they're getting sun, they're photosynthesizing. The next ones up are a little shorter because they're a little younger and they're a little higher and they're photosynthesizing. Next ones are photosynthesizing. Next ones are photosynthesizing. And when you look at that conical shape, that's the most efficient shape for photosynthesis to take place. But as those younger branches get shaded out or as those younger branches get broken off, or as that tree continues to thicken and their vascular tissue surrounds those pieces and that upper portion is providing more resources than the lower portion, those are shed and that upper portion starts to take on that vascular productivity. And what you start to see in ancient trees, whether it's a western redcedar or whether it's a ponderosa pine or whether it's a juniper, is you see the upper canopy start to expand and spread and really take on most of the photosynthetic capacity, which is where we get either multiple apices forming or we start to get an expansion of the crown and a dead tree. So that's the death of the lower branches. And that is more an indication of age. So I'm assuming this flat top form also is a distinct discussion of age in the natural form of Taxodium disticum. As well as when we start to look at the dawn redwood, you see dawn redwoods that, when they're in their very most juvenile form, and dawn redwoods are native to China, when you see them in their most juvenile form, they're this perfect conical tree. But then when you see them and they make that transition, they're almost cylindrical like a redwood and they almost flare up to this expansive canopy, not quite as pronounced as the flat top of a bald cypress, but definitely expansive, multi-apicy, apical region of that tree. And it's really interesting if you do studies about Metasequoia simpervirans at dawn redwood, how they actually grow. Because they're a very, very unique, special species and not many people have looked into their native environment and their native growth habits. Tom has a question about the way you're setting the branches kind of up and then down stepwise. Would you do the same design on a dawn redwood? So on a dawn redwood, I would go up, but I would kind of go out and it would be a lot softer movement. Now bear in mind, Tom, that I'm playing off of what the tree is already giving me. And notice this kind of movement that I have here. I've got it here, I've got it in this trunk, and I'm going to turn this sideways so you can see the real angular jagged nature of this. This is what I want to be pulling on. Obviously, I can't create that kind of sharp acute or sharp really elbowed angle with wire, but if I put it in it now with a fairly sharp amount of movement, it naturalizes into some of these more curvaceous pieces that we see here that does help it, as it thickens, look more reflective of the original structure that exists that I'm creating on. So if this were a really, say, a really passive trunk where it had less movement, particularly up in the apical region, I probably would be putting less movement into the branches. Because I've got that zigzag and that jagged movement, I'm putting more movement into the branches. And that's really kind of that consistency of delivery of shape is a big part of reading a tree and making those design decisions. And then Clark said that you mentioned a shear you used while working with Kimura that would cut wire and foliage. What's that called? You mentioned it? I didn't mention that. Maybe you. But I'm using it. It's just a regular scissor. But what this was, Kikua, the tool company, used to manufacture these. These were a very low-budget scissor. But there's an interesting thing about it. And typically when you guys talk about really high-end, we're actually going to have a stream on tools later this summer because a lot of people ask us about tools and understanding tools, how to sharpen tools, what makes a quality tool is an interesting thing to discuss and break into. There's a lot that goes into tools. But typically when you see a really good cutting edge, you've got an extremely soft metal that's very, very honeable and easily sharpened like our grafting knife. To get that super sharp edge, you've got to have a very soft metal to be able to get that refined down to that cutting edge. This is why 10, 12 grafts in, you resharpen your knife. 10 or 12 grafts, you resharpen your knife because it's soft enough that even cutting that scion when you're doing the grafting dulls that edge. Okay? There's a scissor that has extremely hard metal in it. So once you get past that original factory sharpness and very similar to stainless steel from the perspective that that factory sharpness is very difficult to achieve as you use that cutting edge and it's hard to regain that unless you send it off to a specialty sharpener, these blades become virtually worthless. But what they are is they're super, super hard. Not so hard that they're brittle but hard enough that you can cut wire and it really doesn't do much to the cutting edge in terms of chipping it or reducing it. It'll dull it but the duller it gets actually the better it cuts your big lump chunks of wire. And so this was something that Mr. Kimura gave us when we were all apprentices first day because he said if you can prune the branch and you can prune the wire at the same time, you're saving time and milliseconds for him with the quantity of work as his apprentices that we were having to perform, that over the course of a year, you may be saving days worth of work, believe it or not, just by cutting the wire with your scissors. And he was all about speed. And so this is actually, I bought a box of these. I don't have any left. This is my last pair. But my first pair that I had for, let's see, I started studying in 2004 with Mr. Kimura and it's now 2017. So 13 years I had my first pair. And it wasn't the blade that broke. It was actually the handle. So I could probably have that re-welded and put together again. But they just broke a few weeks ago. So I'm breaking in this new pair right now until I get those fixed. Okay, guys. Wow. Should we look at the pre-photo? Do we have a pre-photo? We do. Oof. Show it to us. There they are. Wow. Huh. I mean, it doesn't look that whole lot different. It still looks like chaos. Nevertheless, you can see the big shift from right to left, yeah? You can see the exposure of that deadwood. So bring me back in, Arthur, and let's just kind of talk about the ultimate vision. All right, so ultimately what I want is I want this to extend out. I really want some length here. I want to play on the fact that this tree moves this way and you've got this length coming back this way, particularly because this is a dead piece kind of hanging out here. That's an interesting discussion of, ooh, it didn't work out for me over here, but I had this that was also how about that, right? And then I feel like if this apex is able to extend more this way and obviously extend more this way, which means these tips that are kind of are not elongating currently, but I see these getting much, much stronger here. If these are capable of elongating and we're able to flare this out and kind of stack a few of those branches to build this functionality in here in terms of ramification, we're going to have this eventual canopy that as it matures is just going to get better and better and better and better. And that's really what we're looking at. Now, one of the interesting branches on this tree that was very, very tough to utilize was this big straight piece right here. And it was sticking straight out at you guys when we started. And the reason that it was so tough to use is because it was dead straight. So as we put movement into that, all of the movement that I put into it didn't look very good and I couldn't go farther. In fact, it's split in a couple areas just in terms of the bark popping open, but the vascular tissue is still intact. So what we did, because I can't get a very sharp bend in this area here, is if you notice, I just cut that visual reference to that with this smaller secondary or tertiary branch. And that's an interesting design tool to be able to distract the viewer's attention from a very long exposed line by using that secondary tertiary boom. Just to break that line and not show you its full extent or its lack of attraction. Just a little technique or tool for you guys to tuck into your tool belts and carry forward from this stream on. Got anything else? That's it. I think maybe we should shout out Tom Benda again. Yeah, yeah. Mention the... I'm sure, I'm sure again that this pot has, you guys have mixed reactions about it. But for me, when you start talking about people clawing at that upper edge and continuing to push the envelope, the number of ceramicists that create this and create this with this kind of quality, craftsmanship, symmetry, it doesn't rattle when it's on the turntable, all feet touch. I mean, this is like Tom Benda is on the cutting edge of ceramics, period. Not just bone size ceramics, he's on the cutting edge of ceramics as a functional body of art. And I encourage you guys to check out the work that's uploaded to the web store because there are some pots in there. Some insane pots. They are to die for. It is hands down Tom Benda's best, very best body of work to date. And you would be very, very remiss to miss that and not take or at least get to appreciate it because it's beautiful, it's accurate, it's clean. His technique is coming full circle. His shapes are wonderful. He's evolving them. He's growing them. He's really coming into his own. Take a look at that. And this was a prototype for another container that's actually in on the web store now. That's a big central kind of raised container that's really, really cool. And I'd say by the end of the week, we'll have all of the new stuff we have on. Yeah. All the new Tom Benda up. So it's not all up yet. Oh, it's not all up yet. Oh, okay. There's more that we're adding consistently. Right. And Ron Lang too, I believe. Yeah, we've got some Ron Langs on there that are out of his new kiln in North Carolina. Shout out to Ron Lang, Ron and Sharon out there. Yeah, the ceramicists right now are going off. It's really, really cool to see this community growing and rising to the challenge of meeting these wild trees with something very special from the ceramic body and the combinations. Vicki Chamberlain down in Medford, Oregon doing some incredible things with textures, stone, et cetera. Her work on display at the Pacific Bonsai Museum for the Natives Exhibition. Horst Heinzelreiter obviously doing his thing in Austria. And Horst, shout out. And Jonathan Cross down in Los Angeles doing amazing things, very organic in form, out there in Joshua Tree firing a wood-fired kiln four days, 100 plus degrees. And he's out there in the elements experiencing it. Super, super cool, interesting stuff. Jan Rentenar in Hiroshima. Jan Rentenar in her Onagama kiln or the Onagama kiln down in Elkton that she fires in, the first Onagama kiln in the United States. Amazing, amazing impact coming out of that. So ceramicists rising to the level, collectors rising to the level. We very much appreciate you guys joining us tonight. Very iconic piece of American bonsai that we're creating here. And you guys have been here for it, supporting it and helping us make this happen. We appreciate it. We love you guys very much. Have a great week and we'll see you next week or for our tier three members, Thursday at 5 p.m. Pacific time. See you guys, good night. 
