What is up everybody? Super Tuesday. First and foremost, happy solstice. We had a very, very important week off last week. And it's great to be back with you today. We also filmed next week's stream today, and I'm going to tell you right now you're going to want to watch that one. A redesign of an iconic tree that was damaged in the heat last year. Fantastic. Fantastic transformation. Evolution, progression, turning lemons into lemonade. It was awesome. I can't wait to show it to you next week. We're live tonight though, and that is very exciting. Getting to work on one of my favorite trees that has ever existed as a bonsai, the Bald Cypress Forest. Scott, are you on the mic this evening? What's up? Josh Sales producing the stream from the mothership. Hey, and Lonnie and him. Jesus live and in studio. Okay, Bald Cypress Forest, a tree that I created or a composition I created in 2013. If you haven't seen the Forest of Mirai, Jesus did a lot of magic with that piece, and the Bald Cypress was one of them. Now, this tree has been through it all. Let me just walk you through the last 18 months. This forest became the subject of a 14-month time lapse for an HBO documentary that will air next year. In the early portion of the first quarter. To be able to witness via time lapse a year in the life of a tree. And in the time that HBO was photographing this tree for this time lapse, this tree was vandalized. One of the two trunks on this front piece was ripped off when the house was destroyed here at Mirai. This tree went through a significant ice storm. This tree experienced single-digit weather. And then this tree sat through. In full sun, 117-degree heat. Okay, so in one 12-month period, it was vandalized, frozen twice to severe degrees, and then it sat through unprecedented temperatures. And here it is. But here's the thing. You know, we initiated this time lapse. We committed to this project. So we can't move this tree. We built temporary shelters around it. We heated it. We cooled it. We did our very best. The tree suffered. And you see it in some of these pieces that exist on some of the secondary trunks, primarily where these branches are dead here. Tips didn't produce. And we sort of had this very major, I would say, trauma that occurred to this tree. We see some of the trunks that are against the edge of the container have far less density, have lost some of their vigor. And that's really where we come back and we start to say, hey, listen, nuances, when we call this bald cypress nuances, nuances are deviated. Nuances are understandings of application and knowledge that apply to outliers. Nuances are being able to understand and tease out behavior beyond the grand norm of ultimate health. And this tree is definitely at a point where without nuances, we're not going to be able to pull this back into an equilibrium of a composition. Okay. So understand why we called it nuances. First and foremost. Right now. At this time of year, we are late this year. We are late this year to be doing pruning and partial defoliating in terms of what is normal quote unquote normal. We're at the end of June. Historically, pruning and partial defoliation of bald cypress is going to happen at the beginning of June where we're at. But here's the thing. We don't function off of a calendar. We function off of physiological indicators. What are the physiological indicators? I'm going to focus on just a nice little branch up here. Jesus, can you give me a little love right here? Right in on that hand. Yeah. Okay. Physiological indicators that red color excuse me. Let me get my scissors that red color right along the left side of that stem starting to show through formation of phloem hardening off quote unquote hardening off because we know the foliar mass. The leaf itself is not going to change form when it hardens off. It comes out. It opens up. How do you know when it's hard enough? It's pretty much hardened off once it opens up. I mean, it's it happens very quickly. And high water mobility trees deciduous conifer in terms of bald cypress and we start to say, oh yeah, okay, so how do we know when we can come back and we can prune that elongated growth to get bifurcation? Okay, because the ultimate goal of any refinement is bifurcation finer ramification more small branches that create the sense of scale that allow us to represent nature and miniature and we recognize listen. I've got to prune those elongated shoots in order to get another flush of elongating growth. When do I do that? When the stem turns? Red. Okay, that's that's not news to any of us. That's on the library already. When we talk about bald cypress summer work summer pruning parts of the foliation. Okay, the nuance comes in the fact that we have so many discrepancies in energy in this singular composition. Now we have to divide multi trunk compositions in terms of are the multiple trunks occurring on one single root system or are the multiple trunks occurring on separate root systems organized as a forest? Okay, because those two things are very very different. If we said listen, this is a singular base a singular root mass and it has this many trunks coming out of it as a clump. Okay, then we understand. Oh, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to reduce the strong down partial defoliation. I'm going to prune the elongated pieces to get bifurcation. I'm going to reduce the strong down to the density of the week and the root system is now going to homogeneously and evenly produce the kind of resources. That allow that strength to be transitioned into the smaller or the weaker areas of the tree great easy effortless. Okay, that's not the situation tonight. These are not coming from the same root base. These are five separate trees that were put together in a singular container. So now we start to say oh five separate trees in a singular container. I'm going to reduce the strength in the strongest piece and it's going to redirect energy wrong wrong because they're not on the same root base. They're not communicating at least not from a singular organisms perspective of one body. I've got a left arm and a right arm my right arm stronger. I reduce the the resources here and I get more resources here. No, okay, but we are going to perform the same action. I'm going to reduce the density. I'm going to prune the strong I'm going to hold it back partially defoliate try to get bifurcation in a second flush of those stronger areas. I'm going to leave the weaker areas untouched to balance out the density. For aesthetics as well as for that function or physiology, but because they are separate trunks, what happens? There isn't a transition of energy. Here's what happens. There's a change. Listen, listen, listen. There's a change in the availability of resources. Okay, because when we think about a tree and this is really where you have to draw these boundaries and start to speak the language of trees. Okay, when I have that much foliar mass that much foliar mass means it's moving. A lot of water. It's transpiring. It's photosynthesizing and generating sugars and starches that transition photosynthesis new root production high rate of transpiration water consumption. This tree is using the majority of the resources in this pot. If we hold that back while we empower these other pieces these other pieces start to use more resources out of the container and in that shift of resource allocation in the container. We can find environment of the container. We can transition the energy and the strength through the tree. Okay, that is where we've got to be understanding our actions. We will not see it happen as rapidly because it is not a singular organism as a clump. It is not sharing the same root system. We will see this happen over two or three nuanced workings over the next 18 to 24 months. And if you understand that then you can very patiently and systematically go about this process. Okay, first and foremost again. This piece was vandalized suffered some branch dieback as a result of the trauma of the weather as well as the vandalization. I'm going to leave this alone. Okay, and let's just assess the whole tree. Okay, because this trunk was ripped off in the vandalization. This bud sprouted from the trunk very unusual to get a bud sprouting in the exact location that you would want to replace an unfortunate removal or some sort of sacrificial piece lo and behold. We got a little. Bit of a blessing will take it will absolutely take it. Okay, but I'm not ready to cut this needs this needs girth. This needs maturity. The most I would be doing is thinning out any sort of clumps of threes and fours rear tree has always been the weakest of all of the trees. Even when we did the the forest of Mirai. Okay, this piece back here has always been very weak little tough to get sun exposure on this piece orientation currently with the weakest piece on the tree, which is the front right trunk that we're going to circle to and this. They're sort of neck and neck for we are the weakest pieces on the tree and I can't treat both of them with the same orientation major problem. Very challenging to deal with we're working through it right now as we kind of progress through the summer season longest day of the year last year June 21st solstice. This is when you can correct things. This is when you can fix things when daylight length is long when trees are still actively producing for your mass and when we have that heat temperature photosynthesis to drive that energy gap. Balance that can occur by the allocation of resources through the reduction of foyer mass in the stronger areas. I need to empower this piece. Okay, I'm going to say second strongest tree on the whole tree is this piece that's in the in the right back. Okay, thriving doing pretty well not near the density of the upper piece. How do I know it is vigorous then because I start to see the elongation of these branches, right? I start to see the elongation of my ramification if I have elongated growth. It means. I'm going to have to prune that if I want any hope of bifurcation if it's weak, that's the growth that regenerates energy and makes it stronger and I'm going to hold off. I'm going to say this piece is really nice and strong. Okay, when I rotate around this is the one where you start to see the pain notice again the dead branching the sacrificial pieces the loss of a lot of the apex which makes it look more like a pine than a bald Cypress right now. This was at one time a very broad flat top strong dominant trunk. And it just took the majority of the brunt of the weather that we experienced over the past 18 months. Okay, so knowing that I'm not touching this piece. Not only am I not touching this piece in terms of I'm not going to be thinning and reducing for your mass. I'm going to be very strategic in this piece as to how many of the elongating shoots coming off the trunk. I'm going to remove but we do have to understand with bald Cypress. Listen high water mobility trees when we get growth. From the shoulder that growth naturally has the fast track for water and resource consumption. I have a woody branch here that has far more resistance for water moving through the woody tissue. I have a fresh soft fleshy Sprout right here. This is going to claim the life of your woody branches on bald Cypress. If you allow that crotch growth to proliferate and continue to strengthen and grow. Okay, so when I look at this we said listen fastest way to rebuild energy on a tree like this. Is to allow these shoots to grow if I'm trying to preserve the woody structure. However, I need to be very systematic and very strategic. So let's dive into the weakest trunk first and really assess these nuances. Okay. Now I'm going to start here at the bottom and I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to get rid of I save these dead branches. It's been tough to look at him. I knew we were going to get here. Okay, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to get rid of that piece. Now. I had two branches coming from one shoulder. They kind of bifurcated at the shoulder. Notice that I have these small little pieces here. I've got a nice little frond here. Nice little front here. Nice elongating shoot here. Okay, there's no structural flaw that's going to occur right here. I'm going to wait and see which one of these three starts to really give me that proliferation of growth. I'm going to leave that as a nuanced approach. Okay, a lot of us want to try when we're dictating and we're directing energy. A lot of us want to try to kind of control. Oh, this one's in the right location. I'm going to take off the more. Vigorous and probably the more promising of the three to try and make that one grow. Worst thing that you can do leave it up to the tree. Let the three of them compete. Take what the tree gives you adjust your design to accommodate the tree. I'm going to leave those three. Okay, but let's hop to another one here. I move up the trunk. Now. I've got these two little small sprigs growing out of an area that I don't really know. Go ahead and bring me in tight Josh. I don't really know if I want a branch here. But this is a moment where I say listen. Whether. I want a branch here or not. These are going to contribute to the energy system of a tree that is showing weakness. There's no way right? There's no way that I'm going to take these away. These have the capacity to produce tremendous foliar maps. Okay. Now I have a small little sprig. Growing above them right here. I am going to take that off and eliminate that piece so that I don't create a triad here. Let's move to this one. Perfect example. I've got a left. I've got a sinner two strong ones. I'm going to take off that third and eliminate the triad right there. Just as a manner of selection. Okay, moving up into this piece here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take off these tips. Just a very crude cut to get through the wire with my wire cutters. Yes. I'm going to take off these tips. Yes. I'm going to take off this tip. Okay, just so that it starts to look a little bit more presentable. I'm going to take off this piece down here. Okay. And what we're going to see right here on the inside of this is we're going to see. Oh now I'm starting to see these pieces. That are emerging that have a delineation of energy. Okay, I've got a weak one on the bottom. I've got a strong one. That's turning ruby red on the in the middle. I've got one next to it. That's also turning ruby red and I have a weaker one on top. Great. I've got four pieces coming out of the same Junction. I know that I've lost one piece of bifurcation. Yeah, you're just going to have to look through here, right? And this is all conceptual at this point in time. Okay, so I've got these two pieces here, right? I've lost. One piece of bifurcation. I just could just cut this branch off. Yeah, good. There's my branch. Okay, I've got this piece right here and I've got these water sprouts at the base. Okay. Well, Ryan just said that water sprouts are going to suck the energy out of the woody tissue. Yes, I did. You're correct. Okay, but we also lost one of two branches at a bifurcated location. Do I save these strong water sprouts? Or do I go ahead and eliminate them and accept this as one singular piece as it runs out the tree. Here is the moment where I would say. Oh, guess what? We've got two pieces here. We selected down to two. We left two in the other portions of the trunk. I'm going to select down to one now. That's a nuance. I'm going to select down to one so that I only have a bifurcation pushing here instead of a trio with two of them being highly water conductive pieces. That will preserve the energy moving through the woody tissue that gives me the capacity to rebuild the branch really nice strong nuance. Now. I have another water shoot right here at the base of this bifurcation. Okay, come back in tight. Nice. I've got this piece right at the right at the base. I've got a woody branch here. I've got a woody branch here. Boom. That's got to come off even though we're rebuilding energy. And so when we think about when we think about in this one, there's not a lot of work to do on this right? I'm not going to go through and prune and partially defoliate this thing. I'm starting with the very basic fundamentals of shoot management as it contributes to the nuances of bald cypress. To. Evenly distribute the energy. Okay, let me work through this. I know there's some questions. I'll open it up. Let me get through the weak one when I start working on the strong one to compare weak to strong. I'll open it up to questions. Okay, I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to reduce branching here of dead deceased. And weakened pieces. I'm going to take out these woody tips this as much as anything helps me understand when we start to talk about a tree that has suffered a setback when we start to talk about the nuances to rebuilding managing strength, etc. Give yourself a good reference. Give yourself a good reference because if we leave these dead pieces on it's really hard to know did more die and I missed it. You know what? What happened with that piece? I don't really remember. Okay, so I'm just taking off these dead pieces. And when I take off these dead pieces, I'm observing what is left behind. What is left behind? What do I have to work with? Where does the growth start? Right? How am I going to go ahead and recover from this because what we see a lot of the time is that? There are shoots very very close to that dead tip. There's new shoots at the base of that dead tip bald cypress is very very strong. So when we look here, I take off these two finer tips here. I have immediate elongating shoots here and here and here. This branch is far from gone. That branch has so much potential. I'm getting good elongation here. I love that. I see the stem turning ruby red. I technically could prune that if we were in a different situation. We're not we're amassing energy. I'm going to go ahead. And I'm going to leave that. Okay, when we come up into the upper portion of the tree a lot more damage up here. Okay, and I will say that when we built this tree initially we built it with a little bit more of the the structural ramification compromising what I would consider to be structurally sound or sustainably designed branching selection, which means we had groups of three. Now I've lost now. I've already lost some of those groups of three. The groups of three when we talk about bald cypress getting weaker groups of three will kick off woody structure faster than any other area on the tree second area. When a bald cypress gets weaker that will kick off is a woody piece of structure that has a strong water conductive shoot at its shoulder. Okay. So thinking about that, I don't want to rebuild and regrow those groups of three, which means I can come back in here and even though we're trying to regain strength in the tree, I'm going to take off any of the shoots that were occurring around those areas in those regions that had structural flaws. Okay, another nuance. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take care of those now. Let's keep going up. Okay, we're getting into the upper portion here. I've got some of these structural flaws forming even though I'm trying to rebuild. I don't want to rebuild with structural flaws. I want to continue to push energy into the pieces that matter notice what we have here. He's just bring me in tight right here. Okay, beautiful little shoot at the base of a structural. A loss. Okay, no problem. I'm not even going to get close to it. I'm not going to touch it too much because I don't want to damage it. This is an area where we do need to rebuild the branch, right? We don't have anything around this area. It's not structurally flawed. Look at what we have here. A little bit of a rebuild coming behind it, but we want to foster that little shoot. Okay, so eliminating any sort of shading eliminating any sort of structural limitation around that piece helps us accomplish that goal of re-empowering. That piece that for whatever reason that woody branch had lost its capacity to survive. Okay, we're going to continue moving out here. I've got another piece of bifurcation here that lost its way. I'm going to get this out of the way. Boom. I've got shoots coming from its base now. Now notice that these shoots here and in these in the knee in these open areas. He's just you got a straight shot on that beautiful. Okay, these are not elongating. These are not forming branching not yet. These will turn into elongating. Shoots if we were to partially defoliate either of these this piece is weak. We're not going to do that. Okay, but that's how you could turn that into elongating. Shoot you partially defoliate and reduce the foyer mass on some of these stronger areas. It will empower this and this can turn into any of these leaves can turn into an elongating shoot. If you leave it behind and empower it with that second flush of energy. Okay, but just leaving these here opening them up to sunlight. That is the move. Let me go ahead and rotate back and you can just take a look. We've cut a lot out of that. But none of what we cut out of that piece was actually foyer mass did not have any foyer mass unless it was forming a structural flaw that was occurring at a point where we no longer wanted to facilitate that structural flaw. That's it weak bald Cypress. You recognize the power of those water shoots coming from the shoulder. You can regrow a branch with one of those effortlessly. You can also kill a mature branch in a tree. That is less than healthy or has a trio at those junctions major nuance to consider at this time of year. Okay. Now you may be asking should we do this sooner? Should we thin those in the spring? No, no, no. You can't sit there and micromanage your trees. You cannot do it. It's not good for the tree to do it. You don't want to do it. It takes the joy out of bonsai to do it. You do not want to be sitting here rubbing off buds selecting things as they're growing Etc. Worst thing you can do you will have a weaker tree over the course of time. If you manage your trees that way, but we come back at that point where we see the tree at a post flush hardened state. Now is the time to go back in and adjust these things as a nuanced approach and what you get as a result. High water mobility high recovery in that second flush. Okay. So just be sure that you don't try to over manage people are trying to bud select on deciduous trees. People are trying to rub out buds in the spring Etc. You know, don't over manage your trees. Okay, I'm going to hop into the vigorous. You've seen the weakest. Of them. We're not touching this. We need more strength. We're not touching this. We need more strength. We're definitely going to touch the stronger areas. We're going to touch a few areas on this. We're not touching this. It needs more strength. We took out all the dead here and we understand we fixed structural flaws. I'm even leaving bottom growing pieces on that because I want all the foyer mass I can get. Okay. All right, let's dive into the biggie here and I'm going to start at a point in a location where I've got some good solid ramification. Jesus. Can you just focus on this area right here? Yeah, great. Go ahead and just pull back just slightly for me. Yeah, good. Okay. Now we see the Ruby color in these shoots and we say, oh, okay, cool. Ruby color says that we have the capacity now to prune because that means phloem is formed once phloem is formed and I prune. I'm going to get two shoots coming out of that site. So I have one branch here. I pruned in the spring prior to the flush of growth. I got two branches here as a result of the prune at that tip. Now, these have hardened off. I'm going to come back in. Okay, nuance of bald Cypress. What portion of ramification is this piece forming? Because if I prune out here, I'm going to get bifurcation right here, but this is second or third level tertiary ramification, right? So follow me here. You have your primary structure. You have secondaries coming off of primary. You've got tertiary is coming off of secondary. You've got sub tertiary. Try. Tertiary quad tertiary levels of fine ramification that build on each other. Primary structures longest secondary shorter tertiary shorter tri tertiary quad tertiary get shorter and shorter and shorter and shorter. If I'm in a third tier of tertiary ramification here, I want to be pruning to the length that I would hope to be seeing in the step down of fine branching and ramification. Okay, there is a limit with bald Cypress. The limit is when. When you prune that back a half inch is kind of the bare minimum. Okay, I'm going to take off the foyer mass around it and watch how I handle this second piece. Okay, because I've got my bare minimum length here to get bifurcation off of that piece. I do not want to prune this back to the exact same size as that to have equal length on these two pieces is to create artificial symmetry. I'm going to give myself an inch on that inch on this half inch on that. That's my minimum that I need. To be maintaining in order to empower bald Cypress to continue to push flush and maintain strength. I need that bifurcation coming out of those branches. I have an uneven distribution which gives me aesthetic beauty and now I can come back in and I can start the partial defoliation. Now, it's partial defoliation willy-nilly. Absolutely not. We understand reduction of density is to the weaker areas of the tree. Okay, even when I look here, this is weaker than this. This is stronger. This is weaker. I'm not touching this area. So which one of these two do I reduce my strongest tree down to? I'm going to reduce it to the lesser density that exists in the weakest areas of the tree. I know this is strong. It's strong. It's creating elongating shoots. That means that I'm empowered to go ahead and prune and partially defoliate. How much do I take off? I take off to get the density of the weakest area in the composition. Okay, that's first. Second, what do I take off? First and foremost, we're reducing any competing pieces of foliar mass at the tip here. I do not want to prune back my two pieces of bifurcation. Leave a leaf right here, right here at that Junction and have that take off and lose these two pieces of ramification. I need these to push two sprouts off of those to continue to enhance my ramification. Okay, so first and foremost, I'm reducing anything coming off of that knuckle where my ramification exists. Okay, second, I'm going to be reducing. The foliar mass that even exists in a close proximity to those pieces. Okay. Now when we think about bald cypress, we talk about bald cypress as this flat top form which comes up, right? We say listen the flat top form. If you go look at natural bald cypress branch grows here branch goes off the vertical back here. Branch goes off the vertical back in here. Typically when we partially defoliate anything, right? Pines junipers not partial defoliation. But we prune we clean we're always eliminating vertically growing branches, right? Don't do that. Don't do that with a bald cypress. Okay, that vertically growing branch. Number one is going to form a much stronger piece of ramification much faster. Number two. That is what you build the flat top form out of. Yes lateral first verticals laid down to laterals second. That's how we get this form. Okay, so when I'm partially defoliating, I'm protecting the tip from being overwhelmed. I'm stacked. I'm staggering my laterals left right left right and I'm taking off my bottoms being sure to leave verticals and staggered orientation left and right now if we're really thinking about staggering do I want my staggered foliar mass that's going to produce branching on the outside of a bend or the inside of the bend I naturally want it on the outside of a bend so when I'm partially defoliating here I want to leave these pieces on the outside of the bend. And I want to be taking off anything that occurs from the inside of a bend. Okay inside of a bend take it off outside of a bend leave it on form your stagger with those pieces. Okay, so I'm going to work in an area here partially defoliate this prune this I'm going to open it up to questions. I'm assuming there's quite a few. Let's start to dig into the nuances. Let's focus really intensely on speaking the language of bald cypress. Go ahead Ira. Yeah, we definitely have a few questions. Thanks everybody for. Coming in Ricky D and a few others had the conversation in the chat about the pond Cypress bald Cypress and asked if you could talk about the differences between pond and bald Cypress. Yeah, so the pond Cypress bald Cypress and I'm sure that this is going to you know be a be a heated discussion. There are still a lot of I would say conflicting pieces of information of whether pond Cypress and bald Cypress. Yes, it's tax sodium distichum as the bald Cypress that typically occurs farther north in the southeastern United States. Yes, it's tax sodium ascendance, which is the pond Cypress which typically occurs farther south in the southeastern United States. There are a lot of crossovers in terms of how the foyer mass behaves in different areas in different seasons at different times of year under different climactic conditions and generally. I'm not sure. That the taxonomy of ascendance versus distichum has been fully vetted. Typically taxonomy is a representation of reproductive formation in terms of cones or seeds or pollen and write any of those reproductive components. I don't know that they actually have fully scientifically verified that ascendance and distichum are different. Okay. So when I start to talk about this, I'm talking about tax sodium as a general broad species. Yes, I call it bald Cypress because again, I don't know that there is a huge difference or any difference between bald Cypress and pond Cypress. Okay, so just just take that. Maybe you say oh Ryan there is it's so obvious. Okay, cool, right? I can show you pond Cypress that have completely opened up fan shaped leaves and I can show you pond Cypress that have completely rope like leaves. I can show you pond Cypress that have identical identical cones to a distichum and I can show you a bald Cypress. That have identical foliar pieces to a pond Cypress, right? So from that perspective, I assume that this would become a talking point of the conversation tonight. I don't have any anything to add to that conversation. Eric P asked what temperature ranges can bald Cypress take and what would be ideal? So bald Cypress are one of the most adaptable and diverse conifers that exist in the world because they can take cold. Right if you if you kind of research their native environment, obviously native to the southeastern United States and to very very warm areas of the southeastern United States. But when we start to look at bald Cypress and we start to say okay, but where does it exist in domestic cultivation? You have bald Cypress that are growing in the ground in Saint Paul Minneapolis, Minnesota. You're talking about one of the coldest portions of North America and you've got bald Cypress in the ground at the Botanical Gardens, right? That is. Diversity. Okay, when you put them into a bonsai container that same durability and I can attest to this does not exist confined environment more exposure to the roots roots are the susceptible piece of any plant when we start to talk about bonsai cultivation because roots are meant to have the buffering capacity of the in-ground environment. We see that susceptibility creep in we start to see a little bit more fragility and we start to recognize. Hey, honestly, bald Cypress can be grown almost anywhere in North America. If you want. You protect them in the winter time. If you're going to expose them and no protection winter temperatures, you don't want to let them freeze. You don't want to let them freeze because you don't know what's going to happen when a bald Cypress freezes. I've let my bald Cypress is freeze. I've experienced tremendous branch loss as a result. I've let my bald Cypress is freeze and I've experienced no branch loss tough to predict best to not let it happen. If you want to be in full control of the finest degree of ramification. Dalton. Ask does that lack of redistribution of energy within a forest change slightly if there is mycorrhiza present? Yeah. So the the whole notion and I'm this is going to get to be a really funky conversation really quickly, but I welcome the funk. So let's do it. Okay, the conversation of the microbial highways that exist in the forest floor high quantity of organic matter littering the forest floor, which is what facilitates the presence of that microbial activity. Not what we are cultivating in a bonsai container by any stretch of the imagination. Okay. So first and foremost, we've got to separate that notion of this is what happens. Microbial highways are allowing things to quote-unquote communicate right? Susan smart. Absolutely brilliant scientist her research super on point as far as you know, modern science and that there are people that are contesting her research. So don't don't be fooled. It's not broadly accepted as a universal truth. But All signs point to the fact that her research is incredibly effective incredibly accurate and and has a lot of significant implications. Okay in a bonsai container. We talk about microbial activity. Let me tell you something. Let me tell you something you do not want and this is this is contrary to what we thought when we started playing with biology. You do not want too much biology in a bonsai container. You want some you want a little bit of mycorrhiza you want beneficial? Bacteria and fungi typically in a bonsai container depending on how we're feeding. You're probably leaning more on a bacterial colonization of the space than you are on a fungal colonization of the space, which is challenging which is dangerous, but that's kind of the broad spoken truth. Why is that because we typically tend to feed with a high ammonium based nitrogen fertilizer in bonsai cultivation as our standard technique for nutrition, which facilitates bacteria as a almost junk food, if you will of plant nutrition ammonium based fertilization lowest oxidized form of nitrogen. Okay. So when we start to see that right and we say okay, I have a high bacterial content. We put a lot of nitrogen into the system. We can see bad things happen. Okay. So when we start to talk about is the microbial Highway of beneficial fungi in a bonsai container connecting these trees in this environment. In the way that we talk about in the natural forest environment. 90% organic decomposing matter in the forested environments that have that kind of microbial connection. Okay, you're talking about that research was done and dug for big leaf maple alder some spruce, but primarily that that small Pacific Northwest ecosystem almost entirely decomposing organic matter. We're growing in 7% organic matter. We're growing in more of a hydroponic system than we are in a natural. Plant system in bonsai cultivation based on the shallow confined environment high bacterial content low fungal content. Absolutely not absolutely not don't plan on don't plan on that connection existing in bonsai. It is nice to think about it's very romantic. Oh man, wouldn't that be something these trees must connect in the forested environment. It is it is not the same thing in a bonsai container. Have a question on behalf of Boone moons daughter. She says, this is a bonzo question. She wants to know if this pretty tree has a name. Just the bald Cypress Forest. Just the bald Cypress Forest. That's all we call it. All right, we'll work on that. La David says, where did the giant pot come from? Where did the giant pot come from? This is a pot that I got probably from Diane Lund at the Wee Tree Farm very early on in my starting of bonsai. And has continued to be the only pot that I can find that can house this composition. Would I ever consider or want a higher end pot for this tree? I think about it every day every day as I look at this horrific, you know, I would say utilitarian workhorse of a container, but certainly not serving of the aesthetic of such an incredible and I do think this is an incredible composition. This is a very, very special composition. I think everybody agrees with that. Bentley asked, how long will it take the water chute to catch up to the girth of the branch where Ryan was replacing the lost ramification? Yeah, that's a good question. I mean with bald Cypress, maybe a single season. If you get this really ramped up. Now, we just hit 100 degrees. We went from having not seen temperatures over 75 degrees to 92, 194, and everything. Came to life, you know, last year going to 117 was a little bit tough, but ultimately when we start to think about especially when we're dealing with conifers, we started to say, listen, that heat is highly highly productive conifers need that metabolic activity. They need that photosynthetic capacity. If you have a tree that has good balance and good energy, that is a very very positive thing. And we literally saw the garden erupt in terms of growth over the past few days. Today, we're back down into the 60s, which was a welcome change for the watering routine. But ultimately if you have high activity in Bentley, you live in a region that is very very warm in the Carolinas. You're going to be able to catch that up in almost a single season bald Cypress will rock out. Now, here's another nuance when you come back and you perform this partial defoliation. This is what allows bald Cypress to focus its energy. If you're going to leave those pieces untouched that you're trying to cultivate that energy. And this is exactly how you get those pieces to grow with the kind of rapidity where you close that gap in a single season. Okay, so nuance to direct energy partially defoliate and prune much like we talk about with deciduous. We are dealing with a coniferous a deciduous conifer, but it will behave from the deciduous model in terms of allocation of energy. Okay, any of these junctions where I've got this accumulation of foliar mass. I've got these water shoots on the woody structure. I'm cleaning all of these off. So if we just come in here Jesus go ahead and focus on the underside here just paying attention to these. Let me rotate. Yeah, good. Okay, any of these pieces that we have here. I'm just taking these off right at the base. I don't want okay, right at the crotch of a structural area. I don't want those pieces to be contributing. I don't want to foster and cultivate those pieces. But once I start getting pieces that are occurring along, branching, line back into regions that are far more functional than I want to be using those pieces. So with bald Cypress, I can come up underneath here. I can be pruning these pieces to the design length. If it's a more developmental piece, I'm going to leave a longer internode. If it's a ramifiable piece, I'm going to consider the degree of its ramification where it occurs to determine that length. I think we understand that nuance by now, but just coming underneath this and cleaning out a lot of the bottom pieces coming out and cleaning out a lot of the sprouts. That are existing at the shoulders and colors. This takes care of two-thirds of the partial defoliation of bald Cypress before you ever have to go in and start staggering your laterals and really building that higher quality ramification in the tree. Okay. Now I'm starting to get this reduced down to what I would consider to be a density in a single branch, a fairly sparse density, right? This is exactly what we're talking about in terms of closing the gap. Now there are more branches in this piece here. So I want to be a little bit respectful and realistic of the fact that the greater number of branches makes this feel denser. But when you that's a good shot when we start to really talk about that, you start to see that reduction that airiness that is what's closing the gap on the weaker portions of the tree where we have that same lack of foliar density. It's all about needle mass. How many needles exist in an area transpiring photosynthesizing resource generation and utilization. That's the magnet for everything. That leads to strength in a tree. Okay, if we balance that needle density, high water mobility, we can get through it with a bald Cypress and have tremendous impact. If we understand the nuances of it this year, right, we can get tremendous progress in the balancing of that. Ricky D asked, he says, so you did a time lapse on this. Did that mean you couldn't move the trees from their position when you have the 117 degree weather? That's correct. That's correct. So, so when we had the ice storm, which if you ever watch some days at Mirai, the ice storm, we had to shovel off the greenhouse, which was a total nightmare and build a cold shelter around the bald Cypress. So we had this whole like tent that had heaters in it around the bald Cypress because we are single digits with a tremendous amount of snow and ice. That was really fun. But the biggie was the shade structure that we had to build around. This thing because we could not move it based on the time lapse during the heat. And that was really, really challenging in every way shape and form a super challenge challenge to keep this thing watered a challenge to, you know, resist the urge to overreact because I love this tree and I don't want to see it suffer. But we were not able to move it. Yeah, we made the full commitment. And again, it's the first time that a shot like that has ever been attempted and you see some of the planet Earth. Things and you see some of these like really radical time lapses over prolonged periods in the natural environment. This was a very very special time lapse. I don't know how how prominently it will be featured or even if they're going to use it in the film because again, we tried this experiment and and and it was challenging. It was very very challenging. I think they didn't know what they were getting themselves into. We didn't know that we were going to experience the radical radically unpredictable. Conditions of of last year. I mean, yeah, it was it was challenging across the board. Bentley has a question and says, why don't we see more deadwood or any on bald cypresses and pond cypresses those branches that you're removing look like they could be nice gins. This is from earlier. Yeah, so deadwood doesn't last. Unfortunately, now now now there's a rebuttal to that. You could say deadwood doesn't last. But the the water lines of some of the great cities in the southeastern United States and I want to say including New Orleans, but I can't verify that right. There are still bald cypress trunks that were hollowed out that were put in the ground that conducted the water through the cities and are still being used to this day as water pipes. Okay, so you're telling me that the deadwood won't. Last that's exactly what I'm telling you when we start to talk about these domesticated pieces when we talk about domestically grown branching the capacity for it to last as a piece of deadwood is very, very limited and very, very minimal in its strength, durability and capacity. So I just take it off. I just take it off because otherwise, you know, then you're going to come back and take it off once it's rotted. I don't I don't need it for a sense of scale, et cetera, especially with the deadwood that already. This on this piece. So I just go ahead and eliminate it. That's that's where I come from on that. Treebeard Steve's up next and says he has a question for you. My bald cypress. The new twigs are going from Ruby to tan. Is that mean it's too late for post flush pruning and air layering still in the window, but you are you are at the tail end, right? Because what's the what's the what's the the the negative to partially defoliating? If you do so too late, you don't get a second flush that fully matures. Okay, and some of the nuances when we start to talk about tax sodium and this application of knowledge, some of the nuances. Are that if we don't give them enough time, even if you live in a warmer area, you might be going ahead and doing this work. If we don't give them enough time, it's as much daylight length driven as temperature driven. Okay, and so you want to be very careful to not, abuse that timeline when they show you that Ruby red. That is your first foremost and primary indicator. Okay, if you're still tan, some of these are a little bit more mature and I've got a little bit more of that tan coloration going in here. It's it's still very applicable to be doing this work. Okay, and I'm just continuing to kind of work through these areas thinning out any areas of threes and fours down to twos at any junctions in the partial defoliation. Again, as I get near those structural, junctions, I'm taking out all of the water Sprouts and I'm balancing that energy, but continuing to really focus on simplifying those tips, making sure you're pushing energy into the pieces that have the capacity to be the most contributing ramifiable growth. This is what you've got to be focused on. And I want to say this, I've challenged people with this as far as bald Cypress go to date. If if full defoliation, if full defoliation is a sustainable thing to apply to a bald Cypress, where are all of the impeccably ramified bald Cypress in the world? Yes, Vaughn Banting. Absolutely crushed Pioneer of Bonsai Pioneer of bald Cypress as a bone site. Very very inspiring. Yes guide. Guidry has incredible trees, but there are not very many. There are not very many people outside of those two gentlemen that have ever been able to accomplish. Highly ramified bald Cypress. Here's the other thing. Both of those gentlemen are cultivating bald Cypress in the prime native growing region of bald Cypress. So you take it outside of that prime growing region and you say, I'm going to fully defoliate this thing. I'm going to take all the leaf off. I'm going to wire this in the middle of the summer. I'm going to prune it. Yes, a bald Cypress is going to push push growth again. But are you going to get ramification or are you going to have short knuckled woody branches or overly elongated leggy, non-ramified? branches primarily and most likely? Yes, is that tree going to suffer at some point climactic issues repotting and it doesn't respond one year half of the tree pushes out. I can tell you why this bald Cypress suffered first time. It's ever suffered. Somebody ripped a trunk off. It sat through two ice storms and 117 degree temperatures and it's never experienced that before in a confined environment. It's going to suffer. Okay, right. But as far as the fault of technique. The response, the timing mechanisms, the actions, it has never faltered, right? It has never faltered in a region that is completely outside of its native zone. And I would say arguably there is a higher degree of ramification on some of the bald Cypress at Mirai than almost anywhere else in the country. And that's not bragging. That's just saying, hey, listen, this is just abiding by the trees physiology, the physiological indicators and again understanding these nuances of maintaining. That woody tissue that you've built in those branches at this time of year where we come back in, we correct it. We direct energy and we remove those draws that suck all of the effort out of a branch that you've built ramification in, right? Because we know that's woody. That's a more high resistant. This is water soft fleshy tissue. Of course, it wants to go here. Bald Cypress is always going to take the path of least resistance. That's water's natural course. It's not even the trees option. It's just what? Happens and how a vigorous species proliferates. You want to preserve your work. You've got to really focus hard. The more refined bald Cypress gets the harder. You've got to focus on this up here in this upper canopy. It's going to take me several hours to do this partial defoliation and pruning because I've got to focus on it. But I got this area done here so that we can just see a comparison. This was the piece that was untouchable. Let me get the leaves off of this untouchable here. We partially defoliated here. Let me go ahead and see if I can get. Just a little bit more. There we go. Okay untouched here partially defoliated here even distribution untouched here untouched here partial defoliation here. Look at that. Okay, even distribution this one we pruned and we partially defoliated probably 60 to 70% this one. We have not touched that's pretty darn even in terms of distribution. Now this and this same trunk of the tree this particularly matters that these are balanced but I'm referencing in the density of this actually this piece right here. Go ahead and pull back just slightly Lonnie. Bring me back in tight Josh. Yeah. Okay. So go ahead and bring me just come back in just a smidge. There we go. Okay right there. Perfect. Boom boom boom right boom boom boom getting that even distribution and density. Now what's sneaking in here is you're seeing this guy in the back and you're seeing some of the healthy pieces off of that. So you're getting a little bit of density. But I've got even. Even even even yes. Now we are starting to get that distribution that we're striving for seeking and searching to achieve Bentley has a question and says or starts by saying he did a partial defoliation on his bald Cypress a couple of weeks ago. He's been rubbing off the unwanted buds that are emerging at the cut sites. Should he be leaving those alone? They are healthy trees. So rubbing off unwanted buds at the cut sites. If you're talking about a very major structural cut back aggressive cut back and you're trying to get allocation or focus of resources, which would be you know, that kind of cut would be a developmental cut. You can direct some of the energy in general, especially when we're talking about refinement, which is more what I'm speaking to when we're talking about the nuances of bald Cypress. You do not want to be. Micromanaging the second flush of growth, right? You don't want to micromanage the first flush of growth. You want to let bald Cypress go ahead and push its energy out. You come back in perform this action, which allows you to balance the energy allows you to distribute the energy allows you to focus the energy and then you go hands-off again and let bald Cypress be a bald Cypress. The worst thing that we can do to any bone side tree is try to tell it how to be itself. Don't try to tell it how be itself. You don't know that tree better than it knows itself. It knows exactly what it needs. It's going to produce what it needs the tree. When you think about the tree, the tree is a non-bias objective per perfection of function, right? Tree can't go drink itself to death. A tree can't go eat itself to death. A tree can't go run itself to death. A tree can't over invest its resources like financially. It is a perfect objective system. It's responsive to the environment. It knows exactly what it needs in terms of how to perform with the resources it has in that environment. We start getting in there and we start finicking with it and touching it and handling it and all of a sudden we start to see things happening and we're like no, no, that's that's not what I wanted. I rubbed off the buds because I wanted to direct it. Now there's no more growth coming out of the you took away what the tree was trying to do for itself naturally, right? So I would just I would always caution trying to over manage. Our trees because again, it's the perfect system. They are the perfect system. Chucks up next and he said I'm working on my first bald Cypress in South Florida. It was freshly collected by Mary Madison last May four foot tall with beautiful taper, but all of the growth was at the top. It started yellowing. So I repotted in August based on your recommendation. It exploded with growth in the spring including a new branch mid trunk. I want to promote more lower. Butting the new flush has matured. Can I prune it again now? It really feels like I need to and he clarified. He got it may freshly collected by Mary Madison that year. Okay. So here's here's what my experience with bald Cypress is you want branches lower down build strength in the tree. Let that tree get healthy abide by abide by the fundamental timing that has contributed to bald Cypress. Sort of achieving a predictable behavior, which is which is sort of what we're dissecting here and talking about the nuances of okay, that that's how I would go about getting lower growth and back butting the more that you that you produce vigor in a bald Cypress. The more that they're going to back but now Chuck you're in the native region of bald Cypress. So you're starting to say well, I have a tree that's functioning with so much aggression right that I feel very confident. If I prune it's going to incite growth further down on the trunk. I would agree with you. I would agree with you. But what I'm saying to anybody else who's listening to this is listen that is not the move. If you are outside of the native range of bald Cypress, that's not how you want to conduct yourself because conducting yourself in that fashion could actually be the reason that your bald Cypress fails to thrive. So Chuck. Yes, everybody else who's not in the native region of bald Cypress. No, don't do that. It is a conifer still it is a conifer still right we do get sort of thrown off. I would say to a fairly significant degree by the vigor and the rapid production of growth and we say, oh my gosh, it's deciduous. It's deciduous deciduous conifer. It is still a conifer. What does that mean when it's a conifer? Okay, when it's a conifer if you want this tree to function perform and behave as a conifer, then you generate that back. Butting in that prevalence of growth by expanding health and and expanding for your mess. Okay, that's that's what it means when we say it's a conifer and and and to have that have context. We talk deciduous you get deciduous growing big elongating growth. You prune it you get those buds back along the base. Okay, when we start to say, okay, well, I'm in the native region of it. So I'm functioning at its maximum productivity. Okay, you can take advantage of its deciduous nature. Chuck you're talking about. Full defoliation and pruning and you get a beautiful second flush that ramifies in its native region. Okay. Yeah, you're taking advantage of its deciduous capacity it by executing that technique. And now even still I would say, okay, where's all the highly ramified bald cypress in Florida? If that's the move and the answer is most of them are dead, right? Because we abuse that strength Factory by overtapping it year after year after year with unsustainable technique. Okay, but when you start to talk about I've got a tree in development, I've got a tree that's got the strength built up. I'm only going to use this technique once right? You can pull on its deciduous capacity in the native region for the rest of us. We've got a lean on its coniferous capacity coniferous capacity meaning we get those buds occurring at those places that we want growth by allowing the foyer mass to expand achieve health and pay back resources. Nuances, nuances, nuances, a lot of nuances, bald cypress nuances. We're talking about the nitty-gritty of one. Of the best native North American species that's ever existed. Breaking it down the night folks. Eric P is up next. He says I've never seen a bald cypress with super dramatic trunk movement. Is that traditional or do they not do well with hard bins? Are they more prized with subtle movement? So I would say that the natural form of bald cypress is not some contorted and some people are going to say that's not true. I've seen a contorted bald cypress off of Highway 165 driving. Yeah. Oh, okay. I mean like you can find an exception to every rule. I will totally give you that there probably is off of some random Highway somewhere deep in the woods of Florida, Louisiana, Houston, Texas, North Carolina, Alabama, Arkansas, you know, there probably is okay. I'm sure that there are contorted bald cypress. You don't see that very often if ever okay, because their growth habit where they grow the conditions that they are. Able to out compete other species and occupy that space facilitate a vertical upright growth habit conical and youth much like any other conifer cytokinin void oxen driven growth. And as they start to mature they hit their vertical limit of water transport. They flatten out based on environmental reasons availability root system formation and hormonal allocation and you get the flattening of the form on that tall. Cylindrical rapidly tapering trunk. Okay, that's historically how bald cypress grow. That is generally the species behavior that we work with that we try to emulate right now. There's a traditional when you say is that traditional traditionally bald cypress have been treated like a conical conifered wired like a pine tree branches wired down out right? And when you see some of Guy Guidry's work, I love Guy Guidry. I think he's tremendously talented. He's made. Incredibly wonderful bald cypress. He's a legend one of Vaughn Vaughn Banting's original students amazing and and guy when we were together at Brussels rendezvous early on in my career coming back from Japan, you know, he said listen, I'm a sucker for a traditionally styled tree. I like the pine form. That's how I was taught. That's what I do. He's acknowledging that's his intention. That's his goal. He understands it and and that's what appeals to him. Awesome. Cool intentionality is what bonsai design is all about. That's not necessarily how bald cypress naturally grow. So for representing nature and miniature that feels a little bit compromising to the objective. If you're saying my objective is to make a bald cypress in a miniaturized form. All is up next and says when bald cypresses are healthy and strong. Do you hold off on fertilizer until the first flush has hardened off similar to a deciduous tree? No, no, or do you have a different regimen? Sounds like you might. Yeah. Yeah go hard. God go hard on bald cypress because this is the same thing as the Japanese black pine at this point in time, right? We have a conifer. Look at what we're doing here. Okay, we're essentially decandling. We're cutting all of the elongated shoots back to within a very short distance of their base depending on whether we're forming primary secondary tertiary sub tertiary levels. Okay, right now I'm dealing with sub tertiary a few of the longer pieces on the interior that I'm like, gosh, that's coming off a structural that really needs to be a secondary. I'm leaving them longer or I'm not even pruning them because they need more girth. Okay, part of the nuance of partial defoliation and continuing to expand branch formation, right? But when you think about it, I'm essentially decandling or pruning the tip back and needle plucking or partially defoliating to balance the energy over the course of the tree. I'm doing the same thing as a Japanese black pine. Now what's going to be the byproduct of this? It's going to push out. Second flush. I'm not looking for shorter needles. I'm not looking for shorter internodes. Why? Because I get to prune that shape in and I can't impact the length of those needles unless I do a full defoliation. And yes, the second flush will be much smaller. But again, I'm telling you not sustainable unless you're in the native range of bald cypress. Partial defoliation is simply balancing energy. Pruning back is creating bifurcation. We experience the fruits of our labor next spring. As the bud. Swell when we get to come back in and we get to shorten that second flush of growth and have all of those branches perfectly presented as they open up into that foliar mass. That is your prime moment for bald cypress. Okay. Are there ways to make them presentable over the growing season? Absolutely. Absolutely. There are right? This doesn't look this doesn't look too bad right here. Bottoms cleaned up orientation staggered even for your distribution long branches prune back. This is looking pretty darn good. I could present this and it wouldn't look bad in an exhibition. Okay, but when you see all of that ramification and all the work you've done because you've abided by the physiological triggers and you've gotten that ramification to occur. There's nothing better bald cypress in its bare native form with those buds swelling beautiful. Chuck is up next and says, what about grafting? I've not seen branches grafted on the bald cypress. Does bald cypress not graft well or does it back bud so easily that nobody really resorts to grafting? Is there a particular type of grafting that would work best on this species? Yeah. Yep. So there are and this was something Juan Andrade when he was working in the United States and I talked about when he came here and I actually have one, you know, you have these dwarf forms of bald cypress that have just the tiniest needles and they're super compact and really really interesting. And one was saying hey, have you ever grafted? This on to a full-size bald cypress and I said no, I haven't he said I'm really thinking about it because he was working primarily in Florida and I said man, I would be really interested to see what happened and then and then you know, one wasn't able to or chose to go back to Costa Rica and I haven't heard from him since and I don't know how that experiment of grafting worked. But if you were going to graph bald cypress, I would think especially on smaller bald cypress that you could probably graft on dwarf varieties. Scion grafting primarily seems like it would be the most functional and fundamental but honestly, I don't have any experience with it. Chuck. My guess is they back bud freely, which is why you don't see people graph to build branching including all the way back on the native trunk, which you can see here. Okay, so we get that back budding which you know, and I think also there's a freedom of shape in our native varieties. So we're not trying to get the same controlled aesthetic that you see in the traditional model. I think that's another reason. That we want to be really really clear of why we graphed what we graph to have control. If you're just functioning off what the tree gives you then you're sacrificing and relinquishing some of that control. And I think that's where you get the best native reflection is taking advantage of the unique character of the tree. So there's also that but I honestly don't know. Scion grafting would be my guess doing it in spring as the buds swell. I think you'd probably have a fairly high success rate if your grafting technique is on point. Oz asks, can you show a close-up of where you have left vertical branching? Vertical branching. Yeah, absolutely. So Jesus, can you just focus right in here? Okay, and I'm just going to pause. I'm going to do this. Go ahead and bring me in tight. Josh. Okay. So here's the vertical branching boom land in here. Here's another vertical branch boom laying in here. This one behind it another vertical branch coming up and back to the interior here. Okay. This is the only lateral that exists here notice top. Top top. Okay, so I've got my my horizontal here. I've got my tip to it here. I'm using this look at this another vertical woody branch right here coming off the top of this one. So this one's coming this way vertical branch coming off that way and it starts to stack. Look at the base of this base of this is coming off of the vertical right? So when we start to see that this is coming off of the vertical here. There it is. That's coming off of the vertical that one's coming off of the vertical this one. I've taken vertical vertical vertical. Lateral vertical all of them vertical. This is the structure of bald Cypress, right? And so you start to say well, that's not really different than a deciduous tree. Most of the time in a deciduous tree. We're taking horizontals. We're laying them out and then we build that ramification up but with bald Cypress you take that horizontal you lay it down that vertical grows you lay it this way you lay it that way you lay it that way you lay it that way and it starts to create this dancing sort of lateral orientation of branching right? It always starts the same though. We take up and out on coastal varieties down and out on Alpine varieties as just a fundamental shoulder of the branch is what demonstrates the environment. Okay exceptions would be wind right wind influenced in the Alpine right exceptions might be wind on the coast might take it down the slope as opposed to up the slope nevertheless up and out as a bald Cypress is a coastal variety. Of tree up and out but then we start to say what is unique that vertical branch that vertical branch. We're not cutting it off. We're using it right and in fact through partial defoliation. I'm facilitating it. I'm pushing for it. I'm favoring that right Ricky Diaz a question and says is this tree free of native soil at this point? We did the repot on Mirai live. To show forest repotting and we took out some pretty prominent areas of native. I don't know if it is completely free in totality yet or not. But my assumption is that it's if it's not it's pretty darn close. Yeah. We're actually caught up on questions right now. So if you guys have anything else let us know up there treebeard Steve just jumped in and said Ryan. You said bald Cypress should be fertilized hard. Could you expand on that? Yeah. So again if we're not if we're using okay, and this is this is really important because this is where it gets really murky, right? We're saying listen, we're going to decandal and needle pluck a Japanese black pine decandal to push the energy from the tip to the interior and get bifurcation needle pluck to balance energy and our goal is shorter needles and shorter internodes combined with ramification. Okay. So so we fertilize aggressively to build up the strength of Japanese black pine. We get to a point where they've almost got energy, you know, their post flush hardening off getting back into a slight energy positive nowhere near where they started. We decandal it and that's what gives us multiple buds that are shorter needles and shorter internodes and we don't feed. Okay with bald Cypress. We have to push a bald Cypress first. We have to push a bald Cypress to produce the kind of vigorous elongating growth that will mature and give us a thick enough. Branch to prune and get bifurcation on so from spring to this point in the summer or fertilizing to get branching that will provide ramification when we prune it now when we prune it we've got to fertilize aggressively to get bifurcated growth that elongates thickens and hardens off enough to stay and not drop off in the deciduous form, right? Because if we hold back on fertilizer now any of those ramifiable pieces that come off of that pruned component. Do not thicken with enough aggression and length and strength to stay when this tree drops its leaves in the fall. Okay, and that is where we've really got to understand that we're aggressively feeding to prepare for this. We're aggressively feeding in response to this both of those are trying to create strong enough growth to contribute to ramification. And again, this is why I continue to say hey, listen, hey, listen, listen, listen, listen. If you're going to grow bald cypress, if you're going to grow bald cypress, if you're going to grow bald cypress, if that's the best way to handle bald cypress, where all the highly ramified bald cypress? And it's just that's not a that's not a challenge. That's not I'm not speaking poorly. I'm not that's nothing like that. Okay, I'm not I it's not in any way critical. It is questioning something that we should all be able to question, right? Oh, okay. That's how we grow bald cypress. Well, what's the byproduct of that? What is the final outcome of that? Oh, the final outcome of that is not dependable. Crease and ramification. It's not dependable. Elevation of the refinability of the tree. Okay. Well, then that's not a sustainable technique. And maybe it's sustainable in certain regions native ranges. The answer to Chuck's question. Okay, cool. We have to understand that nuance it applies here, but not there there but not here. Okay, what I can tell you though is even in Chuck's area. If he followed this protocol, he would get dependable results that he could predict that. He could count on and that would definitely contribute to a higher elevation of the visual quality of the tree. Can he finesse that system? Can he nuance that system? Absolutely because he's in the native range. Most of us outside of the native range cannot. So I'm working now kind of in some of the under under regions of the tree. I'm just kind of trying to and these are a little bit weaker, but I'm focused on where I have stronger shoots. They may not be prunable. They may not be shoots that I can actively utilize in ramification. Now, for example, let me show you. Let me show you some of these Jesus. Can you just focus? Jeez, can you just focus right here? I was dying. I was I was dying on us as we speak. He stepped away to die. Okay. Jesus. Can you focus on these? Can you focus on these pieces here? Okay, notice that these pieces are vegetative. Okay. I just dropped this one down green soft fleshy and they've got already got kind of some bifurcation or multiple pieces of needles coming off of them. These will be branches. They are not ruby red. They're not ruby red. These are growing underneath a more dominant area. I cannot prune those. I do not want to prune those if I prune these vegetative pieces that are not showing that phloem. Not only do they not ramify. I probably kill them entirely. Okay, so I want to exercise caution in these areas that are growing. Welcome back. Thank God you're alive. Holy cow. I was trying to get off the mic for a second. I know nobody wants to hear that coughing fit. I know that reminded me of Ferris Bueller's day off when he had that program like computer. I was home. I was homesick mom. I was there the whole time. That's right. Yeah. Dalton has a question says how bad of an idea is it to show the tree temporarily standing in water during the exhibition? Good. That's a good question. And I and I have to be honest. I would I would never let me let me pull back. Those absolutes are a little bit dangerous. I don't know. Let me pull back one more time. I have killed bald cypress from overwatering them. Okay. I'll just say that. Right off the bat, you know, people think okay, they grow in standing water so we can cultivate them in standing water, right? Wrong wrong, at least my experience and maybe this is outside of their native range. And so they behave much more different and in trying to predict, you know, how they behave or make sense of that. I'm saying gosh, I killed this bald cypress. That's supposed to be capable of growing in standing water. I killed this with too much water. So, you know submerging a bald cypress in in water. Probably a bad idea. Okay, other people and I've heard I've heard this on numerous occasions. I have heard people successfully cultivating bald cypress in warmer regions of North America in standing water. I don't know if it's true. I would never suggest it as a technique because again, I've killed them and I've over by overwatering how bad of an idea is it probably interesting from a environmental insinuation probably very possible and relatively safe for short periods of time, but I just want you to know that I've killed bald cypress by overwatering them. So, you know, take take that and and use it as you will. Linda's up next and says my bald cypress turd. It's rosy color early this year and early to mid-May and I did some shaping at that time. I've not done any shaping since then. So do I now just leave it alone? As far as trimming and shaping? So good question Linda and I'm glad that you asked that when we come back and we handle a tree, right? We have to understand that there's a natural cadence to the energy system of a tree your tree turned ruby red at the time that it turned ruby red you performed some partial defoliation pruning or growth management of some kind. I'm not quite sure what you did, but it sounds to me like you did something of that fashion. Okay. Once you do. That you start to say, okay. Well, is there another time do I need to do it again? I think number one. It depends on the trees response number two. It depends on what are you trying to accomplish with that tree? But my feeling is it's not possible. Okay, as even if you say listen native range growing them at Max capacity. Can I prune bald cypress multiple times a year? Yeah, you could prune bald cypress multiple times a year. What would be the repercussion of pruning it? You could prune it multiple times a year. None of that ramification that you develop from those prunings would ever harden off and contribute to a sustainable branching at the end of the season, right? So you prune it and you're like I'm pruning it and it keeps growing and I'm pruning it keeps growing. Cool. What do you have to where's all the ramification? Where's all the result of that pruning at the end of the season? It all drops off every year when the when the needles drop. Okay, then you shouldn't have prune that much because if it all drops off then none of it is contributing to sustainable ramification. We didn't do anything favorable. For the evolution and further refinement of our tree quite the opposite. We over handled it and and kind of shot ourselves in the foot. Okay, so I would say Linda if you want to contribute to the ramification of the tree and you want to have those branches exist as woody tissue that allow you to enhance not only the winter silhouette but also the distribution of energy over the growing season and years to come Etc. I probably wouldn't be trying to do more to a tree that I've already handled. Okay. Now when you come back and you handle it next year now that we've sort of gone through these nuances and we understand the implications of how we handle it what happens when we handle it what we're trying to achieve when we handle it you can handle it in a way that will further contribute to the tree and give you a much more positive result balance energy Etc. That is what I would recommend and how I would handle that situation. We're all caught up again Bentley had a question then you answered it before we even had a chance to ask. It you're ahead of the game. Wow. Wow. Okay. So when I'm when I'm handling and when I'm looking at this, you know, and I'm going to do a few more pieces and then I'm going to close it out because really this is a this again. This is going to take me several hours and I hope you've been able to see some of the detail shots as I'm just working through some of these areas up in here, but I'm doing the same consistent thing and let me again sort of reiterate and clarify. I'm going ahead and I'm taking off bottom growing pieces bottom growing needles. I'm cleaning out any of the junctions where ramification exists because naturally just like any other tree. There are nodes of growth where there's meristematic tissue. And that's where you're going to get the most proliferation and unfortunately because it's a high water utilization tree at those nodes. If we don't go ahead and reduce the competing pieces of growth at those nodes, we will see anything that we leave behind at that node take over for the branch. Is that we've disempowered through pruning and partial defoliation. Okay, so I'm cleaning out those nodes. I'm cleaning off bottom growing pieces and I'm creating a staggered pattern. Now the nuance to bald cypress branching as we use verticals as well as laterals. We do not use bottom growing pieces. Okay, so from that perspective that gives us a unique branch display already by using those bottom growing pieces. Okay, but when we start to think about all of the different strengths that present themselves to us, right? We've got some pieces that are ruby red that are thick that are vigorous. We've got other pieces that are still very soft and fleshy green and we're like, how do we handle those if it is not absolutely strong if it is not absolutely giving you the definition of phloem formation. You do not want to be pruning that thing that will definitely cause that piece to lose its strength and fail as a contributing portion of ramification. Right? These are fundamentals of bald cypress handling as it. Pertains to generating refining and creating ramification. But what we've done we've gotten through about half the apex. Okay, let me rotate to a point where you can see some of there's some of that density thinning out over here. Okay, and let me keep going and just see if we can get the top. Okay, some of that reduction of density happening. Let me go ahead and continue by the time I'm done with this there. You can see some of the airiness that's occurring on that far right side. This is the back you see this now you start to see this is. Clean this is clean and that's partially defoliated. You can compare it to that branch over there. We're starting to get nice even distribution. I've been working for what an hour. We've been going for an hour a little more than an hour hour and 20 minutes hour and 20 minutes. I've been working for an hour and 20 minutes and I'm through, you know, roughly 25% of the largest trees canopy by the time I'm done with this. This is a four or five hour operation for me and I work pretty quickly focused operation. I've got to be careful of not. Overly abusing the foliar mass. I'm leaving behind so that it doesn't fall off because I've broken it all and damaged it bald. Cypress is all about technique and the attention to detail but but come back to me come back to me come back to what our focal point is. What is our focal point generating woody ramification? That's the goal. That's the goal in Mariah's bald Cypress handling. I am generating woody ramification. Okay, I don't want a tree that doesn't. Have fine branching. I don't want a tree that drops all of its branching in the fall as the leaves shed or else I would handle my bald Cypress like everybody else does coming back from Japan having seen this higher level of ramifiable growth looking at Taiwanese bonsai Indonesian bonsai and recognizing there are ways to achieve ramification that in North America. We have not been able to accomplish and then looking at bald Cypress and saying deciduous conifer. I get two flushes of. Growth if I time it correctly you can apply this exact same concept to a tamarisk tamarisk right is a deciduous tree. Technically, I guess they would call it a broadleaf. I don't really know similar to a bald Cypress you get two flushes. I handled a tamarisk for two years observed it got it at Chukugo in from Masaishi. I pruned it. I saw it. I pruned it. It fell off in the fall. I recognize I've got to do this at the right time who I do this at the right time. I get two sets of ramification prune in spring prior. Growth it grows prune in the early summer. It produces ramification stays on when the leaves drop off boom. I've got finer ramification and woody tissue expansion bald Cypress start applying it to a bald Cypress. Oh my gosh. It works the exact same way. This is how you ramify a bald Cypress. This is how you develop that high-level deciduous winter silhouette in a bald Cypress. This is how you create a shorter needle denser bald Cypress as a bone size subject. I'm in that's all I needed to know right, but you've got to understand. Those nuances. So the trickle-down effect over 10 years of applying that is learning. Oh the length that I prune that ramification to for the stage of that branching that I'm trying to create. Is it primary? Is it secondary? Is it tertiary or sub tertiary? Okay, the length has to shorten each time we prune. You've got to know where that branch exists in your design. That was a big one timing physiological indicators of the flow and formation in the ruby red timing to hit it. Fertilization. To get that gas pedal driven so that that solidifies this woody tissue in the second flush prior to the dropping of the foyer mass and then the biggest one once you create that woody branch ramification, you got to manage those water sprouts or else you're in deep deep doo-doo because that tree will absolutely take the path of least resistance for water allocation and that woody tissue that you've spent the past eight years building can go boom single season. You miss it. It's gone. It's gone. Okay, and you have. To rebuild it again, this tree suffered. Here's the best part about bald Cypress coniferous some challenges there deciduous some opportunities there bald Cypress deciduous conifer. I want to maximize its deciduous growth rate. Now. This is a forest in a singular environment. The main tree is obviously consuming a majority of resources. It's a slower transition with multiple trees in a singular container. How do you balance the energy stop the utilization of resources and allow the younger the smaller the weaker trees to pick up some of that excess moisture and nutrition left behind by that balancing of energy really really strong discussion of high high-level bone side subject. This is high-level bone size subject matter tonight. This is not a beginner discussion. This is not a discussion of hey, I have a bald Cypress that I've kind of played with how does this apply? This is a I want to make the best bald Cypress possible. I haven't had the capacity to generate. Tremendous ramification in the past. How do I get that done? How do I balance energy in a multi-trunk singular container composition? What are the factors that contribute to these things? How do we go ahead and maintain woody lignified branching over the long prolonged course of time Etc. This is high-level bone side discussion. A couple more questions pop up the tree bird Steve asks. What's the substrate and what are the finest particles used for this tree solid Akadama and when solid Akadama. I'm on my bald Cypress and there's a and I did I went 1 16th to 1 quarter or 2 millimeter to 6 millimeter as far as depending on whether you're in metric or Imperial and I've started doing that because I again we created the professional sifting screen set which is not by any means limited. Anybody can use it. In fact, I would encourage beginners to use it because it sets you up for success but it's on the metric because I think the metric gives you much more malleability than the Imperial. Especially in availability of mesh sizes. Anyways. Bald Cypress in a lot of portions of the country because they are a high water retentive tree high water utilizing tree are grown in a very heavy dense organic medium. Nothing wrong with that, especially when we're talking about recovery post collection of bald Cypress recovery post digging out of the field bald Cypress out of the swamp bald Cypress sure heavy organic to match the native soil. That it came out of and have a more homogenous water oxygen balance. Cool got it. Bones I container we are trying to create a ramified root system just as much as we're trying to create a ramified branching system when we use a high organic medium with bald Cypress we get long thick course roots and it makes it very difficult to create that fine ramification in that heavy. Organic mixture, which is why I shifted to the Akadama saw the Akadama like it does with any other species of tree ramify the root system and give me shorter needles and much more controllable growth. I think the soil combined with the pruning and then we tack on fertilization approach to manage the gas pedals of the tree that trio of pieces of information soil nutrition and pruning or what allow you to ramify your trees and what allow you to achieve. Fine degrees of ramification if any one of these in this trio of three are off. You don't get fine ramification. You don't get it right. It's a beautiful marriage and that's where you say listen. People speak about. The you know, should I go to Japan and apprentice? This might not be a modern discussion because Bones I in Japan has changed and changed dramatically in a very short period of time. Should I go to Japan and apprentice and people say you would learn how to maintain trees, but you're not going to learn how to create trees. I think that is largely true depending on who you study with. There are not a lot of tree makers in Japan these days. Okay, learning how to maintain trees. You're learning how to you know, shift a refined tree Etc. But the thing that you learn is how to maintain a refined tree in Japan and and don't be fooled. Listen making a tree super challenging. Okay, refining a tree and maintaining a tree. In a high degree of refinement highest level of Bonsai highest level of Bonsai. So when we start to say hey listen tonight is a very advanced subject matter tonight is a super intense stream of nuances to take this species and be able to elevate it to a high degree of ramification and maintain that maintain that energy system maintain that ramified branch that you've created. Okay. One of the highest levels. Okay. So when we start to say there's a derogatory. Sense of that trees already been created. So there's nothing to learn there actually maintaining a tree at that level is the highest level of Bonsai execution. The hardest thing to do over the course of time and one of the things that I think in North America. We have not mastered or wrapped our mind around especially as it applies to our native species. Would you try cold? This is Dalton's question. Would you try cultivating epiphytic plants like an old man's beard with this tree or would it degrade the bark like normal Moss? Um, so we have a lot of volunteer ferns that grow in our containers and because we live in an environment that's favorable for ferns. They're everywhere around us. We've got the moisture to facilitate them. We try to manage their scale and size. I just prune back the fern at the base here so that it wasn't taking over the composition and that works for us. If you live in an area where epiphytic plants because of high relative humidity and an environment that's favorable for epiphytic plants you live in that area. You have epiphytic volunteers sure. I don't see, you know, unless it's a parasite. I don't see a problem with it trying to put an epiphytic plant in a bald Cypress in an area. That's not favorable for epiphytic plant volunteer growth meaning they just do it naturally. You're going to be paying so much attention to that that oftentimes you would see that detriment the tree. It's one of the common I think misconceptions about Moss is you've got to keep Moss so wet to get it to grow that it that you know, it's counterproductive for the tree. That's that's not true. We've learned and dispelled that myth that that's not true with an epiphytic plant. It is true right to cultivate an epiphytic plant out of an environment that facilitates epiphytic plants is to is to be the detriment of the tree. So if you're in that environment, absolutely let it rock out unless it's parasitic. It'd be awesome. If you're not probably going to be a challenge for you and might be to the detriment of the tree. Chuck asks, how quickly do new surface roots develop on bald Cypress? Mine has a massive root on one side. It is a bit too horizontal. Could I shorten and bevel it or would I or should I cut it off and root graft? I would do neither Chuck. I would do neither especially in collected Cypress. We talk about the narrative arc of collected material and we say listen bald Cypress is a deciduous conifer. So it should respond more quickly, right? And we should see things happen more rapidly. It's not true. Okay. Collected bald Cypress, Mary Madison collected bald Cypress, Louisiana collected bald Cypress, Texas collected bald Cypress, North Carolina or Carolina collected bald Cypress, any of those. Okay, when you sever those major sap flow or water conductive veins that might stay alive for six or eight years before it starts to atrophy, die, form deadwood, compartmentalize, change behavior, etc. When you get that tree out of collection to shorten or cut back woody root systems. Is a no-no. It's a no-no. You had the opportunity. The opportunity was in the swamp. If it wasn't cut in the swamp and that trees compartmentalize and recovered on that root unless you have definitive roots secondary roots growing behind that that you could shorten it to you do not want to shorten that piece. You want to adjust the design to a to accommodate right and that and I would I would tell you that is not up for debate. That is not a negotiable. That is a. Fundamental understanding of a collected Cypress and its behavior and the narrative arc of yamadori to domesticated over time. Right now. I've got a bald Cypress that was collected in 2011 or 2012 major fin of the Nibari was cut and it has slowly compartmentalize calluses rolled. It's dead deadwood has now is now showing where the bark has sloughed off that was collected in 2012 is 10 years ago. And it just started showing deadwood this year. You know, that's the narrative arc and the time frame of yamadori to adapt to domestication. I would not try to graft and I would not try to cut I would accommodate design to facilitate use of that piece tribute. Steve asks, when would you stop aggressive fertilization for the year on a bald Cypress? And what are the indicators? I would aggressively fertilize bald Cypress with nitrogen through the middle of. August right now. If you're in such a, you know, hellacious area of heat in the summertime that you're experiencing temperatures consistently over a hundred degrees. You could lean on liquid more heavily in those regions to get Cypress the nitrogen. It needs to develop that second flush into woody tissue. Once you cross and again, August 15th in the northern hemisphere as a daylight length trigger for plant physiology. We refer to it. In Japanese black pine as a timing to be able to shorten pieces that were not decandled right? August 15th and on till early September major period of transition for fertilization of our conifers in North America nitrogen fertilization up to August 15th after August 15th. We want to back off on nitrogen pretty heavily through the early and mid portion of fall because nitrogen pumping. When we're in. A period of vascular productivity is not favorable for the tree in terms of insect and disease susceptibility. Okay, so I would be going heavy up to that sort of period of daylight transition as a physiological trigger, which broadly speaking across the northern hemisphere is sort of that August 15th to at maximum September 1st after that. I'm going to back off on heavy nitrogen feed. I'm going to lean not on a 0 10 10 or any of that stuff. But I'm going to back off on heavy nitrogen. I'm going to move more into a calcium carbon kind of humate treatment for our trees question from Bentley says, when's the best time to carve a bald Cypress? I need to work on transitioning the flat chop that my trees came with historically. I would say the very best time to do that Bentley is in the spring prior to the push of winter. Okay. And then you go ahead and you paste you putty that fresh wound. Could you do it now? If you don't have a tremendous amount of foyer mass around it, maybe where you're at, which is again, you're closer to the native range. Could you go ahead and reduce that kind of heavy foyer mass with a big chop or a, you know, cut carve and get vascular productivity over the remaining months? You probably could. It's not something that I would do. It's not something that I would do in a non-native region of bald Cypress growth. But I would say the general trend and rule that would give you definitive dependable success anywhere in the growing region of the Northern Hemisphere would be spring prior to the push of growth. Eric P asks for bald Cypress and development. Would you go 70% organic 30% inorganic? I think that's I think that gets you a long ways down the road. And you know again. A lot of times. A lot of bald Cypress collectors use a hundred percent organic for recovery out of the swamp. I think it's a tougher transition when you go a hundred percent organic into the aggregate soil of bonsai cultivation in the shallow confined environment of a bonsai container. And that's where I think the 30% aggregate starts to give you that transition. You then transition into a much higher aggregate when you go into the bonsai container and your reduction of that native soil mass is far less, you know, traumatic for the tree over the course of the year. I think that's a tough transition. For the tree over the course of time. I love the 70 30 for high water mobility trees. I love the 70 aggregate 30 organic for you know, some of our our conifers coming out of the field like a like a pine like a spruce like some of these species that need a little bit more oxygen a little less water. I think it's a beautiful developmental soil mix. That's all we have for tonight. Good good. Yeah, I knew I wasn't going to finish this. The goal was not to finish this when we dive into big heavy. Nuanced information. It's about really keying into the fine action the fine technique. We're going to dig into to Elm pruning and show preparation for deciduous and really walk you through how you ramify Elms to a high degree. We're going to dig into pomegranate. We're working on some other species before we start to hit that twist of for your growth into the vascular portion of fall. So we have really really good information to elevate your bonsai technique. To that high level of refinement again, you know Mirai started out with the broad brushstroke of the foundation. How do we set structure? How do we style? How do we design? How do we do these big things? How do we water? How do we fertilize? Okay, we moved into secondary. How do we build build branching systems? How do we create separate for your masses? How do we create proportional design apical insinuation Etc. You know now at this point with Mariah live we're talking about hey, how do you hit that highest level? How do you hit that highest year of refinement of perpetual? Situation of continued sub refinement levels? How do you maximize? How do you continue to evolve and in next week's stream? How do you respond to catastrophic unpredictable events and what they do to your trees? How do you respond with design? How do you respond with technique? How do you respond with timing at that kind of you know Association, which we're all going to experience in bonsai tonight was all about how to handle this multi-trunk in a singular container and understand the physiology. Of it. It was about how we balance pieces that are weaker versus pieces that are stronger to get the same aesthetic as well as physiological distribution. It was about how do we maintain bald Cypress in a ramifiable form at a high level over a decade of bonsai cultivation. These are the techniques that are not only going to allow you to get there. Once you get there getting there is far easier than staying there. How do you stay there? That's our focus in on Mariah live for the rest of this year. And the and the foreseeable future. We will be designing. We will be doing radical stuff. We will be building more pillar information that you haven't seen before. But how do we keep you at the high level? We've built your knowledge to this is a very major missing link in North American. Bonsai in Western Bonsai European Bonsai struggles with this tremendously Central and South American Bonsai. You know, how are we going to keep it and continue to evolve it? Australian Bonsai is working at this exact same thing with their native species right now. You know, Japanese Bonsai has been there for a long time. And because they stayed there so long the tree maker mentality kind of disappeared. We've got to be very careful to balance our Bonsai practice from all of these different perspectives. Early fall is when we move back into raw material design and exciting stuff. Until then we're going to build your skills at the highest level. Good to be live. Good to be back. Happy solstice longest day of the year. Why wouldn't we celebrate it right team is recharged. We're ready to go. Love you guys. Thanks for the support. All right. See you next week. No, see you for the live Q and A's. Yeah, live Q and A Thursday at 10 a.m. Our time and then we'll have the form. If you guys haven't put anything in go ahead and jump in there. There's still some spots available spots available. See you guys. Love you. Mwah. 
