. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Thank you. Thank you. Forest design is one of the many challenging but enjoyable relationships that we get to explore in the bonsai process. And to back into forest design, starting with the notion of what are we trying to accomplish, but more than that, what are the criteria and factors that we must consider in order to execute really quality forest design? I think there's a tremendous amount of knowledge and a tremendous amount of knowledge and a tremendous amount of guidance that we pull from just fundamental understanding of those considerations. And that's where I really want to begin the discussion of forest design. Now, I'm going to give you a once-around with this bald cypress, very special bald cypress. And I do have to say, I did not arrange this forest. This is a very natural composition. I do not know if this was collected or nursery-grown, but I do know that these pieces are not all unified as a singular living tree, but are separate pieces that have grown together to a degree that I would be very reluctant to separate them. Now, inside of this, we understand the repotting bench is a completely different world, a completely different planet than the styling turntable of the workshop. And it's inside of this that I think we're going to see a tremendous number of changes occur in this design based on the fundamental understanding that forest design pulls on very specific criteria. Now, what are those criteria? Let's just go ahead and establish a backbone of knowledge before we dive into the handling of this bald cypress forest, okay? First and foremost, in forest design, we start to talk about a difference of girths of the trunk, okay? The girth of the trunk, the thickness of each trunk, and that being diversified across all of the different pieces in a forest, different sizes, if you will, in terms of thickness. This establishes your hierarchy. It is not impossible in forest design to have your thickest tree be shorter than thinner trees. It's not impossible. But it also doesn't feel quite appropriate unless there is a certain amount of thickness. A significant demonstration of age for that thickest piece to not be the tallest. And so generally, we say, okay, different thicknesses is the primary, number one component of what makes a good forest. And inside of that, the thickest piece is typically the tallest and the most dominant piece of that forest, okay? And number two, different heights. Okay, because we talk about girth associating with height, and you have different girths. You've got to have different heights. We don't want a homogenous, we don't want a homogenous canopy necessarily, right? In fundamental forest design, we don't want a homogenous height to the canopy unless that is an effect that we are intentionally trying to duplicate from the natural environment and the forest that we are contextually representing. Fundamental forest design, different thicknesses of the trunk, different heights of those trunks where they pinnacle out at the apical region, okay? Now, once we have those girths and heights, we have the spaces between the trunks, different spacing, right? And this is really where we start to have this lateral mobility and intentional shift of the lateral presence. And as I rotate, you'll notice that as I get to locations where trunks start to overlap and hide each other, where I don't have that space between the trunks, or notice when we're looking here that the spaces here are equivalent in those two regions. The size of this space, very equivalent to the size of this space. And let me go ahead and go three-quarter. on that so you can see that. Notice, I have three trunks that are in line there that we've now lost the spacing, and now suddenly that spacing has a homogenous size here. This is really when we start to talk about forest creation as well as in the design of forest continuing to improve this relationship of different thicknesses, different heights, and different spaces between the trunks. When you create a forest, you are seeking to create a front in that composition that shows every trunk. That's your ideal. That's your north star. The more trees you have in that composition, the harder that is to achieve. However, if we can show every trunk and have different sizes, thickness, different heights, and different spacing between all of those pieces, we start to win the game of forest design. That's something we have to consider. Last piece, different planes. We need pieces in the foreground. We need pieces in the midground. We need pieces in the background. When we start to talk about those planes, showing that difference of planes, this is showing generations in the foreground. Foreground, smaller trees, big powerful central tree as the predominant sort of mother, father, grandfather tree, whatever we want to call it, that singular tree having this offspring. This is a generational approach. The pieces in the foreground, they show that generational component to a forest. When we start to see pieces in the background, much smaller pieces in the background, this gives us depth. We've got generations. Age, reproductive cycle, the story of a forest in the foreground. We've got depth we're seeing through the forest. And when you look at a forest, you see those trees lined up and you see those trees in the distance are skinnier, they're shorter. That's what gives you that perspective, right? That allows you to recognize, oh, this is a big ecosystem. We want to convey that in a miniaturized form, right? And so when we start to talk about forest design, the most complex thing about it is taking into consideration everything that we see is the same for every single one of those pieces, different thicknesses, heights, spaces, and planes. But if we can manage all four of those criteria, we build the very best forest that we can possibly represent. This is the backbone of forest design that we have to enter the equation with to understand if we're going to deviate, it's an intentional deviation to express an environment, to express a species behavior, to express a nuance of place, okay? But if we are just creating a forest, and we want to go back to the、 Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. So back to, or we want to lean on the strongest criteria for forest design, those four pieces have got to be a part of every consideration that we make in terms of the shape and design, okay? So what we will notice in this, okay, Bald Cypress Forest, again, not sure, nursery material, collecting material, I don't know, I don't know, but this is naturally connected or intertwined in their root system. I didn't feel it was necessary to pull this apart, but I did think that this was going to be the front of my tree. I did think this was going to be the front of my tree. Now, there's some limitations to this piece. I'm saying, okay, this is the front of my tree, I've got my big central pillar, okay, Bald Cypress, it's an upright growing tree, so I need that central tree to be very rigidly ramrod straight in this form. This isn't a wind, there's no, Bald Cypress, boom, okay? I want that, I want that vibe, I want that height. The fact that they so rapidly taper, this gives me the impression of a very, very large tree, okay? And I love this. When we start to talk about large tree implementation. Impressions, narrowing that silhouette, that gives us a sense of scale. We're going to work into that, okay? But as I've been looking at it, I recognize from here, I lose a lot of the trunks, and as I rotate, especially in this region right here, I've got one, two, three, four. Let me show you that. One, two, three, four, three, four. See those two in the back? These two in the foreground here? I've got to somehow work these out so that I get all four of those untethered to each other. Meaning, I see spaces between them. I see them that are irregular, not repetitive spacing, different spacing, different planes. I need to see that, okay? So as I continue to look, I start to recognize, oh, yeah, no, I see that overlapping, okay? I can't be in here, right? That dominant trunk is lost. I continue to rotate, okay, I see some of that, right? There might be some merit in there. There's some interest over in here, right? We start to get over into this region. Now we start to see the dominant trunk kind of overwhelm that piece in the back, and as I continue to rotate, I start to recognize. Actually, this might be, look at there, notice how those trunks open up. I'm just looking past at the screen behind you. Notice how those trunks start to make themselves, and then we get back to overlapping, and we see something here, right? So we've got some opportunities, you know, we're still looking baseline features of that primary tree in terms of that design, but I'm thinking we're somewhere in here. Now this is the back. This is the rear portion, and what are we lacking in terms of the design of this forest? Foreground. Foreground pieces that give us the generational sense, okay? So could we already say there's a slight weakness to this? Yes, we could. Now, we understand how bald cypress occur. Bald cypress are occurring where there is a plethora of water accumulating, and where there is not a lot of standing water accumulating over a six-month period of the year. That kind of forms the boundary. There might be some slightly more genetically drought-tolerant bald cypress that can exist outside of that. But we have definitive boundaries to the bald cypress forest and these representations of the southeastern United States. Is this a superficial, you know, flaw? Is this a deal-breaker for the representation of nature in miniature? I don't think so, but let's start to tell the tale, because this could be the outer margin of a generational forest, and we're just simply seeing the boundary where that facilitator, the water accumulation based on the topography of the landscape, has created a boundary for this, right? Would I like it here? Yes, I would. Does this have to be a traditional forest? No, it does not. Do we still need to abide by different thicknesses, heights, spaces, planes? Ideally, yes, we're missing this one plane. Let's deal with it. We've got great surface roots. We've got the capacity. But if I'm here, now let me just show you, this whole thing is tilted back this way. I need this whole thing to move forward, so I'm going to first start by changing that. And again, this is really one of those nuances that I love to explore based on the fact that on the repotting bench, it seemed like this was a given. It was an obvious. Of course, that's going to be the front. Of course, that's, I mean, what other option is there? Okay, now this is straight up. Let me go ahead and show you straight up and down is to say that the trees, yes, straight up and down still feel like they're leaning backwards slightly, okay? I need those trees slightly forward. Let me show you that angle here. Notice that they're rigidly straight up. If our front is over here, okay, so I'm going to go one step farther. This might be a little bit much, and let me go, let me go with a little half step here, because I think this is going to be a nuanced change of angle, a little half step here. Now that starts to push that forward, and let's see how that feels. Notice how that brings everything sort of into the vision right there. Now it feels like it's coming at us. Now it feels like it's giving us something, okay? I think if we go too far, and I will explore, I will explore a little bit thicker piece here because this is going to give me one more little nuanced increase in height. I think this might be a little too much. Okay? It's always worth pushing past. Now you see how far forward that is, and now we start to look, and although it does create a very looming presence of this, let me show you how far forward that is. That's pretty intense right there. That's a little bit, I think that's a little bit aggressive. I'm going to pull back to the middle option, and just kind of strike that happy medium, okay? All right. I love this. I love this. Now, when we start to establish this, what we're really trying to manipulate when you change the angle, when you're exploring forest design, right, and in the creation process as well, we've got to be thinking about this. You know, do we style the tree first and then repot it? Sometimes we can. That's not typical, but sometimes we can. Do we repot the tree first, structure the forest, and then style it? That is the more common way to go about it, more common way to go about it, okay? So, potting this first as a composition that I wasn't going to pull apart and put back together, I had the ability to miss it just slightly, okay? If we are talking about potting it first, putting on a stone, tearing apart root balls and putting them back together, you don't have that freedom. You really have to be on point with the repotting process to nail that aesthetic. But as we're looking at this now, I had the ability as a unified piece to miss it, and here we are correcting it, okay? Now, I'm looking to establish in the change of angle of a forest. In forest design, I'm looking to establish the orientation, both that rigidly straight if we're talking about a formal upright or a rigidly upright growing tree and the nature of the forest showing that, that main dominant trunk having that perpendicular from the edge of the container, perpendicular rise, booms, nice and straight, okay? I would be changing angle left and right if I needed to increase that upright form of that central piece. So, always base your angle changes and positions on orientation. I'm going to be planting that thickest trunk into the position that you want because these smaller trunks, I have the ability to move these. I can change the nature of that relationship, but this one, this is a little bit tougher to be able to manipulate and shift its position. I'm going to focus my effort on that and that begins the process, okay? Now as I start to rotate and we start to look towards the back, notice I have a knee here, very beautiful aspect and characteristic, unique to bald cypress, I've got these pieces that I want to move. I want to make sure are as rigidly straight as the thematic definition of my forest, that primary tree, okay? Primary tree is all curvaceous, then I can't have straight trunks. Primary trunk is straight, then all these other pieces can't be all wild and curvaceous. We have to have consistency in the movement of the trunks to tell the same story of the influence, the species, the environment, et cetera, okay? But if I start to look at this and I see any of these that are encroaching upon that, any of these that are arching back towards that. I want to be doing something to give them their own space. Now this piece feels like it is directly reflective of that. I love that. I think that's such a beautiful feature. But these pieces right here, these smaller pieces that exist in the back, number one, they overlap each other, okay? Number two, there's some sub-trunks that are growing out of here, okay? And number three, overlap each other, they're also leaning in and I would love for these to just have a slight adjustment back out. Now do I wire this whole thing to give that adjustment? I don't want to destroy it. I don't want to destroy that cylindrical presentation of that piece. I'm wondering, maybe we can go ahead and prop a little bit. Maybe I can kind of use a more subtle change. But for these upper apical regions, I'm definitely going to have to apply some wire to be able to change and manipulate their position in terms of the overall composition, okay, as we come back around here. This one is also encroaching. Now let me show you that from the front, okay, front being somewhere in here where we see them. Let me just find all the trees. Right there, okay? Notice how this is kind of leaning towards the front, but also leaning towards that tree into that, okay? I want to just take that out slightly. I want to give that a little bit of space, a little bit of position. Notice these pieces here, okay? I start to straighten those out, find their place in the composition, and all of a sudden, we start to see things dramatically improving in terms of the primary lines of the composition. I love this. This is the very first step in terms of establishing our design of the forest. I'm not pruning, right? I'm not doing anything other than figuring out where do my definition of line based to tip on every single trunk inside of this forest, where does that definition need to exist? Developing my strategy, okay? And I recognize, okay, I can do more harm than good if I come back in and I start wiring all of these pieces. But I do need a little bit of control of this upper apical region. I do need a little bit of space and distance to be established in here. I do have the ability to use some blocking and some strategic relocation of these pieces, and I am going to have to wire a few of these just to put them in a position in the upper portion of the tree that allows me to kind of establish where they exist. Now, let's go ahead and walk through the technical aspects of this. Okay? If I'm going to wire this trunk, if I'm going to wire this trunk, if I'm going to wire this trunk, if I'm going to wire this trunk, if I'm going to wire this trunk, I want all of the wires spinning in the exact same rotation, okay? Because what do we know about wires? Same angle, same spacing, no gaps. These are our three fundamental rules. We don't have any rules beyond that, okay? We don't like rules. We always can break rules when we need to for the aesthetic or functional aspects of bonsai. But same angle, same spacing, no gaps. Looks good. Gives function. Function and aesthetics. These are our considerations. By having that wire wrapping in the same direction, this is another nuanced repetition of pattern that allows the wire to disappear. So I pick, do I want this clockwise? Do I want this counterclockwise? Right? And I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to say, you know what, I'm going to go counterclockwise just because for me that tends to be the most comfortable rotation that I can apply as just an intuitive aspect of the structural wiring process. And I'm going to be starting my structural wire at a point where I have a nice rigid portion of the trunk. To begin that process and where I'm already immediately up and distanced from the base so that I don't disrupt the position of these trunks and instead only have a little bit of capacity to change the position, okay? I'm going to start with these two back pieces, get some structural wire on these. I want you to pay attention to how I anchor it, how I handle it, and the spacing that I put in between each turn because when we're dealing with very cylindrical upright trunks, very significant spacing. When we're dealing with these cylindrical upright trunks. Elongated spacing between the wire. We're not trying to create significant movement, we are trying to straighten the structure, okay? Here we go. See what we can do. Okay, now I'm going to start right here at this locked in point, okay? Right where that trunk is nice and nice and thick and sturdy, I don't need any movement there, okay? I don't want big old beefy wire on this. I don't want it to be too thin. Too thin looks just as unsightly as too thick, okay? This is some of the hardest wire to apply. Wire that's visible, that doesn't have an anchor, that's visible all the way up the trunk, okay? Because you know you're going to be able to see this. This is a deciduous conifer in a bald cypress. You're going to see this wire on this tree for the next two years. Okay? Any deviation in the spacing or that angle, spacing between the turns, angle of the turn, any deviation is going to be immediately, immediately noticeable visually, okay? Beyond that, any gaps or that contacts that trunk are going to be immediately noticeable, okay? Beyond that, any odd movement that the wiring process puts into that trunk is going to be immediately noticeable. It's going to be immediately obvious and accessible. And so we start to have this really radical challenge in the structural work on these pieces to carry 8 gauge all the way up to this delicate top, not work harden it, not have the upper portion of the tree kinking or taking on a tremendous amount of movement. We want to keep it straight, okay? Wiring can be just as damaging to the aesthetic as not wiring, okay? If we finish this off and suddenly we've got a tremendous, tremendously contoured and tremendously curvaceous aesthetic to that, okay? Now look at that. Now all of a sudden we're able to separate those two, okay? Let me just show you from the three-quarter view. Hey, Zeus, go ahead and take a look at the smooth continuation of that wire, okay? Same angle, same spacing, no gaps, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. Now this is tapering down, so naturally that's going to have to adapt and adjust. You got a little bit of a space right there, right there, just a little bit of a gap, not bad. Not bad considering, okay? Very, very nice, very, very nice. Same angle, same spacing, no gaps, and that allows me to have control of that. Okay, now I'm going to come back and I'm going to do this one on the interior. Do you do the interior first? Do you do the exterior first? How far up do you take it? I take it until I have no more control, okay? Eight gauge on this really nice thin piece. I'm going to come back with a slightly smaller, maybe 12 gauge here just to flatten that out. That feels like that's enough, but I do want to carry it up to the apex there. Let me go ahead and finish that and then I'll step into the other one, the one behind it. Okay, a little bit of 12 gauge. Now watch this. I don't have another combination. I don't have another combination for this. This is the 12 gauge. I've got a nice fine branch here. I've got these two combinations here. Okay, I've got these two branches here. Yeah, that's a combination. I've got a wire turning in between them. I've got some finer pieces up in here. Yes, yes, okay? There's a combination for me and I've got this fine piece here, okay? Other than that, I've got two fine pieces at the top. That's a really precarious kind of position. Now, my eight gauge is up against the base of this fine wire. It's up against the base of this fine wire. That means that I'm going to start my 12 gauge. Down a little bit lower. Now, you're noticing that I'm not locking this in. I'm not wiring it in tandem, okay? Because I'm not making big, huge correctional moves. I'm not putting dramatic movement into this. As long as I keep this right along, as long as I keep this right along that eight gauge, just nice and clean. Nice and clean, same angle, same spacing, no gaps, okay? And go ahead and grab back onto that. And now I can straighten out that last piece there. There we go, okay? And if you need a little bit of leverage, notice how I just kick this out. Go ahead and pull back. Notice how I kick that piece out. I can use that on my wrist. That stops it from rotating. Small little tricks here to be able to handle this kind of really dainty, delicate twigging with the kind of wire that gives us control. Okay, and I want to wire this all the way out to the apex because I want that, I want to have total control. Maybe I want to stand that out. Maybe I want to stand that up and increase the height of that. That'll depend on what my other trunks do as I start to set them, right? But at least now I've got that central piece kind of defined, set up for success, boom. Okay, now I'm going to take this piece out, boom, okay? And we've got a nice, beautiful setup and establishment. Okay, let's go ahead and let's do this interior piece here. Now you might say, well, man, why did you do the interior piece? Why didn't you do that first? Well, honestly, I wanted to get this piece out of the way. I wanted to allow that piece to have some degree of protection because the interior piece is probably, this interior piece, probably going to be a little bit more challenging to wire and I'm probably going to be bumping into this quite a bit. If I don't have something on it to protect it, oftentimes we can do a little bit of damage wiring these interior pieces. Okay, now I have this lower trunk here. This is coming right out of the, right out of this sort of odd little midsection area right here. I love that. We want to use that. Nice skinny little generational insinuation of a trunk, okay? So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to be trying to create some sense of separation. Now I need to know, do I want this piece to move into this interior and straighten out or do I want this piece to move out? Okay, let's go ahead and take a look at the front to be able to decide that. Our front is here. Okay, and I'm looking past the camera. Front is here. Do I want that to go that, ooh, or do I want that to go here, mm? Nice little separation. Notice the spacing right in here. Notice the spacing. Boom. Okay, let me go this way. Boom. Little bit awkward headed that way, huh? Kind of starts to create a similar amount of spacing. Now I come this way. That gives, notice how that gives a lot more spacing in that area there. I actually feel like it's better here. Now that does kind of cross over. I wonder if we can go here and straighten up a little bit and see what that does. Let's kind of take a look at that first because structurally that's a lot more sound. Let me show you what I'm talking about. Okay, so directly from the front of the tree, Jesus, can you just kind of focus in on these little, these little two little trunks right here? Perfect. Okay, notice how this one is closer to this direction. Now that means if it sits on this side of this trunk, it's very challenging to push the apex to that side of this trunk. So the structurally sound thing is going to be to pull this this way instead of push it that way and cause those trunks to cross over. I want to straighten those trunks out. I want to give them separation. I don't want to go here with that trunk, okay? So what that means is for a structurally sound execution, I'm probably looking at a guy wire scenario here where I pull this in. And then I'm probably looking at a blocking situation where I push that back out after I pull that in. So I pull in here. I'm going to block here and push that back out. And then I'm straightening the upper trunk. This is the upper apical region I'm establishing. What I'm doing here, I'm establishing my strategy for how I go about this. Now do I go ahead and guy wire and block and then apply my structural? No, because you'll throw all of that off. It'll cause the bark to scratch. Your guy wire comes undone. Everything gets thrown off. Put the structural on first and then let's pull it together and have the structural there to really adjust it. Let me go ahead and apply it. And again, I thought I was going to be going counterclockwise. For whatever reason, clockwise when I got into it felt a little bit better. I'm going to follow that clockwise turn as we start to work on this piece right here. And I'm going to start at a point down low where I think I'm going to need control of this piece. And I see that control being necessary right here. That's where when I start to change this, the abnormality of the curvature right there. So notice my index here. Notice my thumb here. Boom, boom. I pull and I push. Boom. That means my wire. My wire needs to be here. Right? I need to touch that point. But my wire needs to be supporting the bend back here. Okay? That's a major, major component. I'm turning in the clockwise direction, talking myself through it as much as I'm talking to you about it. Okay? So I'm going to hit that point, weave my way through all of these delicate little pieces. I don't want to break these little branches because these are what are going to give me the opportunity to execute scale. Right there. That's where my wire needs to hit. Okay, there we go. And I don't have a lot of... This is one thing to recognize when we start dealing with this type of structural wire. I don't have a lot of play. I don't have a lot of wiggle room. The more that I try to bend this wire, the less effective this wire is going to be. Okay? So when I start to identify those points, and you have this big, elongated spacing, because you don't want to put a bunch of wire on these trunks. It'll destroy the aesthetic of the trunk. Right? So when we start to look at this, when I'm applying this, I apply this nice and tight, same angle, same spacing, no gaps. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to set myself up for success there. Okay? I really have to be very, very accurate and strategic with where that wire hits to obtain the function. And I need to be very, very strategic and intentional about how I move it. Because I'm using an elongated turn. Now this has to have the exact same angle. Let me show you what I'm talking about. Okay? Notice that these wires are right next to each other. I've got to be hitting the exact same positions here or else I'm going to see that change of rotation. I've got to have that be dialed in. Notice how they're boom, boom, boom. Mirror reflections of each other. I'm not trying to get these to be in the exact same point. That's how it serendipitously turned out. But if those angles start to change, now this one is thinning a little bit faster. It's going to be the shorter of the two. This is taller and thicker. So there is going to be a slight natural deviation. You're already starting to see it just slightly here. Now we're here. We were right here parallel. Right here we were slightly down. Boom, boom, boom. That is the girth difference of these two pieces. But I need to be following that same consistent pattern. That's a big part of having the wire disappear and the execution of force design. Okay? Let me continue. . Offhand is the hand. This is where I really... This is where Mr. Kimura really made us master the use of the offhand. Right here. Because this is such a significant moment to be really supporting the wire on the trunk and having that contact and having all of that aesthetic pan out as a beautifully technically handled piece of work. Okay? All right. I've got the wire on there. I'm going to go ahead and top that off with 12 gauge like I did with the other one. Before I do that though, I just want to make sure... Yes, I see I've got that opportunity. I'm going to pull to that side, which means I'm going to have to support here, pull, block to straighten that out. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to set this little pull point up to give me the space to actually wire that apex. Okay? So what that means is if we're talking about a pull point here, I want to pull where this trunk has immobility. Okay? When we start working inside of a forest, you are going to be tying trees together to change their spatial relationship. Different girths, different heights. Girths, you can't change unless you grow one out or you start with that differentiation. Heights, you can obviously prune and change the height or set them up for different heights. But when we talk about spacing, this is one of the biggies that we have the capacity to change. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to adjust this so that we have that different spacing that gives us that quality of aesthetic. Okay, now I want to talk a little bit technically about the use of rubber. Okay, now this is gasket rubber. This is a relatively thick gasket rubber because I'm going to be holding a tremendous amount of force to bend these pieces at the base. I use a slightly thicker rubber. I also would hate to see a wire scar on the lower trunks of these and have some sort of inverse taper in the sponge form. So I'm using a thicker rubber to prevent that as well. But notice how small the width of my rubber is. Okay, especially for this one. Okay, I'm going to be utilizing probably a 14 gauge to pull these together knowing that I'm going to pull them together and then up above it I'm going to push them apart. I need that heavy wire to hold. But I just want a rubber pad thick enough for the wire to exist right down the middle of it. You see a lot of people use oversized rubber. It's horrible. It's aesthetically horrible. So utilizing a nice small consistent shape and size of rubber. Now watch how I set myself up here. Okay, because I can't use one single wire to tie these two pieces together. I have to have a wire that holds the rubber in position. This is one of the most important things that we can utilize in the setting up of guy wires where both pieces have rubber. Okay, because if I try to use one piece of wire and I run it over both of those and I tighten it one of the two rubbers is going to respond to the twist of the wire as I'm tightening that piece. Okay, so I've got to be thinking which one of these two pieces do I want to hold. Well, my guess is if I'm going to be pulling the smaller trunk to the bigger wire I'm going to be tightening here. I don't want to be tightening the wire on this which is behind and has so many different obstacles in terms of finer branching which means I need to be holding the piece that I'm going to be twisting the wire to or else that rubber will dislodge from that perfect line. Okay, so I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to set myself up and watch how I set myself up. Okay, nice, beautiful, okay, clean piece of wire. I don't need rubber going all the way around. I need the rubber that exists to the edge of that pull point of force. Okay, so this allows for a little bit of a buffer I'm just going to go ahead and I'm going to slide so that I've got a little bit more here because that's that line that goes perfectly over here and I want to be parallel to the rim of the container and the setup of that. Okay, so I'm going to go ahead I'm going to set myself up here. I'm going to have a slight little technical and let me go ahead and come back in here slight little technical nuance to get this tightened. Yes. Yes, okay. Not too tight because again I don't want this wire biting in. This is just holding my rubber. Okay, now I'm going to come back with the 14. Give myself a nice little clean piece of 14 here. Okay, I'm going to come back with the 14. I'm going to cut off any abnormal or irregular pieces. Okay, I might even take this and just straighten this out a little bit. Now watch how I set myself up. I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to align my wire. Okay, we already determined the height by where we put this rubber and where we wanted to grab. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to set this up. Now watch how I handle this. Okay, I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to bring this in here. I've already got my wire there. This is how we do this as a single individual. We don't have anybody helping us and we use small pieces of wire to give us the maximum capacity with the best aesthetic. Okay, nice and clean. Notice I have tension, tension, tension on the wire. I'm able to work through these finer branches. Okay, and I'm going to split the goalposts. I'm going to split the uprights where this joins this. Notice this is on top. This is on bottom of that wire that's holding that position. See that on top? See that on bottom? So that means that my gap, the gap that I've got here where I'm tying this is going to be right on top of that. Notice that, okay? That's a really important technique right here. Now we can go ahead and we can close the gap here so that those are together. But see that set up really nice and beautiful, okay? That's how we set up a really good guy wire. Now watch closely now that I'm set up here. Again, I want to be very, very careful that we're dealing with a beautifully parallel line to the edge of the container. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to, now that I'm set up and I can release my hands, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to adjust that. I'm going to hold this piece here, okay? My middle finger goes right over the top. My thumb is up above here. And I'm going to go ahead and the same time that I'm compressing here, I'm going ahead and just pulling with the exact same force that I'm pinching with. So I'm just taking that slack out so that I never let the wire have any sort of relaxed moment in terms of the composition. Notice how clean, how straight, how beautiful. Let me show you that right there. Really, really clean. And you see how this rubber stayed perfectly intact. Perfectly intact, okay? Now coming back, if you say, wow, but you tighten that around that trunk, bald cypress as an elongating species thickens relatively quickly. Yeah, it does. And that might girdle it. Guess what? Now you can cut it off. Now you can come back in and you can take that initial stabilizing wire and you can go ahead and you can cut that so that it's not constricting the trunk, the rubber's set up, but you have no ability to move it if you cut it right now, okay? So you have to make sure that you have it in exactly the appropriate position. Okay, now let me show you what that did. Jesus, can you go ahead and show this kind of on a broader scale here so that we can see how much we've altered the position of that trunk? Okay, notice this. This is now, this is straight See how much we've changed the angle of this? See how we've straightened that right there? Now we've taken those. Yes, perfect. Right there, okay? And then we're gonna have to come here and then we're gonna have to come here. Okay, now we're starting to get that line really beautifully dialed in, okay? So much the same way as we started talking about, hey, there's a point where I have to pull here and push here to get that bend, right? Now I'm pulled here. There's a point where my block has to contact this tree in order to get it to reposition itself and this is where we really put a lot of pressure on this tie right here because I'm just gonna be blocking that to upright that portion of the tree. And I'm looking here and I'm saying, gosh, if I can get it right there, if I can get it right there, ugh, that's where it is, right in that location, just below that turn of wire. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna set myself up to have a nice little block, okay? When we talk about that block, I'm gonna come back and I think eight gauge is probably a little bit ambitious. Oh, I think eight gauge is a little bit ambitious. No. Maybe eight gauge is gonna be appropriate. I'm gonna take a little bit of scrap eight gauge. Okay, and I'm just gonna straighten this out so it'll be a nice, nice clean cylinder. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna cut angle, okay? So I have a nice sharp point there. Nice sharp point, okay? I'm gonna grab this with my wire cutters, use this angle here, and I'm gonna work hard in this wire. Twist, twist, twist, twist. Just making it nice and solid. A little bit more grip on that. Okay, I'm solidifying, solidifying my prop here, all right? Work hardening that. I'm gonna go ahead and just straighten that out just a little bit. Got a little bit kinked in that whole operation. No big deal. The straighter the better, the cleaner the better. Okay, now watch closely. I want this to be parallel to my guy wire here. We know we want it to be right on that portion of the trunk. I'm gonna straighten this out. Straighten, straighten, straighten. Okay, and I'm gonna mark. Mark where I want that. Now, these angles that I cut, these create a very sharp point. That sharp point's gonna embed itself in the trunk, okay? So watch closely. I'm gonna embed and I wanna be centered, centered in that point. I don't want it to be off to any side of the circumference of that trunk. It's gonna be centered. Okay, now this isn't a tremendous amount of force. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna push, push, push, push. Okay, make sure that that's parallel. Make sure that that's centered. And I'm gonna let that embed itself. Okay? Let that embed itself. Looks a little bit, it's a little bit kind of up and down wonky. So I'm just gonna push a little bit more. I'm gonna bring it up to parallel. I'm gonna let that embed itself. Okay? Parallel to my wire down here. Parallel to the edge of the container. Everything about that setup is clean, clean. Clean. Because we're dealing with so much visual interest in the plethora of pieces in this that we have got to be executing these technical areas very, very precisely. This is a big part of forest design. Not having it be some big chaotic mess, but having it be a very strategic, pointed application of technique to maximize the aesthetic over the period of time that this is being trained. And when we start to talk about small changes to the position of these pieces, this is an application of knowledge or an application of technique that is going to take several years to set in. So you're gonna be looking at this for several years, right? And you're gonna rewire and unwire and rewire this multiple times in order for this to really establish itself. Okay, I'm gonna go ahead now. And I'm just gonna cut that piece that's holding that rubber down there so that it doesn't embed itself as this swells. Knowing that this is a rapid, vascularly productive species. Comes right out from underneath. And now everything is really, really beautiful. Okay, now let me show you what that got us. And I'm gonna go ahead and just now change the position of these pieces from the front. Let me show you what that got us because it's really, really nice. Okay, that's what that got us. And let's just see right there. Okay, now you see those spaces. And that's what we were striving for. We wanted this space. We wanted that irregularity. But notice those trunks. Those two trunks right there. They don't overlap. Now we've got a little bit of some awkwardness in terms of their relationship here. We can kind of play with that a little bit. Okay, that looks really, really nice, doesn't it? Looks really, really nice. Yeah, those lines are beautiful. Okay, excellent. I feel really good about that. Now let me show you and go ahead and swing it around. Now you're starting to see. Notice all those lines starting to really line up. Very, very technical work here. You might say, gosh, all that work just to change that slightly. Yes, yes, yes. This is bonsai. If we thought we were doing this to be very quick, if this was easy, I want to get through this one so I can do the next one. You missed the memo. You missed the memo. You signed up for something far, far, far more anal and detail-oriented than this. I mean, you really have to be a stickler for technique and aesthetics to maximize bonsai's capacity to represent nature and miniature. Now you go out into the woods and you might say, hey, those trunks aren't super straight. Okay. That doesn't mean anything when you take that macro environment and compress it into a scale one one-thousandth of the size. You have to be on point to convey that same consistent general aesthetic in a miniaturized form. It's an exaggeration, bonsai is. Okay. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to finish up the top of this, straighten it out so that we're dialed in. And then I can kind of start to work with some of the nuances, the imperfections of the larger trunks. I believe we have two or three more of these structural pieces. If there's a technical aspect of it, I'll call it out. Otherwise, I'm going to rock it out and we'll come back and start to talk about branch selection design and the pruning process. Then we'll talk about how to set our forest up for the next phase, which is secondary-tertiary handling of that growth. Thank you. Okay, now I'm going to rotate, let's take a look, let me just give you one 360 around now already, already from this front where we're at, look at the visibility of all of the lines. You see that? See how clean that is? This is, we're walking a knife's edge of getting to see every single one of these trunks, but we have exponentially, exponentially improved this layout. Now I did come back and do another similar whole point to this piece right here and go ahead and take a look at this where we see that getting pulled to the exact same piece. Now watch this, stay with me here because as I come around, you're going to see that I actually pulled just above where I had this other one propped. I'm propping here, I pulled just above that, let me go ahead and cleanly cut that, okay? Really nice use. Really nice use of these parallel lines, we kept everything clean, our turns are consistent. This is the kind of technical execution that we expect in forest design in order to be able to maximize the aesthetic while still having an impact on that shape and form of every single independent trunk. Now I want to walk you through what I perceive to be a judgment call, a judgment call, okay? Because when we say judgment call, judgment call of what? Do I come back up, and let me show the three-quarter cam, do I come back up and try to straighten this little jog right here, okay? I think this little jog is actually kind of magical, and let me keep rotating, you kind of see how it boom, and then it kind of starts to angle out right there, right? Angle out, here this is straight, there's a move right there. I don't want to try and make every single one of these lines perfect, okay? Because perfection, it starts to take away some of the organic, so as I get in, and here's another one right here, right in this very pivotal secondary piece that we have, that is also boom. And then a little jog there, I don't want to try and straighten that out, I'm okay with that. Look at the primary piece right here. We come up, and then all of a sudden, we kind of have all of these different pieces that are originating from the trunk. This is a beautiful branch line. That is bald cypress at its essence in the upper apex, boom, lateral, moving up. Up and out, I've got this piece that's heading straight up into the air, we're going to go ahead and have to give that some form, define that apical region, line base to tip. We're finally at a point. Okay. We get to come back, and we get to make branch selection from the bottom to the top, and we get to make height selection. This is one of the most important pieces of different spaces in terms of the branching establishing that visibility, as well as different heights. And let's go ahead and build from the bottom all the way up to the top. Now we know, right, very, very vigorous grower bald cypress has a lot of adventitious buds that are going to grow from the trunk of the tree. So I'm going to take out pieces that are very, very weak and insignificant right from the start, just some of these pieces growing on the base, in towards other areas, in towards other trunks. And we know that down towards the base of bald cypress in these sort of environments, if there is open sunlight, we will have branching that will sprout all the way down below and form. When I look at this unoccupied region here, if we're not going to plant another tree in front, which I do not plan on it because I think it would be very difficult to find material of a similar character, if we're not going to plant here, then I'm going to want to build these branches up in this foreground. That's part of the story. That's how we give context to whatever is happening here to convey that forest form. But what I do want to be very clear about is these branches that occur in between these tighter areas here, I want to save a few strategic branches. I do not want to clear everything out, but I want to open those areas up. And so what I'm going to do is I'm going to be looking at all of my different branching options, where they exist, where they occur. And I'm going to be taking out. I'm going to be taking out pieces that maybe don't offer as much potential. Now if we're going to go ahead and we're going to occupy this area where we don't have another tree, then I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to use these two pieces and I'm going to take away this one. Nice strategic little removal so that this has the space to thrive inside of that environment. I get into the interior here. I have all of these pieces kind of growing into my secondary trunks. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to clean these off of the primary piece. I don't want that space chewed up by a tremendous amount of foyer mass. I'm going to open up the knee here. I want to see this spacing between these areas. All the way down here at the bottom where we're getting these adventitious pieces, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take these away. I don't want to form any more trunks from the base. Now if I did, we could very effortlessly let some of these smaller pieces grow and they could start to contribute. But I've got enough as is to give the impact and the kind of visual interest that I'm looking for. Now as I get in here to the interior, this is when we start making judgment calls on forest design. Because we are so tempted to just cut all of these pieces out of here. But if we do that, then we are eliminating one of the great fundamental aspects of trees growing in collaboration and in community. Because some of these interior branches are going to find that space between these pieces. So when I start to look at this, I'm going to say, wow, I want my biggest tree to maintain a significant branching mass. It's very tempting in forest design to cut all of the branching off of the lowest portion of the main trunk to make room for all of these smaller branches on our smaller trunks. That's absolutely catastrophic. If you take that action in the beginning, you never fix it. Because here's what happens. We cut off all the foliar mass. We prune back the upper branches. We open up sunlight for the smaller trunks. And guess what? The smaller trunks have a proliferation of branching. They produce more sugars and starches. They thicken very rapidly. And they overtake your primary tree in the design. One of the catastrophic failures and mistakes in forest design. Always leave your primary trunk pumped up with the most branching so it maintains its dominance in the hierarchy. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take away some of these immediate interior growing pieces just to open up some of that space. But when it comes time to making a selection of main trunk branching versus secondary trunk branching, I'm always going to favor the main trunk with nice, big, strong pieces. So again, I continue to perpetuate that hierarchy that's given rise to the aesthetic. Now in these pieces here. I start to have branches that are stacking. Stacking on each other. Notice this and this are immediately above each other. And I've got this plethora of branching right here above it. I've got a bunch right here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take off this piece so that I don't have these two lined up. But I give myself a tremendous amount of spacing here. Now once I get into this region, all of these are right along that same area. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to open that up. I'm going to create some differentiation there so that I have significant and structurally sound spacing. Here, up to here, nice little short inner node there, but notice how I pruned out these two that were closest to this. I left the farthest away so that I have that nice distance. Okay. I get back up into this area here. Again, I've got that proximity. I'm going to go ahead and leave those for now. I'm okay. This is my secondary trunk on the tree, potentially my third. I kind of have two trunks here and let me show you that. Two trunks that are rivaling for that number two spot. We're going to have to define which one of these actually is our number two. We're going to have to define which one of these actually is our number two. number two but I'm guessing just based on the height as well as the impression of girth that this is my number two, this piece is my number three and if this is my number three, it's taller than my number two. Let me show you that, okay? If this is my number three, notice the height of my number three is taller than my number two. Notice where this branch exists inside of this design. I don't want to chop this, I don't want to shorten this, I really don't, right? And so this is where we start to get into this whole nuance of, gosh, do I really have to respect the hierarchy and my cutting out character that I want to preserve because what's the option? What is the option? If this is my number three trunk, I can grow this by leaving an abundant amount of branches to be my number two, okay? And if this becomes my number two, this can be tall, okay? I can move this branch to the foreground, I can save that piece and have this in the background, totally fine with that but it would mean I would have to shorten this piece, I would have to shorten it. Now, look at how tall all of these other pieces are around it, right? We really do have an interesting dynamic here. Let's continue to work our way up from the bottom to the top, making branch selection that allows us to maximize the quality of the design and see if we can't work it out through just the serendipitous presentation of pieces in the overall composition that allow us to make that determining factor and decision, okay? So I'm going to take off these bottom pieces, I don't want more trunks, I want to clarify and open up these lines. I really like that. I like the ability to kind of be able to open this up. I do have the potential for maybe a smaller little secondary trunk here and maybe even something right here. Now, this is all the way in the back. Do I want to muddy the water? I don't really know. Still kind of trying to decide how I want to handle that, so I'm just going to keep moving. Anywhere where I have two branches originating from a single source, I'll take it down to one. Anywhere where I've got branches that are overlapping, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to try and make a really nice sound decision. Boom. Okay, I've got these pieces here kind of overlapping. I'm going to have to change the position of this so that it exists in its own space, which starts to reconcile a lot of confusion already. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to clarify this. Take away those weaker pieces. This is that race for number two versus number three right here. This is one of those pieces that we've been kind of discussing that we're trying to figure out how we're going to go about it, okay? I'm going to go ahead and open that up just a little bit. I like keeping these smaller daintier ones smaller and daintier. That's what it's all about. Mm-hmm. Okay. That feels really nice. Starting to get a nice clean. Starting to get a nice clean amount of branching in there now, the spacing. Notice how that's starting to clean up a little bit. These are all going to be very detailed, small little interesting lines. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take this one away. I'm going to make an executive decision here. Am I? Am I? Yes. Okay. And I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to lean on this. I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to maximize the presence of these branches. I've got this other trunk right here. That means I can take this piece out right there. If I take that piece out, notice boom, boom, boom. These are stacked. Okay. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take out that piece right there. I'm going to have these exist in their own planes. That reconciles this area in this kind of smaller trunk. I want to take more branching off of these smaller trunks. I still have a discrepancy in height here that I want to consider very, very closely, okay? Let's continue to look here. Now, as I move up, I start to have these branching knuckles that start to form. These are from pruning. And notice how I have this really odd angle. I come in here. Maybe let me go ahead and rotate just slightly. There we go. Yeah. Notice this angle. Boom. Coming back. So my branch goes out, ding, back. Okay. Now, if this were any other tree, I would say, gosh, we got to correct that. But this is bald cypress. Okay. Bald cypress proliferates on branches. So I'm going to go ahead and take off these branches growing back, back in. That's how it creates its density. That's how it creates its shape. I'm actually going to save that piece right there. I'm going to try to utilize that piece right there. I'm going to take off some of the detritus around it. And I'm going to maximize the presence of this as it engages with this trunk and as we start to kind of look at how this piece finds its way into the overall design. I'm going to take off these stumps at the tip. And most likely, I'll be reducing the length of a lot of these branches knowing that I'm going to get adventitious buds. I've got some branching that's in tight here. I'm going to go ahead and save that. I don't really know what's going to happen there. And I'm going to be wiring a lot of this out to kind of preserve what we have. But let's get into it up here in the apex. Now, notice at the shoulder of this piece. Shoulder of the piece, we get branches growing off the shoulder, cause the shoulder to overly thicken very rapidly. I want to take those off right there. Nice and clean. Nice and clean at that shoulder. See how that originated from the junction? That will suck the life right out of a mature branch on a bald cypress. So I'm just going to tie that up. If you let those suckers grow from the base. We want to keep that water and nutrient flow moving out to these outer tips here. That's how we continue to sustain and drive forward the progression of the shape that we've already started. Okay. As I move over into this apex, notice I've got a lot of stuff happening here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to start to clean this up. Okay. And I don't know if I'm going to shorten this yet or not. So I think it is time to make that decision. Now, I could shorten to here. That virtually draws me even. I have sort of a cut over here. I've that's already kind of died back and I've got branches at the very top, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take this back. Let's just give ourselves one nice clean reference. Boom. Another nice clean reference. Boom. Okay and in that reference I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take away any structural flaws right at the shoulder there and I still have a trio. Go ahead and I'm going to take that one off there. Okay so that creates something nice for us. We've got this junction here. Now I don't know if I'm going to shorten this or not. That certainly does feel like my number two trunk, but it also has the best opportunity to be shorter. Okay now I want to look at that. I want to look at and let me go ahead and pull this forward. I'm going to step back here with you. Just take a look here. Okay because when we look over here notice what we have here. We've got all of these trunks in this area that are all kind of right around that same height. Now this thick one right here, that little stuff right there, that's your secondary trunk. And I see, let me just go ahead and find that space right there. There we go. There's the space. Okay so we've got that secondary trunk right here. Let me bring that in. Let me find myself here. Yep there it is. Secondary trunk right there. But this one, skinny, taller. Can't do it. Can't do it. And notice that one, secondary trunk, is shorter than that one, which right now is our third trunk. But I don't have anything to shorten this to, right? And I've got all of this in here. Doesn't it make sense this would be a little bit taller on the outside there, unfettered by everything else? I think what I want to do, and let me just think about this for a minute, because if I have this conglomeration of trunks over here, the taller this one is, the shorter that one's got to be. But when I shorten this, I've also got the height of these two here, and I've got this one pinnacling right there. I've got to be very careful in here to not create a homogeneous height. I think I need to leave this one that tall, which means that maybe I shorten this one all the way back down to that. That might be the move. As painful as it is. Ah, there it is. There it is. Okay, and now that we've done that, let's come back in here. Okay, now we need to figure out the hierarchy between these two. Right, I already wired the top of this. I didn't put a lot of time and consideration into the ultimate height of that, but I wonder, should I take this all the way back down into here? Right, because I have two really brilliant little beautiful branches down in here that could very effortlessly take over. I've got a nice small trunk here. I've got this up in here. I've got this a little shorter, which is really beautiful. I could take this all the way down into here, and I could have that. That's kind of nice. I like it. I'm going to go for it, okay, because that's my next natural transition point. And again, this is a fifth or sixth in the ranking. Aha. Yes. Look at that. That is stunning, because now that piece, let me show you. That little guy right there, that's what we just created. Notice it's super skinny and small in the back. How nice and delicate that is. Really starting to lean on some very beautiful differentiation of height. And we established in the very beginning, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, girth, the girth of things, very, very important, okay? The spacing, important. The height, extremely important. Okay, now I see another discrepancy. See if you can find the discrepancy before I point it out. Right here. Right here. This is a big discrepancy. Okay, now I have one significant transition point right here. Right here, where I could take this down. Okay, now this is a fairly thick, beefy piece. This is much thicker than the one in the back. It's much, it's sort of of the same ilk and size as that one. If I cut it back to here, I'm going to have to wire that piece up. I still think it's the move. I still think that's the move. Okay, let's go ahead. Now some of you might be saying, oh my gosh, I can't believe you're cutting these off. These are such great trunks. Yes. But this is how we set the bones for the future. This is how we start to build all of the character in the tree. Oh yes, and now we're starting to get that deviation, differentiation, and height. Let me just go ahead and swing here. Beautiful. Okay, and we have You notice I'm walking that line, walking that line right here with this one. Because this one and this one are very, very close in proximity. Very, very close in proximity. And I wonder, do we go ahead and take this all the way down to somewhere in here and just really reduce the height of that down to our next transition point? Now, we know with bald cypress, we could cut this, and it's going to sprout almost anywhere where we cut it. So we do have the ability to cut back to nothing and regrow an apical region on the tree. But the question is, do we want that aesthetic where we've got those two pieces kind of in tandem? The shorter that the back pieces are, the better the execution of scale. I'm going to say, let's go ahead. Let's take this down, and let's see if we can't create that kind of differentiation in the hierarchy that gives rise to something. Something really profound, okay? Cut here. Yes. Hmm. Yes. Now, you've just witnessed a very... very dramatic decision-making process to alter the distribution of height. And notice how that changed the entire composition. Notice the girths of the trunk that are creating the height. Notice the reduction of the thinner pieces and the depth that that creates towards the back, the visibility of all of your trunks. It's really created something quite spectacular in terms of this group dynamic, okay? And that's what we're looking for. That's what we want. That's really what we're aspiring to achieve through the height selection process. Because, yes, it's powerful, and yes, it's beautiful when they all kind of have this , you know, sort of upright presentation, and they shoot to the sky, et cetera. But we have to have that differentiation of heights. And I'm just finding that point where we see all of those trunks. Really, that's a compelling moment right there. That is a very, very compelling moment that we see in the base of that tree, okay? Oh, I'm excited about this. That was tough to cut some of those. I had emotional attachment to those apical regions, right? But we have to use objective decision making to maximize the quality of forest design, or else it's impossible to set the structure that this tree will continue to progress upon, right? And I think we just did a splendid job of separating ourselves emotionally from what we love about the composition to be able to maximize its quality, okay? I'm going to drop this down. Just a little bit more. And I want to set the height as well as the primary line of the upper apical region. So I'm going to go ahead and shrink that down. That feels good to me. I think we're still okay. Okay, so we've got this kind of nice junction here. Now, I have a kind of a, and I don't even know. Let me see here. Nope, dead. Okay, so a real weak branch that kind of perished here. Go ahead, I'm going to take these off. But I've got this nice, strong piece here that I feel like is a defining character of this tree. We have this piece that I think is probably, be very careful. I think this is probably going to have to come over into this region, and that's going to push over there, which means I need to go ahead and enter here. Now, that follows my theme coming up onto that apical region of that rotation. I love that. Okay, I'm going to come back with an eight gauge. And I'm going to go ahead, and I'm going to move those pieces. I'm defining the line base, the tip of my primary trunk. I start to set the tone for the apical region. I want to reduce its height pretty significantly. And I want to go ahead with this apical region, and think about this. Currently, this is a very juvenile, very, very juvenile form of apex on a bald cypress, right? Bald cypress is an oxen-driven, triangular form in youth, oxen-driven shape of a tree in the elongating species category. Big, tall. Strong, vertical tree, okay? But as they get older and older, they flatten out at the top. That flattening out says they cannot raise water against the force of gravity driven by transpiration any farther. And so I want to be thinking about a commitment to a direction, right? Which is exactly what I want to generate with that branch. Now, you see, that means this piece, is going to have to kind of come back towards the front here. This is an important piece. I can't push both of them that direction. This one's slightly to the left of this piece in terms of hierarchy. So I'm going to bring it back. But let's go ahead and let's just work this piece here. Because this is really going to be one of the cruxes of the design solution here. Because I need for that to insinuate a direction. Now, when we think about forest design, forests have a directional and, say, it's not windswept, but they still, they kind of have this asymmetrical flow. Now, if you look at this, I chose this to be here. I still have a higher tree here, but all of my branching that could give positional movement is over in there. Now, I could bring the apex back this way and I could run these branches out this way, but the natural flow is kind of moving in that direction with the visual weight of the forest kind of anchored by all of these different trunks right along the base here. Right? And again, I think we could go either way. But I think pushing in that direction, I've got my defining branch there, apical region also laying over in that flattening out form. So we're vertical, vertical, vertical, boom. Right? Vertical, vertical, vertical, boom. That's what we're looking for. So I say vertical, vertical, vertical, and. Okay, now, notice it paralleling that defining branch, but notice how I push the center of that apex. I took that apical region here. Right? And I pushed the center of that apex from being centered off center. Now, I can bring these branches back in here. I can flatten that off. I can kind of use some of these pieces to be shorter over in here. But that definitively, notice how that pushed in this direction. Now, here's where this echoes into the design. I've got to shorten here and I've got to run out here. Okay? That's my compression on the left. I'm going to go ahead and get, and then I'm going to out here. Okay? So when we start to look at this, natural branching, notice this arc, zhoop, zhoop. All of them have the same arc. The acute angle is up, right? It's not down, it's up. This is a coastal tree. This is low elevation. We're not talking about snow. We're talking about up and out, up and out, up and out. That's where I want to be. Okay? I'm going to start to do some of the preliminary wiring and setting of structure and design from the bottom to the top. We're going to start to pull it all together. And then I want to walk you through the considerations of apical formation on a bald cypress to really round out the unification of apical region to branching and multiple apical regions inside of a singular forest design. So you're going to start by getting all of the layers from the top. Get them in place. All right? All right. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Longer than expected, should have. I'm overly optimistic about the time it takes to do anything in bonsai, which keeps us moving forward at a very rapid pace, producing more work than would ultimately be likely without that mentality, and also I'm always a little bit disappointed and behind. But the process of this was a huge narrative arc in wiring this for me, and here's why. You know, we talk about handling trees of different maturations, ages, conditions that create the material, whether this is nursery stock or collected material, we understand that the branching was incredibly straight. And so this challenge, as we're putting movement into the branches of different angles, different spaces, different planes, we move left, we move right, we move up, we move down, and trying to mix that up at the halfway mark of this, the homogeny of all of the movement, the mirror image of this repetition that I was creating was very challenging to look at, and I just thought, ugh, I'm having a really hard time getting through this. And as I started piecing together the apical regions, that's when I started to feel like, aha, now I'm finding it, now there's something interesting happening here, because I could see how the rest of the design was reflected. You know, we're talking bald cypress, rapid expansion of the upper canopy as oftentimes the widest point, if not one of the widest points, it may be the widest point. I didn't have any definition down here. You know, my defining branch, when we talk about the design process, my defining branch on this is in the upper right portion of the tree, on the second-ranking trunk. We're talking defining branches over and up in here, and I didn't have that reference, I didn't have that backbone, so I kind of floated through this middle section. Now, let me step back for a minute, and this is really where we have to be self-critical of our work, and kind of look at and understand how we continue to improve, and just objectively seeing the piece. There's a few areas that stick out. This area on the lower right here. Okay, notice how I have similar movement, similar spacing, similar length, everything kind of has a similarity there, and I think the length is probably the biggest limitation. You come over here onto this side. We have a very similar length to all of these here as well. Now, how do we fix that? Okay, because I'm quite happy with what's happening up here. We see the flow moving to the right, our defining moment there on the number two trunk. The way that we start to fix this is by using planes, okay? Now, we know Bald Cypress up and out. This is a young tree, straight branches. We're putting every piece of movement from the shoulder all the way to the tip into these. They will ramify. We will be able to expand, but we want to set that initial line because it's going to thicken, and it's going to do what it's going to do on top of this, okay? So, when we start to talk about these different planes, just by taking a few pieces out of the equation, right? And I'm going to go ahead and carry this all the way up into here, okay? Just by taking a few pieces out of the equation, look at how that breaks up the monotony of that left side of the tree, okay? Now, I would say the lowest one here all the way down there. That lowest one, we still have a little bit too close of a proximity there. So, let's do a little bit more work. Maybe this lowest one, instead of going back, maybe this actually needs to come forward. Maybe that needs to give us that length. And then maybe this piece right here in the middle, maybe this needs to come forward as well. Maybe this piece needs to come forward as well. What does that do? Does that give us some more diversity of length? Oh, see, I like that a little bit better. Now, the lowest one being the longest, now that the upper canopy feels so expansive, almost feels like it doesn't work aesthetically. So, let's continue. Let's keep working, okay? Because the most interesting of the branches in this area is right here, okay? I have the ramification on this piece. So, I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to pull that forward. I'm going to pull this way back. I'm going to pull that way back. And then I'm going to push this one a little bit farther forward, okay? Now, that starts to have interest because we get that longest branch lower down. We've got short all the way at the bottom. We stagger this. We've got super short, long, intermediate, and close to the trunk breaking up that cylinder right there. I think that works to a significant degree better. Now, the spacing, when we look, spacing, branch to branch, spacing here, spacing here. That's a little bit too even for me. So, let's go ahead and change that up. And then we're going to come over, and we're going to swing onto this right side here, and we're going to try to reconcile this. These squiggly lines mirror each other. I like this relationship, but it's a little bit obtuse. These are the same length. These are some of the things, right, that we kind of look at and try to see if we can't reach. And this is small moves at this point. We're not restyling the tree, okay? But this is something that we can kind of, yeah, and that looks better now. Notice how I close that space here. This space stays the same. Now, they have a difference. Okay, so being aware, being critical of your work, and really pushing to try and seek that next level of quality. This is a big part of the final handling of any tree, especially for a tree this young, this early on in its development, setting the lines that allow us to have the kind of structure that improves the tree, okay? So, now we get the quality of those trees. We've got those two lines back there, but we have that length differentiation. Now, we've got squiggle, squiggle. These two are paralleling each other in a way that I don't think is very productive. Let's see if we can just kind of change this here for a moment, okay? I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to, I'm just going to alter this piece's plane and where it's occurring. Take that to the back, okay? I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to straighten this out a little bit. I put a little bit of superficial movement, and I'm just going to straighten that out a little bit. Now, how did that? Ah, yes. Okay, now we start to engage with two different areas I don't like necessarily, how lateral this just became. So, let's go ahead and let's come back up. Okay, and then let's go ahead and finish this tip off a little bit of a different way. Yeah, that looks much better. A little bit of difference. Now, some people might say, you're kind of crossing those branches. Okay, cool. One final, one final little piece just to give us the space there. Okay, now we've got that space. That feels nice. Okay, we're going to close the gap on these next two now. And notice how that's opening up very clear blocks. See this block of space that we're opening up? See this block of space? There's different depth to this. We're going to work on this. And then we're going to finish off up in the apex. I feel very good about the apex. I think we can improve it just a little bit. Okay, and I just want to close this, close this down. And I'm actually going to change the plane that we're functioning in here as well. Okay, closing that space, shifting that a bit. Yeah, I like that. You know, I think the missed opportunity in the design is right here. I think it's right here because this branch has all of this space to play in, right? I've got a real space. I've got a real now. I don't want to create a ton of length because again, you know, I'm really trying through here to drive that defining branch, defining apex. I'm carrying that up through here in the structural piece. But what we see of Bald Cypress when they're in space like this is we can have some interesting branching. I wonder if I go out on a limb here and really push that to be a diversified shape of a branch where we have this up and out, up and out, up and out. And we talk about, you know, this kind of, this kind of synonymous up and out movement is how we set the structure on a young tree. Do we ever take one branch and do something radically different? I think there's room. I think there's space to play. Now, I think we still have to end up with the same gesture, which is up above the shoulder of the branch for the tips. But can we drop down and does that give us any sort of quality? Let's just play here for a minute. Okay, and this is where it becomes fun. This is when we can really tap into. This is also my propensity for a defining branch that has some interest. Ah, I like that. Okay, comes up, boom, drops down. And now let's see here. Okay, Bald Cypress, little brittle, little brittle when they don't have water flowing at this time of year. Okay, let me see if I can just get a little bit more in there. How does that, how does that work? Oh, I like that. I like that a lot. I think that's a very interesting addition. I think the way that it engages in this space, and I'll rotate it for you, but having that also have a presence that crosses over that straight section of that trunk, not at the halfway mark. I'm more up top than I am down below. Again, I get those definitive blocks, those definitive blocks that are occurring of space, right? So I have a much greater space here than I have here, and that feels good. Now, notice that the space here does not compete with the spaces up in there. Notice that our space here does not compete with the space here, right? This is when we start to say, okay, I think, I think it's working. I think it's working. I think we were kind of pulling all of these lines, if you will, together to be able to finalize the design, and this is really at the epicenter when we get to the branching and the apical formation of forest design, because we have to reconcile every trunk and every branch and every apex's interaction with each other, okay? Now I'm going to do a 360-degree rotation, and I want to focus on where the apical regions in each juncture of the tree are focused, because I'm not pulling every apex towards the front. Let me just show you where we're at here. And I want you to notice the distribution, okay? Notice that this apex is pointed this way. I'm going to take you back here. Notice how that still occupies a space from the front that has pleasing lines. You're seeing the back of the line from the front orientation. I'm not pulling that towards the front. I'm pulling that towards that area that that trunk is occupying in the circumference and the hierarchy of its occurrence, okay? Notice here, high point oriented back. Notice here. I'm occupying this three-quarter. Sort of rear right portion of the design. These middle ones finding their space, finding their space. One of these goes to that direction. One of these comes here. This one moves into its own space, out from underneath the ones above. And you notice that the uppermost trunk that defines the composition, leaning towards the front and pushing towards the right, a very harmonious design. And let me go ahead and come all the way back. Very harmonious design for the initial setting of branching, trunk line. And continuation base to tip. And finally, the apical region on a forest design. Really, really nice outcome, I think. I feel very good with how this turned out. But again, midway up, putting faith in the process, understanding we're going to come back and pull it all together. We can't make 100% accurate moves every single branch on every single tree at that moment. Sometimes we do have to let it evolve. I'm very, very happy with where we're at, okay? So just to recap, forest design. Fundamental concepts, right? Different girths, different heights, different spaces between the trunks, different planes in terms of the dimensions for middle back that they occur in. And when we start to talk about the handling of forest design, we really start to understand that the number of branches, the heights and formation of the apex, respecting that hierarchy of the trunk earth, et cetera, builds the foundation for a forest to improve over the course of time. I think it's a great. Hopefully this helps you build your skills about forest design and think about it in a more elevated way. And the final touch up, really tapping into conceptual knowledge, right? Not this is how I feel about these branches, but why does this not look as appealing? They're all the same length. The spacing is uniform. How do I fix that? I'm not going to take it and put more movement. I'm just going to change. I'm going to change the field. I'm going to change the plane. I'm going to change slight things to offer that diversification of those pieces that are all lining up and creating a little bit less than the quality that we're looking for. And voila, right? It comes together. Okay. Thank you all so much. Always building our skills for us. Design your one step closer. Love you guys. Bye. Bye. 
