Mirai Lecture Series, Bonesize Styles, the August session. I got Josh Sales producing the lecture today, live and in studio. Skeleton crew, we got a bout of cool weather at Mirai, which is so freaking welcome, because it has been hot, like hot like potato, hot potato hot. Yours truly, only person watering this entire garden, all day, every day. Which, you know, I do have to say, we all understand this in terms of our own personal collections, but certainly my apprenticeship prepared me for this. Specifically the nine months that I was the only apprentice at Mr. Kimura's Garden, and that just happened to be right through the middle of May, June, July, August, and then into the Kokufu season, I was the only apprentice there for nine months in my third year. So, 1,200 trees, singularly responsible. Had a lot of wire work to do, which ended up happening late at night, or early in the morning. And that's pretty much what life looks like now. Getting ready for the tree sale, if you didn't see the email, check it out. A little bit of a description, this will be our last tree sale, that we're going to do at Mirai. The non-profit, the One Tree Project, is off the ground. These trees have the ability to serve a greater purpose. Our trees will be available, they'll just be available in a different format, different context, entirely. So, this is the last one. Get them while they're hot, it's going to be a good one. I'm selling a lot of trees that I would like to keep around. There's too many trees here, and we can't keep them all. And the sale of these trees allows us to be able to patron the field growers, the nursery, you know, men and women that are growing great bonsai material, the Yamadori collectors. You know, we have to be doing the work, selling the trees, in order to continue buying and supporting the community. That, you know, I got to be honest, prior to coming back from Japan, there wasn't a format to support. Ceramicists couldn't do their best work, collectors couldn't focus on collecting, growers couldn't focus on growing. And that's really something that I feel proud Mirai has contributed as a patron of the accoutrements to the bonsai community. And so, anyways, all of that to say, last tree sale, but certainly, it's going to be a big one, it's going to be a good one. I'm working diligently on that in between waterings. And I'm glad I got a cool sale. I'm glad I got a cool spell to allow me to do this, okay. So, you know, in the spirit of moving into sort of the late summer, and this really begins that period of early fall vascular productivity. You know, we say number two time to be doing structural styling and design may be the best season in all honesty, because daylight length is decreasing, temperature is decreasing, vascular production repairs damage. And this is really when we get into the nuts. And this is really when we get into the nuts. And this is really when we get into the nuts. And this is really when we get into the nuts. And this is really when we get into the nuts. And this is really when we get into the nuts. So I want to go through the nuts and bolts of raw styling of our conifers. We know that leaf drop is one we're going to be handling our deciduous. And that means that we have to understand bonsai styles. This has been a request from the community to circle back to this. And I'm going to break it down in terms of pitfalls prior to the styling process. And then looking at the material and reading the material to determine the potential style of the material and how we handle that effectively. So first and foremost, pitfalls of bonsai design, and I'm going to say, number one, a polluted databank. And if I misspelled polluted, maybe that's two L's, maybe that's one L. Don't judge me. It is what it is. I'm a bonsai professional. I'm an English teacher. Polluted database. And this is something that a lot of people don't really consider. What you put into your inspirational index of images in your mind is what you're going to be referencing when you start to create bonsai, all right? And a lot of us are polluting our database with the traditional slash orthodox model of bonsai, okay? And if you're working in Europe, if you're working in North America, if you're working in Australia, New Zealand, you're working in Central and South America, any time... Any tree can be pulled into the traditional model of orthodox, and understanding the orthodox model is the, you know, that is your fundamental kata if you were practicing karate, your fundamental form if you're practicing taekwondo, your fundamental salutation if you're practicing yoga. This is how you stay sharp. This is your basic fundamental backbone. It is not the end-all, be-all. So if you're looking at bonsai and you're saying, okay, I want to take every tree and make it a bonsai, and I want to make it a bonsai, and I want to make it a bonsai, well, let's first understand, pre-World War II, bonsai did not look like the orthodox model that we have now. It was wild and reflective of the native environment, even in Japan. Started that way with pinging and the birth of this in 700 A.D. It moved with Taoism and Confucianism to Japan under the Japanese culture, shifted from being more of a, you know, sort of grotesque, irregular beauty to being a lot more of this beauty, and the imperfection, but, right, the 1900s pre-World War II was all about letting the trees be unique, be informal, be irregular, represent those ancient forms we see in the mountains. World War II happens, a grasp on the cultural influence of foreign entities now occupying and starting to convey Western interest into the Japanese culture, and boom, we get this constriction around the kofu. Around the conservation of traditional cultural practices, and these start to become defined in a box, and this is the birth of orthodoxy, right? And so, even if you're saying, well, I like the Japanese model, you have to understand and be an informed bonsai practitioner that the current Japanese model is literally 70 years old, right? I mean, the end of World War II, and then we get into where we're at now, and with that, the kofu model creating the boundary around. And if you're approaching a tree in terms of bonsai styles, thinking, I've got to take this wild form and pull it into this orthodoxy, and that is how we're viewing design, I'm telling you that in the areas where we have rugged beauty coming out of the mountains, which does not exist inside of Japan anymore, those trees are having their wild character and their unique characteristics sacrificed to become a patternized approach that is literally, just think of this, as a very short-term, new-age concept for bonsai, 700 A.D., all the way up to 19, let's just say, 50, as a broad brushstroke of when we started seeing bonsai styles change, and now from 1950 to 2024, you've got this blip of this stylistic consideration, and all of these things that we're doing now are conforming to that, right? That is defiant of history, that is ignorance. And I'm not criticizing the practice of bonsai and what it's all about and what is capable of being accomplished, and I'm not criticizing it, but I am putting it out there and saying, hey, listen, not every tree needs to look like that. You've got to populate your index with variety, including the orthodox model, which is a beautiful practice and discipline inside of bonsai, and it is a craft. It is a patternized approach that we are taking bonsai styles and accommodating this orthodoxy with as a rehearsal, if you will, as a tool-sharpening endeavor. But beyond that, we have this plethora available to us in the Western world of ancient trees, wild landscapes, etc. This is where your database can be populated to start to inform things, okay? So one of the pitfalls is a polluted database and not understanding. Okay, number two factors that contribute to aesthetics, okay? And when I say this is a pitfall, listen. Listen, do we understand species nuances? Do we understand environment and how it acts on the tree? Do we understand elements and how those shape and form? Do we understand age and how that tree evolves over time? If you don't understand this, the worst thing I can do is sit here and lecture about bonsai styles and pull you back into some sort of orthodoxical defined model of bonsai. It is counterproductive. Counterproductive. Now, do the fundamental forms and styles of bonsai represent some of the natural shapes that we see? Beyond a shadow of a doubt, informal upright trees are abundant in the landscape. Formal upright trees are abundant in the landscape. Clumps, forests, rafts, brooms, these things are out there representing species in a variety of different circumstances. Cascades, semi-cascade, windswept, etc., right? But you have to understand these aspects to be... to be able to appropriately design the material that's on your turntable. What does that piece of material allow you to actualize in a first styling? Where do you jump into the design process? What environment does that material carry the influence and information of? What elements were acting on it or could be portrayed as acting on it through your execution of aesthetics that paint this image for somebody to come and view it, right? These start to form bonsai styles. And this is where we start to... We start to say pitfalls number three, and the biggest one which I'm going to put a star next to is tree slash material characteristics. And when I say characteristics, the question here is do you speak tree, i.e. recognize character that informs design? Do you speak tree, okay? And so, here are some fundamental aspects when we look at a piece of material that start to inform our decisions of how we are going to design that piece of material, alright? And so, from this perspective, I want to dive in, and I'm not going to dive in from the top where we talk about the ceramic gestalt, and we're talking about the rectangle, and we're talking about the oval, and we're talking about how those play into the two most common forms, informal or formal upright. I'm actually going to dive into what that means. windswept and I'm going to dive into cascade because these are the two most bastardized forms in all of bonsai abused, beat to a bloody pulp by material that has no business being treated as a windswept or as a cascading form, right? Because we get into this workshop and we have this impotent little limp piece of material here and we're saying I don't know what to do with that singular pigeon breast curve, I'm going to make it a windswept and it's like well does that have the characteristics that would represent a tree being informed by the action of wind and if it does, right, which the pigeon breast does not, if it does, what environment is that tree occurring in that's experiencing wind because there's a big difference between coastal and alpine wind. There's a big difference between when that would affect a redwood and when that would affect a pine or a larch or a spruce or a hemlock or when that would affect wind. A deciduous tree or a broadleaf in different environment, right? So we start to recognize, ah okay, and when we start to say okay, bonsai styles, I've got a tree on my turntable. First and foremost, do we enter a styling with an with an idea of what you want to create? Absolutely not. Absolutely not. That is not how we approach the art of bonsai. Tree leads the dance. Tree leads the dance. This is what makes Mirai different. Okay? And one of the frustrating things for me, and you can see I'm getting a little excited, I get heated about this because people come to study at Mirai to learn how I design bonsai, but they bring all of the baggage that they have from their bonsai career up to this point, which is to say I'm coming with all of the instructors that have told me and taught me how to pull a piece of material into the orthodox form and I'm sitting here saying hey let's start out by letting the tree lead the dance. Well, when you talk about taking a tree and making it a bonsai, making it an orthodox or a traditional model, the tree has no information in that. It is not informing those decisions. You are not using the tree as the introduction to your concept. You come in as the dominant force and you apply that pressure to that piece of material and you make it conform, okay? And I'm saying let's not do that and students say yes. Yes, I see that. I see that and then we put that piece of material and everybody tries to get it to look like a bonsai... of their polluted data bank. That's not what we're doing here. Not at Mirai and not if you want to learn our approach, which you're sitting here watching this, so I'm assuming you care and find what we do to be interesting. Okay, so we start to say, listen, objective design is led by this concept of objective assessment of baseline features, and we know that we sacrifice the best of any for the best of all. Objective design, this allows you to select the front. Select your front. Okay, once you select your front, now you start to look at what are the characteristics of the tree that allow me to define apex or continuation of line base to tip and allow us to establish our defining branch, which is our greatest degree of asymmetry that creates flow. Okay, we're objectively assessing these things. This is actually, when we start looking at this and the way that these factors interact is what allows us to execute harmony, tension. And dynamic as design concepts. Now, I'm going to pull all of these in, and when we start to think about this, the more times around the vortex or the more years that we spend with this tree working it, right, the more that we're able to execute age as it's reflected in a greater degree of asymmetry, remnants of what was more deadwood, and a greater amount of negative space with the loss of those remnants under that tree. And so, the first thing we're going to look at is how we can actually adapt to that time and the environment, acting on irregular weather conditions or catastrophic events that change the shape of the tree and the tree must adapt to. We are the weather, we are the sun, we are the drought, we are the fire. We are all of those things, unless you live in a place like Mirai, where there still are a lot of environmental influences. I walked in today, birds had completely stripped the garden of all of the moss on almost every single tree. I'm getting so used to this. It's really kind of bothersome how callous I am to it. So, I'm going to show you how to adapt to that irregular direction that we like, okay? So, these objective assessments of design must be applied to the concept of styles. And if you're not, then you're just taking a tree that has the potential to be something very special and you're pulling it into a box. Don't do that, okay? Let's not be that person, right? Some trees conform to that, other trees do not. Some trees can be a bonsai, some trees can be a natural reflection of nature in miniature. So, when we start to look at the windswept form, first and foremost, we have to understand that wind moves up and out, up and out, up and out, up and out, okay? Wind moves up and out, up and out, up and out, up and out, right? This is a fundamental aspect of wind. Now, when you start to get wind acting on a tree, it doesn't mean that a formal upright tree can't suddenly have this type of a branch. And you start to say, okay, well, what's allowing that to grow straight up? That must be a topographical influence. That must be a topographical piece of information. So, suddenly, we have a formal upright tree here, right? And we start to get this kind of a vibe and we say, oh, okay, formal upright. So, this is crossing the trunk, I need to cut that off and then I'm going to regrow these branches and create a formal upright. And that seems to be the concept that we would apply to that piece of material. It's crossing the trunk, that breaks the rules, right? No, a lot of trees cross the trunk. It's going up and out and a formal upright has branches growing down. No, but we're talking about, the wind swept form. What keyed in our concept of the wind swept form? Well, the trunk is straight, so that can't be a wind swept or a wind informed design. That is absolutely untrue, depending on the topography of the environment. If this natural shoulder starts out up and out, if the movement in that primary structure is up and out, if we see other aspects of that tree conforming to that concept, this can be wind. We understand the topography. We've got the fundamental characteristic. Up and out, up and out, up and out, up and out. Now, that is not the only character that we're looking for in the material to execute a wind informed design. And again, it doesn't have to be from base to tip. It can start at some point up the trunk and we recognize that the species environment topographical features have informed that. If we see wind informed, we also have to start to look at, where is the visual and physical stability of this design? This is when we get into bone size styles, being led by the tree. So the tree has a natural primary structural inclination of either the trunk or the primary branch, starting to paint the picture of this environmental influence and this environmental topography acting on the tree. Now, if I'm going to move up and out in this forever direction, do I have a live vein or a strong rootage that can hold that? Do I have the strong rootage or some sort of natural visual and physical anchor? Because if this is all deadwood, over here holding this tree leaning in that direction, that is a tree that is going to fail visually and physically over the course of time. And you may say, okay, well, how does that inform the decision that I would make? Well, now instead of this being a windswept tree, if we've got deadwood here and live vein on the inside here, we recognize that we've got to pull back into tension to be able to give visual and physical stability. The tree is informing our design decisions about how to utilize, the piece of material. This is no longer a windswept piece of material. This is no longer wind informed. This is an informal upright tree in the slanting form that we are now countering that slanting movement because the characteristics of the material do not support that windswept form. Now, maybe we have something where this turns back and we've got this big time sort of base here and my live vein is on the inside. And if you know anything about the wind informed design, this side where the wind, contacts the material is almost inevitably deadwood. And you're saying, but Ryan, you said that this needs to be living tissue on this side to hold the wind informed shape. That is true for some trees and a lot of other species are going to be obliterated by that on flow of blowing dust and fragments and soil and aggregate, especially in the high desert regions where a lot of ancient trees exist across the western United States. Now, I must have this platform anchoring the tree if I want to pursue that sort of wind informed design and not have to pull back into tension. So the form of the base is as important as the shape of the trunk and any of the characteristics characteristics being the presence of deadwood on the windward side would be an informant that would allow us to start to filter through. Is this a piece of material that allows us to pursue a legitimate windswept form or not? Now, let me just take you over to our basics. Baseline features. Oh my gosh, baseline features. Holy shit. This is actually applied to how we determine whether a piece of material is going to conform to the windswept or wind informed style. Interesting. And now all of a sudden we define our apex, which if we don't have a base that anchors and we don't have a return or a platform to support that, now we recognize we've got to come back to tension, meaning the apex base to tip starts to inform are we choosing harmony, tension, or dynamic in terms of our design feel? You see this trickle-down effect of the bonsai design process, okay? So when we start to say I'm going to talk about bonsai styles, this looks like wind and that's where it stops. I'm sorry. That's too shallow. That's too vain. That's too considered in the execution of an art form that allows you to go as deep as you want and possibly can push yourself to consider and pursue. Push yourself. Push yourself to design better. Push yourself out of the box. Push yourself to remove your polluted index and allow the tree to inform your concept of design. This is when you will move from craft to art and start to break through. And create cutting-edge compositions or things that speak to people by transporting them. When somebody looks at your tree, do you want them to say, yeah, that looks like a good bonsai? Or do you want them to say, holy shit, that looks like a giant tree in miniature. Oh my God. My family had a cabin in the desert. I've seen that tree. Which one do you want? I want that. I want that. I want people to say, Oh God. I grew up in the Redwoods. That is a spitting image of the Redwoods, right? You know, like that's when you truly captured somebody. That's when you used bonsai as a vehicle to communicate. Okay? Wind swept. I'm not going to beat it any further. Okay? If you've got the anchor, you can pursue the greatest degree of asymmetry. If you've got that counter base, we can go around the vortex over and over and over and over and over again. And we can do some really magical things. Okay? If you don't, we may have to adjust our definition of line based to tip. We may have to adjust our defining branch and we may move outside of the wind swept form. From this point forward, if you watch this lecture and you bastardize the wind swept form, again, shame on you. Shame on you. Okay? It is a very powerful style of bonsai. It is a very compelling style of bonsai. There is a very minimal fraction of material that can ever, be a good wind swept style. Do not abuse it. Use it carefully. Use it wisely. It will be your best friend. Some of my favorite trees in the garden, wind and form designs. I came back from Japan, never having created a wind and form design and never wanting to create a wind and form design because I sat through so many conventions and so many workshops in college where every piece of material became a shitty wind swept that nobody loved ever in its life and probably ended up in the garbage or a burn pile or in the back 40 of somebody's 3-400 tree bonsai collection and never got a single lick of attention or affection. Right? You use it correctly. It will be the singular tree you want to work on most. Okay? Wind and form design. All right, and that's going to lead me and I think you're seeing the tone of today because people are saying, hey, listen, Ryan, can you please help us understand bonsai styles? And it's like we can't understand bonsai styles unless we start speaking tree and moving past this sort of generic like, well, this is an informal upright and this is a formal. It's like what causes you to pursue this design cascade? Here is the most impotent form of a cascade, right? This is not a good piece of material. I see this all the time. There's this tree that looks like this and somebody says, you know, I'm really thinking about making that a cascade and it's like, oh, okay, cool. I'm going to go listen to a Yoko Ono CD real quick. And grind down my fingernails. Nobody wants to see that as a cascading form ever anywhere. No exhibition. No, there's nothing there that would say, hey, this tree is growing on a cliff or a hillside or an eroded hillside or a riverbank or any other zone where a tree would be forced to drop down for any number of reasons to conform to the environment and seek some sort of comfortable growing position that adapts to the elements acting on it. All right, so then you start to say, okay, what is the character of cascade? What is, and again, windswept. Fraction of a percentage of material leads to a good windswept yet we choose the windswept for every crappy piece of material we ever see. Fraction of a percentage of material is ever going to make a great cascade yet every piece of shit material turns into a cascade. Okay, most important aspect of a cascade is right there. We need an acute angle of drop. This is the only time that we would ever think about a piece of material becoming a cascade. Now that may be an acute angle of drop in the trunk which creates a very beautiful seamless cascade or it may be an acute angle of drop in our defining branch. Okay. Now this one's dangerous. This one's dangerous. Okay, because if we say, okay, cool. My trunk line is coming up here, right? And now I've got this trunk line and we carry this trunk line up and we make this cute little tree here and then we have this dropping branch and we've got this little tree in this branch down here. This is one of the most counterproductive styles in bonsai. I'm going to create my symmetrical triangle up here and then I'm going to have my cute little triangle down here and you're saying but what was the element or what was the force or what was the environment that caused that branch to drop straight down and that tree to grow erect and juvenile upward, right? When did that happen? Why did that happen? And the answer is it doesn't happen. That's not the way that it works out especially if we're considering. Oh, okay. So baseline and features if I'm going to have a cascade and I'm going to be dropping down chances are I need good rootage on this opposite side to hold this weight. Now we can adjust for that because we say oh, well I've got this this Cascade that drops down here very slender trunk. I don't have any base over here. Maybe I have a slender point of grabbing the soil mass and we say okay cool. Well, then I'm not going to carry that long. Line out here to create the kind of asymmetry that puts all of the functional visual and physical weight on a base that lacks the capacity to hold that visually and physically I can move this closer in so that my acute angle of drop stays close to the container. Now watch this and I could start to say okay, I'm going to create my apex and I'm going to create my branch moving out here. But if I start to think about well to age, this piece of material in the container visually over the next 10 15 20 years, I need a greater degree of asymmetry. I need remnants of what was and I mean don't mean more negative space. If I start to pursue harmonious design and I don't have a base that's going to further anchor or hold that continually and incrementally increasing degree of asymmetry. Maybe the move is to actually start to grow back into this direction as a piece of tension based design and somebody says well, that's not how cascading trees grow. How could they grow back underneath the cliff consider your perspective if this base is is existing here and we turn this tree. We're starting to look at a tree that's leaning towards the front regardless in order to engage the viewer. It is very practical if the front is here looking at this tree that this is coming towards us and this can engage across the front of the container in attention based design. Our apex. Our defining branch moving against direction of the trunk right to compensate for that failure or lack of presence of stability in the base that would encourage us to pursue Harmony. Okay. This is also where we say or I'm moving out in this direction. I don't have the base to compensate. I take that apex. I come back in the dynamic apex countering defining branch most common application of dynamic design is in the cascade and semi cascade form rebounding on that apex to redistribute visual and physical weight to compensate for a weak base. Oh my gosh baseline features define the line based to tip defining branch. This is when we consider Harmony tension dynamic cascading forms use dynamic to compensate for a weak base distance from the rim of the container and the dynamic execution directly informed the strength of the base or lack thereof and we start to recognize wow if I'm just using the materials characteristics to inform my design and I'm speaking tree. I don't have to be an artist. I don't have to be some magical designer that is being moved by the moment. No actually this piece of material is paint by numbers. Bonsai if the tree leads the dance is already made before we ever experience that piece of material. It's in the material. It's in the tree. It's informed by what that tree gives you what it needs to be. This is ultimately where when I look at Bonsai design to talk about styles to talk about how we do this it is it requires very little of me except for coming to that both objectively and with a non-polluted very very full index of imagery to be able to pull from and you're saying but I thought it was in the tree. So why do you have to pull from this imagery? Well, I've got to know what the proportion and scale of that particular piece is going to be in that environment where this kind of shape would occur for this species. I've got to know that shape and scale. I've got to know what that apex is going to look like on a mountain hemlock versus a pine versus a juniper versus a broadleaf. I have to know that otherwise I cannot execute the appropriate proportions that reflect nature and miniature for this piece of material with these characteristics that the material is guiding the dance with right? So even if you say oh my gosh, Ryan saying I don't have to be creative. I don't know. No, you just need to know you just need to know these different environments. You need to know these shapes. So then what's more important to look at a bonsai book or to look at a book of the native environment? What's more important to go to a bonsai show or to go walk through the mountains? I'm going to say hey, let's look at that book of native landscapes before you ever look at a bonsai book go walk through the mountains before you ever go to a bonsai exhibition or a bonsai show. You'll be better at bonsai for it to go get that kind of knowledge and information. How to conform to a convention that is a blip on a timeline of an art form that has a far greater history of natural representation of those places. You could be than that lame exhibition that you're at right? Okay, Cascade if you do not have an acute angle of drop. Hey, listen, you're not making a Cascade and the moment that you take that discontinuity of that upper piece and you start to recognize okay, depending on how my base is is going to inform. How I close the gap. Do I close the gap in a harmonious direction? Do I close the gap in a dynamic direction? Do I gin this upper piece so that I can compensate or care or piggyback on the characteristics of the material? All of those decisions are made by what the material brings to that situation. You don't have to be able to conceptualize that you're just looking at the tree and you're saying does that give me visual and physical stability? Is this cascading branch too long? Right? Well, if it's too long, do I need that length? Does that offer interest? Are there characteristics in that long branch that I can utilize to generate more? Is there deadwood and live interaction all the way to the tip and somebody's going to say I think you should prune that it's too long. Well, if there's character and there's value in that guess what we can adjust the size of our pads and the spacing to lighten that full your load that's pulling on the characteristics of the material. Now skill and proportion becomes the tool that allows you to preserve that interesting character that exists inside of that material. You have to arm yourself with these techniques and the ability to adapt to take the best of that material and move it forward again. What is masculine and feminine design feminine design slender trunk. We elongate the design that applies to a Cascade and a windswept just as much as any other style of bone side, right and we with that farther and farther degree of asymmetry. We get smaller and smaller pads greater and greater amount of negative space and we preserve those long lines to be a part of that design. Because that character is what gives material the value and carries the essence of the landscape with it. Okay, first two pieces that I really wanted to tackle again. Why start with windswept why start with Cascade because they are the most abused redheaded stepchildren of bone size styles. Okay, let's go to semi Cascade. I don't feel like this is well, I mean and this is equally as abused but I don't feel like this needs. The heavy-handedness that I've applied to the other two pieces except for to say okay. So what makes a good semi Cascade a Cascade is an acute angle of drop a semi Cascade is an obtuse angle of drop. Okay, that is when you get you okay. Now does that mean that that's a good semi Cascade? Absolutely not. Absolutely not. Okay, but an obtuse angle of drop suggests. Ah, okay. I've got my obtuse angle of drop that means that I'm moving farther away. Okay, and you start to say well gosh, then you really need that visual anchor. Absolutely you do. Okay, or again coming back to the windswept model. You need that platform to be present there right to be able to anchor that distance. Now the stronger that base the farther we go the concept of dynamic harmony or tension. We know if we want to pursue a greater and greater degree of asymmetry over time if this is living or if this is giving us that stability, we're going to pursue Harmony because Harmony means we can continue to make this tree more and more asymmetrical over the course of time. If you go back and you look at the Mirai in the wild Rockies project, there is a very very powerful bristlecone pine on Windy Ridge that is blown over the length of the tree and the distance that the foliar mass sits on the far side is the 3,000 year old pine. It's an unfathomable distance to the actual living portion of that tree that is the creep into the ancient quality of an ancient tree on the interior portion of a vortex. Now, are we trying to get there with every bone side tree? Yeah, yeah, duh. Of course we are like if if we're not if we're not in this design process to create the goal of executing an older and older form on this tree and we're thinking I'm going to let this tree grow so that I can. Prune it back to what it used to look like and I'm going to let this tree grow so that I can prune it back to what it used to look like. If that's the thought of what we're doing with bonsai sign off right now from Mirai. That's not what we're doing here, right? We are trying to always step into the vortex with our aesthetic evolution to represent a greater degree of age to the ability that material has the capacity to execute. That is what makes this all worth it. Otherwise what you wire and. Wire it grows and you prune it all off. That's like wiping before you poop. Why would we do that? You've got to have a reason to continue cultivating this tree continue fostering that growth continue developing its aesthetic. And that is to represent a truer and truer representation of nature and miniature on an increasing timescale to show more and more age and antiquity. And that is why we define those elements. So when we come back to the cascading form, naturally, the harmonious design is going to push into that older and older representation, but that has to be facilitated by the material characteristics here or here. And again, if this piece is going to be going into this far degree, and we don't have the base, okay, let's just say I don't have that. I have this kind of a base right and I don't want that emerging perpendicularly, but maybe I have this kind of a base. Okay, cool. Maybe this is the move. Then where the apex comes back or returns, right? Because the moment that you start to say, okay, semi-cascade, I don't have the base to support it. I'm going to pull it back into tension. Now, it turns into a cascading bone site. What is the difference between semi-cascade and cascade in terms of how the books define it? The difference would be whether the branch drops below the bottom of the container or not semi-cascade. We start to say, okay, the branch stays above the bottom of the container cascade. The branch drops below the bottom of the container. That is wholly insufficient to define the aesthetics of this bone size style differentiation. Okay, because we start to say listen cascading bones. I have an acute angle of drop semi-cascading bones. I have an obtuse angle of drop. Those are two completely different characteristics that define and outline this style and how we utilize this style. Is there a tension? Tension based semi-cascading design and you say, well, if I increase the height of the pot, now I get a semi-cascade and I turn a cascade into a semi-cascade. That is crazy. If that is how we are pursuing and you know, the old vintage the super old vintage big ass long pots and we say this is like a California bell-bottom 1960-1970 production container style. Now, we can have a cascading bone size. That doesn't hang off of the edge of the bench. Well, you just basically in your definition undefined cascade and now all of your cascading trees are all semi-cascading trees. It has to occur within the material the criteria of the style, right? Okay, hopefully I dispelled that right semi-cascade another little bit of a beat-up and abused form. All right, now I'm going to come back to the formal upright informal upright. Okay, so I'm going to come. I'm going to come back to formal and I'm going to talk about informal. Okay, informal upright. Now when we start to talk about formal and informal and again, let me just lock into informal for a moment. Okay, informal upright in its variety of stylistic forms. You say why would I choose an informal upright tree? Well, this is kind of a no-brainer, right? We have some sort of, you know, complex or maybe maybe we have some sort of really soft movement in the trunk. All right, and you know, we have a base and you say, okay, could this be a windswept it could be a windswept if we got into the into the repotting in the end and the base was here and we had other structural elements, but we don't have the base there. So we're not going to you know slant it and what's the difference between an informal upright in a slanting style form? Good question. Is there a difference like maybe I'm not going to get into that necessarily right now. Okay, when we start to talk about the informal or formal upright form, this is really when we start to talk about reading the characteristics of the trunk girth to be able to define as well as the style of the angles in the movement. Okay, we've got angular movement. That's a masculine feature. We've got a thick trunk. That's a masculine feature. Okay, and some people are saying well, what about rugged Deadwood or really craggly bark? That's Matt. No, that's age that shows age whether the tree is skinny or fat, right? Whether the tree is curvaceous or angular the two characteristics that define masculine or feminine design are the style of the angles and bends and the girth of the trunk. Those are your two. Okay, so when we start to talk, about this in this form, right? I've got a big trunk. I've got angular movement. Okay, now all of a sudden with an upright tree that has masculine characteristics. We already jump into the executable design concepts based on the commonality of those two characteristics. Okay, I've got these branches here. Okay, I've got a thick trunk with angular movement. I've got a base that suggests that's going to be an upright tree baseline features. I'm reading the base. I'm reading the best line and I'm choosing the features of the tree that give it value to give the objective front. Here is my front, right? There is my planting position. There is my front. How do I handle this is a bonsai Styles right concept lecture. Okay, how do I handle that branching? Do I carry this up and make this type of a tree with it? Well, no, because the thick trunk and angular movement in masculine design has a direct and immediate action associated with it, right? If you have a thick trunk and angular movement, you compress the height of the tree, right? We compress when we compress vertically. We expand laterally now with these branches. My notion of design is going to be to compress. Okay, and when we start to compress when I bring these down that means these have to push out. Okay, this starts to give us our ability. This starts to give us our ability to pursue again. What is the purpose of all of this inside of these Styles greater degree of asymmetry remnants of one of what was in the form of Deadwood and more negative space as the Cree and tree increasingly gets older or comes around the vortex. Older or comes around the vortex. And gets carried into the interior stages of development of that trees representation of nature and miniature. Okay, so you start to say well, how does this age over time? Well, if we're saying listen, this is going to continue to get thicker. These angles are going to continue to be angular. That means that we are going to continue to compress over the course of time as we pursue a greater and greater degree of asymmetry and this piece suddenly becomes a piece of Deadwood. And now our apex starts to go here. And this piece continues to elongate. And so we break that up into two pads instead of one to show that increasing scale and proportion as we increase the asymmetry and then this suddenly becomes a piece of Deadwood. And now we've got a shari running up this entirety of this trunk. And now we start to see this piece become here. And let me go ahead and make that look a little bit compressed smaller smaller pads here, right? You see this get more and more masculine as we. Crease the greater and greater degree of asymmetry, right? For an informal upright form, bone size style. Our base informs our planting position. The movement in the size of the trunk inform our impression of whether we compress or we elongate and I'm going to come back here. Okay, and we continue to pursue based on those characteristics. Now, this is what I didn't talk about, but you already know this from everything else. If we're going to pursue. That increasing degree of asymmetry, we better have the base to be able to anchor that and you say why don't have the base? What if the base looks like this? Okay. Well, if the base looks like this and we don't have the stability to push into the harmonious direction, then maybe the move is actually here. Now watch this because this doesn't have to be a lesser degree of asymmetry. Now, I'm moving back in the tension based masculine execution of the informal upright and we say, okay, cool. So, this is going to continue to elongate. Maybe this turns to deadwood. So now this becomes my apex as we continue to compress and this continues to elongate and this turns to deadwood and now all of a sudden we're all the way down here. And now we've got this piece right here. If we want to generate a gesture of age in the informal upright style of bonsai handled in the tension methodology because either the characteristics of the material in terms of, the primary branching or continuation of trunk line are naturally in a tension based design or we lack the strength in the base. And so we do this in response to the material characteristics. We really start to hit that degree of asymmetry and representation of age when the apex passes the center of the base. And so you say, well here it's prior to the center of the base. Yes, I know if I'm trying to climb into the central portion of the vortex where I'm starting to show an, older and older piece of material, the apex must cross the center boundary to begin to pursue the farther degrees of asymmetry that represent antiquity in the visual form. Okay, so there is going to be a point when we center that apex over the center of the base, our design asymmetry and execution of age is nullified or zeroed out. Lots of fancy movement. Tree is not going anywhere. We see the tree. Going somewhere here. Guess what? It's because the apex is getting farther and farther from the center of the base or the balance point of our design. But when we start to push into the tension, we know we're bringing the apex back over the base. We're going to grow that tree, develop that tree. We're going to evolve the execution of tension on the informal upright style of bonsai until we get to that point where we cross that center line of the base. We cross that balance point of the design. And now we start to pursue antiquity and actually age that tree into those greater degrees and executions of antiquity. All right. So there's nuances right with every style. It's like well, I can tell you what informal upright is and I can tell you what formal upright is and I can tell you what a cascade is. This is an evolved conversation of bonsai styles. This is how you do it to the best of its capacity to accomplish the goal of why we're putting in this effort to begin. With okay. All right, that's your informal upright big big big interesting points of design there. Tell me somebody else is going to tell you this stuff. I'm not saying hey, tell me how great I am. That's not at all what I'm saying. I'm saying hey listen, we need to think harder about bonsai. If this is going to be an art form, which everybody wants to call it an art form, then we need to think harder. We need to pursue it because if we're just going to follow this model and repeat this shape, well then call your call yourself a craftsman. Call yourself a pursuer of craft. Okay, it becomes an art when you start investing in the concepts and you start creating dialogue critical context discussions where you have an impact beyond the repetition of a pattern and this is really where we're pushing the envelope here at Mirai and trying to evolve the conversation from being this is what a cascade looks like it drops below the bottom. Of the container and this is what a semi cascade looks like and it stays above the rim. Okay, that's that's not it. That's not an interesting conversation. That's not how an art form exists, right? Okay. There's more critical dialogue than that. All right formal upright now. Here's the thing about the formal upright because formal upright is especially all right, and let's just go ahead and break this up a little bit. Formal upright is the epitome of youth in its form. Okay, it's the epitome of youth the triangular form of a conifer with the apex centered over the base. That is the youngest gesture of the coniferous form. This is showing the perfect photo system, right each of these branches has the greatest accessibility to Mr. Sunshine always having a good day, right that that that as far as the tree is concerned. This is where I am at my peak performance in the hormonally driven oxen as the dominant hormone in coniferous growth the hormonally driven pyramidal conical form of the conifer that allows me to maximize photosynthetic productivity across all of my branches top to bottom in the tree. Okay, and we're saying well in bonsai. We're trying to create something that looks older, right? So when we talk about the formal upright form as we pursue a greater degree of age and asymmetry, and let's just be really clear. We do have to start out with symmetry in the formal upright form for most pieces of material to eventually get to the point where we pursue a greater degree of asymmetry. The only characteristic that makes a formal upright a formal upright is a dead straight trunk. Okay. Now does that trunk have to be dead straight from every single viewing position on that tree? Absolutely not. In fact, very few pieces of material will give you a dead. Straight trunk from every single perspective. If anybody watches the forum QA, we talked about this on a very young piece of redwood material forum QA 205, where the tree was wired straight up for a formal upright and the student took the wire off and he said man it I'm going to have to wire it again. It didn't hold the straight trunk line. So I'm going to have to wire it again. And I said you're going to have to wire that I believe I said six or seven times. I mean I was being nice probably ten or twelve times to keep that thing straight. And even then you're going to have to straighten it out every couple years because trees do not naturally form a straight trunk and all of a sudden you start to say well formal uprights like this fundamental form and it's like it's a fundamental form. But let's be really honest when you get a dead straight trunk, whether it be a nursery piece of material, which is always a youthful piece of material and that is very easy to find. So right that let's take that off the table you get a dead straight trunk and an older piece of material right a field grown piece of material. That's got some age on it or a Yamadori piece of material specifically you get a dead straight trunk. Let's just understand over hundreds of years to have a dead straight trunk. That's freaking rare. It is far easier for Randy Knight to find a contorted Juniper than a dead straight Juniper. It's far easier for Randy Knight to find a contorted pine than a dead straight pine that has more than a hundred years of age on it. That's a rare piece of material to find a dead straight trunk. That's two three four five eight thousand years old. This is this is challenging stuff to get to that point. Okay, when we have a formal upright though, we start to say listen, I want a symmetry immediately. Apex of a tree showing antiquity first criteria of an ancient tree dead top dead top blown out by a storm right you go to the redwoods the epitome of the formal upright any redwood past the age of 800 years will have a broken top broken top broken stag dead snag you go to the giant Sequoias any giant Sequoia past 600 years of age going to have a broken out top burnt out broken dead right for whatever reason. And all of a sudden now we start to get this reiteration. Now we get this reiteration now. It doesn't mean that that reiteration isn't going to follow the same conical form this starts to become and you start to and you have you know, maybe another reiteration here or maybe you have a tree that's in adjustment here. Okay, and so this is this this is still executing this same branching structure. But now we have an asymmetrical apex now naturally if we get a dead snag a lot of times what we start to have. We start to have a die back that occurs with an embolism in the vascular tissue. And so now all of a sudden we lose that piece right now. We've got a greater degree of asymmetry that's occurring and these are going to naturally grow longer as they're continuing to get fed. So we have boom here getting longer and the lower branches are going to start to get shaded out because this is in a forested environment. And now that starts to form a dead snag and then maybe this forms a reiteration here. And so we start to get this kind of a vibe forming there and then maybe this gets broken and we get a reiteration here and we get a reiteration there and then we get a reiteration here. And now this gets broken and this forms reiterations and we start to get all these smaller little sub trees happening here. And we just move into this greater and greater degree of asymmetry in a singular direction. And let's just go even further now all of a sudden this has lost the ability to preserve these roots. And so now this tree. Starts to fall over and now we get a tree that starts to show that upheaval where it's now leaning on the landmass. This would become our containerized environment. We get more a soon tree, right? The evolution the the only criteria to the formal upright was a straight trunk beyond that and you're saying well, once it falls over is this now slanting or is this still a formal upright? I don't really I don't really care. You know, like do you need to call it something? Do we need to put it inside that box because that was a formal upright that because of the actions of the environment, these random acts of nature have knocked it off of its predictable form and have changed its axes. And does that change its bone size style at that point? Are we trying to apply a conformity to a convention when we're just looking at something that represents a very natural occurrence? I don't know, right? I don't feel the need to define that maybe you do maybe it's a an informal upright. That's fallen off of its axis. Maybe it's now slanting style. Maybe it's now an informal upright. I don't know, right? But that is the process of taking that straight trunk and carrying it through those iterations of age. Now you may say well, what would encourage me to put the apex off to the right as opposed to the apex off to the left? Well, I'm immediately going to be thinking is there a basal component that's showing a stronger capacity to anchor or not? Is there a dominant transition point in the bone size styling process to a point where that trunk makes a natural transition to a fairly well tapered piece that shows maturity and an appropriate structural form that can execute an apical insinuation in that transition, right? Those are the criteria in my mind. If I'm going to take the apex out of a tree, I better have a natural transition point to a branch that has some sort of insinuation of apical capacity. And carries forward that transition of taper or I'm going to wait the next 10 to 15 years to grow that into the tree. And I probably shouldn't have done that to begin with. That's part of maturing this form. When you come back and look at all these branches, there's going to be branching that thicken faster and formed forms that allow you to transition the style and begin aging that design. And if they're not, then it's not time to transition and age that formal upright design. Okay, bone size styles. Yet again, information. That triggers the action characteristics inside of the material that inspire the form a knowledge of the environment and the perpetuation of the aspects of design that execute visual age that allow us to be able to determine when it's right and appropriate to be taking those actions that evolve the representation of age. Okay now when we start to look at and I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to do clump. Raft forest all at the same time. Okay. Now these are three different styles. What is the difference stylistically clump? They come off of the same base multi-trunk form. Okay raft. They come off of the same root structure multi-trunk form Forest. They are separate trees multi-trunk form. Okay. Why do I handle each of these? The same? Okay. When we are handling a multi-trunk form can this could be mother-daughter right? The the two trunk form this could be mother-daughter when we are handling multi-trunk form. We have a set of criteria that allow this form to represent nature in miniature by the presentation of realistic characteristics as well. As visual characteristics that make it look larger in this miniature form. Okay, and we're first saying different heights to each of these trunks doesn't have to be a mandatory criteria, but gives that a believable form girth different girth to each trunk. Can I'm going to come back to height and girth different planes of those trunks in terms of 3D and the execution of depth in design and finally movement differing movement so that we see natural versus artificial fall. The movement looks the same all of a sudden. Now we have this now does that movement hint at itself? Are we going to have this type of movement in one tree and this type of movement in another and we said now that looks natural. No, because the elements acting on. Each of those trunks is going to be similar beyond a shadow of a doubt. Now you may have a trunk on the outside of this composition leaning out. Whereas the central piece is extending upwards and you're saying well, that's a windswept and that's an upright. No, no, no, no, no. This is trying to seek light with all of these other trunks around it. It's the curvaceous movement or maybe maybe that's what our trunks look like. Look at the ponderosa pine forest. That I created in the gallery on bonsaimari.com. You're going to see radically irregular movement. Each of those trees had the same characteristics in that movement to go together as a forest, right? So when we start to think about these these characteristics of this bonsai style, okay, the height and the girth are a relationship that are very very challenging to tamper with unless you get to the far degree of age. Because when we say the tallest tree is your definition of the apex, we say baseline features, harmony, tension, dynamic. Okay, does this multi-trunk form carry harmony through each tree, tension through each tree, dynamic through each tree? Or is it the sum of those pieces that conveys harmony, tension, dynamic? And the answer is, it is the sum of those pieces that carries harmony, tension, dynamic. Which is to say, okay, your tallest tree equals your apex. That is the highest point that forms the pinnacle. And that tallest tree forming the apex also needs to be the thickest tree in terms of the hierarchy that allowed it to achieve that height over time if we are expressing antiquity in the design. And you can say, well, I've seen young branches grow much taller than my tree. Happens all the time in redwoods. Okay, if we are showing a young tree, absolutely. If we are showing an immediate transition from the loss of an apex, absolutely. You think that Mother Nature is not going to check and balance that form and shape over time? Beyond a shadow of a doubt, if we are reflecting a greater time scale, the tallest tree will be the thickest tree in a grouping of trees inside of an environment. You say, well, the tallest tree breaks. You said it yourself. Yes, absolutely. The tallest tree does break. Right? And now all of a sudden we're saying, for the most part, until we get into antiquity and the execution and representation, this is true. Okay, so take this with a little bit of a nuance of age at the farthest extent, can be an exception to this, but over the course of a majority of time, the majority of our compositions that we're creating, the tallest tree needs to be the thickest tree, and that becomes the action of defining the apex of a multi-tree form forest clump or a root-connected raft. Right? So you're saying, okay, I'm going to define the line base to tip. Okay, that thickest trunk needs to be the tallest trunk. That sets the tone for the height of your composition. And every other trunk, as the girth steps down to your number two thickest trunk, is going to be your second tallest tree. Your number three thickest trunk is going to be your third tree. That allows you to start to reduce and calibrate and define the apices of all of these pieces. And we say, okay, so the tallest tree is the apex. These general trunk movement in a direction is giving me that information for her. And then that outer line piece is inevitably going to have the longest length deviating from that foyer mass. Even if it's the smallest trunk, that is still your defining branch for that asymmetrical model of the composition. Okay? Now, the planes, the three dimensionality. We say in forest composition, you need to have foreground execution. Smaller trees here. You need to have background execution. Smaller trees here. Why is that? So that we show generation in the foreground. I've got my big parent tree. It is reproducing. And we see the depth of forest in the background. This is a composition that shows this kind of environmental condition. I am looking a long ways down this deep forest situation that gives me the impression of an expansive land mass. Okay? So even when we start to talk about the selection of front, and we're looking at baseline and features of a multi-trunk form. One of the features in selection of front is where can I see the greatest number of trunks? That is a feature in a multi-trunk form. Where I can visibly see the greatest number of trunks. Can I see all of the trunks? When you create a forest composition, that is one of the criteria for laying out the forest. I put my first tree, offset of center. My second tree, to the counter side of the asymmetrical flow of the composition. My third tree, that generational offspring, on the asymmetrical insinuation of direction. Every second tree, it's the same thing. Every single tree that I place after that, I need to be able to see. I forgot this. Spacing. I need to be able to see the tree. I need a regularity in the spacing between those trunks. But the front of my composition should give me a viewable perspective of every trunk. And you're saying, well, sometimes there's better movement or better interest in your main tree, but there's a trunk hidden behind it. Well, then you sacrifice some of that interest to be able to see that special feature of the visibility of each of the trunks. That is an accommodation of the multi-trunk form in the clump, in the connected root or raft, or in the forest style of design. And this is where it becomes critical and pivotal. In the creation of these pieces in the very beginning, the initial design of a multi-trunk form, selection of trunks, selection of the front, build out of the branching, build out of the representations, the continuity, the movement, the height, the girth. You can very easily spoil one of these forms, when we talk about bone size styles. And over the course of time, and I talk about this a lot, and I'm going to say it here again, the greatest pitfall to clump, clump, raft, or forest forms, is that we're constantly taking the branches off of the number one tree and the number two tree, because they're shading out the number three through twelve, right? And then all of a sudden, the three through twelve have more branches, and they're getting thicker, but they're shorter. So we're screwing up the hierarchy, and eventually the number one trunk gets so weak, so depleted because of the branch reduction to facilitate the health of every other tree in that composition, we miss the memo that you've got to preserve the main trunk first. It needs the greatest amount of branching and the greatest amount of foliar mass to maintain its dominance and anchor that entire composition. Who cares about the smaller, weaker trunks in the grand scheme of longevity of this composition? The dominant tree is the priority. Every single time, alright? Multi-trunk forms are so challenging. And also, you know, I think there's two, I think there's two really great things to keep in mind as ultimate executions of nature in miniature. Number one, planting on stone, is the ultimate execution of nature in miniature. There are days where I feel like, unless I'm producing an orthodox form, which again, you know, as much as I'm sitting here saying, that's, you know, that's a convention, that's a craft, there's a lot of orthodox form at Mirai. There's a lot of material that lends itself to an informal, formal, upright style orthodox form. Okay? As much as I'm sort of lambasting that... What was I going to say there? Oh, natural, okay? There are days where I feel like, listen, every tree should be planted on a stone because it is so literally nature represented in miniature. And, you know, obviously there's broadleaf forms that don't conform to that and there's a lot of checks and balances. But for these older trees, these coniferous forms, etc., I feel like that. But second to that, planting on stone, literal nature in miniature, the multi-trunk form, literally nature in miniature. Forests, clumps, connected root rafts, these are the trees that, when put into an exhibition, are the public favorite vote, right? The public bonsai vote. Or a flowering tree. But we'll forget that. Let's say we're presenting these when there's no flowering and fruiting varieties present. Nobody knows anything about bonsai. They come in there. The forest is going to immediately be like, that looks like a forest. And you're saying, okay, I want to transport these people. I want to create context beyond a convention. That's created as a cultural preservation model post-World War II of a culture that none of us, or the majority of us, do not exist in. If I were a Japanese bonsai practitioner, I would be diving heavily into the orthodox form. But even trying to produce the orthodox form outside of Japan, outside of the culture that created that convention, it's different. It's different in North America to try and produce orthodoxy. It's different in Europe to try and produce orthodoxy. You cannot deny the impact of the culture or the context in which bonsai is created as an influence to the shape of that bonsai. But when you start to say, I want to just simply transport people, well, the forest is the greatest way to do it. Now, here's the thing about forest design, and this is really where I want to go into Bonsai Styles, taking this further than the convention that we executed. And I said, you have your number one tree, you have your number two tree, slightly forward and opposing. This is the asymmetry of my forest composition. And then you have your generational tree right here on the side of asymmetry. This is orthodoxy and forest composition. But here's the thing. There is an infinite number of forests that exist at an infinite number of ages out of an infinite number of species across the landscapes on the globe or the face of Earth. Right? So when you start to talk about forests, and I'm saying, listen, this is your number one, this is your number two, this is your number three, this is your asymmetry, that in itself is orthodoxy. That in itself is orthodoxy. Do you have to pursue forest creation like that? No. No, you don't. Does the height to girth, spacing movement, depth in the design, planes, still apply to any forest? Absolutely. That is what gives you a generational, that is what gives you an environmental, and that is what gives you... Sorry, lost my mic. Let me get it back. And that is what gives you a hierarchical representation of nature and miniature. Okay? So now all of a sudden, you could be saying, well, I'm gonna create a... I'm gonna create a forest that doesn't have any of those conventions of number one, number two, number three. Maybe my number one tree stands alone. Right? And maybe I just have a bunch of smaller offspring trees. And maybe my number one tree shows a wind influence halfway up. But these offspring tree are just formal uprights, because they're not at that topography yet. Okay? You look at the clear-cut forest we did, the dwarf Alberta spruce on the Pennsylvania bluestone slabs. Okay? That is an iteration of a forest that we see across the Pacific Northwest on a continuum. Any heavily logged region or environment. When I was in Sweden, I was totally shocked to see that they have, like, less than 1% of their native forest intact in their very limited number of national parks. The rest of the country has been completely clear-cut and is generational, you know, crop-growing, like the Pacific Northwest. You know, it's like, oh, that's a very common forest scenario. Right? And it doesn't abide by your main tree, your second tree, your third tree, the conventions of orthodoxy in the form of forest creation. But it does abide by height to girth, spacing plains, and movement that justifies the environmental conditions acting on it. The conditions acting on that region, that species, at that time, over that period of age that we're reflecting in the composition. Okay? Okay, literati. Broom. And exposed root. Okay. Exposed root. Or what is commonly known as neagari. Neagari. Okay? Exposed root. I don't know what this is. We're going to say it's number eight. Okay. When we see the exposed root form, okay, and typically if you see it in, you know, cultivated bonsai, you're going to see this trunk here. You're going to see this branch here. You're going to see this canopy here. And you're going to see all of these roots. And then your pot is going to be here. Right? Very, very, very, very, very grotesquely exaggerated form. Do you ever actually see trees with that kind of exposed root system standing in the environment? No. No. Here's what you would see. You would see a tree with some rather rigid, bulky roots that would be sort of standing in this kind of stance on a hillside here. Right? And we're talking about in the exposed root form we're talking about erosion as the fundamental environment and condition that creates the exposed root form. Now is this along a riverbed with a broadleaf deciduous variety? Possibly. Right? Is this along a dry southern slope for a coniferous variety? Very common to see exposed root ponderosa pine on the eroding hillsides and stable poor soil condition hillsides or the Japanese white pine up on the sides of the volcanoes in Japan. Very common to see exposed root representations. Large representations of them. Full-size tree representations. Erosion over the course of time. Go to the White Mountains and the Bristlecone Pines. Commonly visible exposed root specimens thousands of years old with the consistent erosion of the mountainous environment degradation of the aggregate, etc. Okay? So when we start to talk about this bonsai style especially in the aged form of this bonsai style you are looking for different thickness. You are looking for different length. You are looking for different movement and I mean irregular and completely erratic movement and you are looking for different spacing and guess what? You're also looking for different planes or depth. This has this exact same concept of a multi-trunk form clump, raft, forest but it all applies to this. To this. Now, how do you understand whether you compress or elongate in an exposed root form? How thick is the biggest root? How thick is the trunk that exists? What is the style of the movement through the root? What is the style of the movement through the trunk? Definitively in forms are we going to elongate? Because listen, there's exposed root forms that are formal uprights. Okay? Are we going to elongate or are we going to compress? This is that masculine-feminine concept of design. We're looking at those biggest roots the concepts and style of the trunk the movement of these pieces to know whether we compress or expand. Does the tension-harmony dynamic anchor our thought process of design in Naegari? Absolutely! Because guess what? If my thickest root is down on the bottom of this and I've got this thin spindly little root right here can I push the degree of asymmetry in that direction and expect for this composition to hold up? Well, I guess it depends on how thick that root is and how thin that root is. Right? But we are limited by the visual and physical stability again of the strength of the base of our tree and now the base has been compromised because there's space in the base which makes that tree less visually stable although very interesting. But if I have a big thick root here that's anchoring this whole thing and I've got my thin root here guess what? I have the ability to pursue a greater degree of asymmetry and pursue a harmonious design. But there's nothing wrong with in a Naegari pulling the apex back to compensate and dynamic. There's nothing wrong in Naegari although you don't typically see it with pulling it back into the tension-based design and I would challenge somebody to pursue that because almost inevitably in the orthodoxy of Naegari you are pursuing harmonious design sort of predefined and a repetitious handling of the material. Let's see something different. Okay, let me give you a reference point for this. In my own journey against the orthodoxy that trained me as a bonsai the hornbeam on rock iconic tree for Mirai small little piece of nursery stock from Tom Roberts down at Driftwood Bonsai I found it in a grow bag had this funky root most people said cut that root off it's ugly and make it look like every other crappy hornbeam you've ever seen that nobody's ever wanted and cared less about. Right? And I said no let's go ahead and take that root let's put that root on the uphill side of this exposed root eroded hillside form. Design it on the live stream. I move in the harmonious direction with that piece of material because of the orthodox embedment of those images in my mind. Okay? I come back to that tree in a feature piece of content and I take the growth and I move it uphill in a tension based design to create something more interesting and challenge that convention of orthodoxy and it's still in that tension based design moving uphill and up the slope and it has become a very iconic and desirable tree that almost anybody that comes to Mirai asks if it's available it's spoken for when I'm ready to sell it I'm not ready to sell it yet. Right? Because I love the environmental insinuation of a style that is most commonly handled in a generic orthodox way and in defiance of that tapped into the natural growth habit of a style that represents that very specific condition. Okay? Things to think about in the exposed root form. Okay. Broom. Now I'm going to be really honest with you. The broom style form is is this like the conical formal upright of the broadleaf representation where you're saying I'm now showing the most juvenile globular centered symmetrical centered symmetrical cytokinin driven form in the broadleaf genre. And the answer is yes. Yes. That is what the broom is showing. And so would I encourage you when you age a broom over time to push it into an asymmetrical model which means the high point here needs to shift to one side or another. The length or even distribution needs to compress and expand. And then all of a sudden what ends up happening to our broom is we start to form this informal billow that gives rise to an increasingly asymmetric broadleaf representation. Okay. And this will happen. Listen. One of the best representations that I've seen of this in visual form is Beth Moon's book Ancient Trees where she goes to England and she photographs the oaks and the elms of the English countryside. And when you see these grand sentinels in the broadleaf form inevitably they are asymmetrical in their informal billows over the course of time. You're talking 800,000, 1,200, 1,500 year old trees. You go through the northeastern United States you can find all kinds of sycamore, elm maybe if they haven't succumbed to the Dutch elm disease or the emerald ash borer. You can find some ancient chestnut if they didn't succumb to the chestnut blight. You can find these representations of antiquity in the broadleaf form a tremendous number of oaks that still exist and can show you this kind of demonstration of the penetrative move towards asymmetry over time. These representations exist. So when we start to talk about the broom stylistically this is a moment of youth that is represented. Now let me tell you where I think good broom and bad broom depart from one another. There are a lot of bonsai books that say with a broom you cut this off and you cleft graft these pieces into here and then these all start to ramify and every year you wrap these up with raffia and you pull these pieces over the winter time and then you take that raffia off and they give you this type of a representation and that forms this and then it builds into this and then it builds into this and that is your broom style form. Well first and foremost this cut and this graft not the way that you form a natural looking broom because you know that they're still in the cytokinin driven growth in the broadleaf youthful form because every conifer has cytokinin even though it's auxin driven and every broadleaf has auxin even though it's cytokinin driven. You're going to have a dominant leader that's going to far fork up in here and then you're going to have this secondary piece this is the beginning of a truly beautiful broom shape form that gives rise to a greater degree of asymmetry over time as it ages. You can have your cake and eat it too. Because now we start to bifurcate here and we start to get this kind of ramification and we start to bifurcate here and we get this kind of ramification and our broom starts to form but then we start to let this continue here and we start to pull back on this here and we start to build here and our broom eventually develops into this and now we actually have and then this sprouts and then we start to get this in here and then this sprouts we start to get this in here and now all of a sudden we start to see the evolution and the development of a tree that actually looks like a tree as it starts to age through those pieces of the vortex. That is your fundamental broadleaf model. But if you start out with all of these forks originating from a singular site, you can never create that kind of asymmetry or perpetuation. You are locked into the youthful form for forever. It grows, we cut it back, it grows, we cut it back, we wire, we unwire. There is no evolution. One of the styles that I found to be most curious was the broom-shaped form and one of the styles that I fell out of love with almost immediately in the bonsai action was the broom-shaped form. I mean, how can you stay in love with a broom form when there's nowhere to go with it? Hi, Potts. Okay, that's the broom. Last one, literati, and then I'm going to open it up to questions. Okay, now, I talked about the windswept, I talked about the windswept form and the cascading form being the red-headed stepchildren of bonsai styles, okay? But let's also be very clear that literati is probably the style that, you know, is most trendy and faddish for people to quantify a tree as and most poorly defined and misunderstood in terms of what makes a tree a literati versus a very elegant, feminine, informal, upright tree, okay? Literati is the farthest extent of feminine design. It is an exaggerated, slender, elongated, almost impossibly long line with the most minimal, minimal amount of foliage, the smallest possible container, and the sparsest distribution of needle or leaf mass, borderline impossible to survive, okay? If you are looking at a tree and it is giving you the feeling that it is on the verge of not being possible, you're just starting to approach the literati form. And if the base of that literati is oversized, if any portion of that trunk is too thick, if that line is not long enough, guess what? It is not a literati form any longer, okay? Think about this as an extended trunk line, think about this as an exaggerated brushstroke, think about this as the far degree of impossible in design, and you are just beginning the literati exploration, okay? So we're saying something irregular, long, it could be angular, it could be curvaceous, it could be straight for all we care, right? When we talk about literati design and we have that fundamental foundation, now can it have a little bit of a root system? Absolutely. There are a few aspects of literati design that we have to understand, all right? First and foremost, 100% of the trunk line is visible. 100% of the trunk line is visible. In literati design, when we are talking about, sort of, do we expect the trunk line to be visible, expand, or do we compress in masculine and feminine? We're saying feminine, we expand, we elongate, the silhouette is narrowed, right? We also start to talk about when we expand, we have less fuller mass, we have smaller pads, we have more space, we see more of the branch line. We see 100% of the trunk line in literati execution. And most people say, okay, this tree is literati. Say, for example, this tree had this big branch line. Well, that branch line was not visible. had this big base or maybe it has this bulbous base and we say that's a literati, okay? Immediately right here it is not literati, okay? It is not literati. And in the design of this particular piece of material we would want to, when we get this character of a masculine base, we would probably want to compress that tree into here to start to bridge the gap between the masculine base and the feminine trunk line because we are now in the middle of masculine feminine and that gradient between the two, okay? But let's just say we have that very slender trunk line, it is a true literati, we don't want to compress here, okay? Any branch that we drop off of this I want to see 100% of primary branch lines, okay? And of that I want to see the smallest possible branch line. I want to see the smallest possible pad size and I want to see the thinnest possible pad profile and I want to see the narrowest pad width and I want to see the smallest container size. I want to exaggerate every single portion of this tree's execution if it is going to conform to literati. If any of these things are deviated from, we are jeopardizing the essence of literati and we've got to understand it. Now maybe it's intentionally necessary because maybe the material does not lend itself to the literati form. Do I feel like people bastardize this concept? Absolutely! Professionals all over the world want to talk about a feminine and formal upright as a literati form. No, you can't do it. That jeopardizes the rare fraction of material that lends itself to literati design, okay? What I want you to take from today is not what a cascade, semi-cascade, windswept, or informal upright is. What I want you to take today from the discussion of bonsai styles is how does the material inform us through its characteristics of not only what style it will be, but also how we use it to manifest harmony, tension, dynamic, masculine, and feminine. How we use it to manifest the evolution of age in the material represented over time, and how you can use it to manifest the evolution of age in your objective assessment of the bonsai style and the material allows you to age that tree based on material considerations through the different phases of the vortex to achieve an older and older representation of nature and miniature. That is what bonsai style is all about. All right, I'm going to open it up to questions. All right, so first question from Joel is, and let me just make sure I'm good. Yeah, all right. So how would you suggest practicing objective design as an exercise? How would I suggest practicing objective design as an exercise? So I used to do this with my students. This exercise drove me fucking nuts. Because I would put six pieces of material in the studio on each student's turntable, and every student had to go and design each piece of material. Now, this is an exercise, as far as I'm concerned, that should take a day. Obviously, everybody wants to get dirty. They want to justify their time through action and implication. But the reason that that exercise should take a day is because it's a very important exercise. It's because you are naturally going to jump to immediate conclusions about that piece of material from the beginning. You need to recognize that. Write it down, draw it, recognize what your inclination is. And then you have to train yourself to look at what your inclination is once you've satisfied that desire to expel or produce that inclination, that comfortable mental image, that is yours, that you're trying to apply to each piece of material. And then you go back and you say, what is actually happening in this tree? So what I would ask students to do is I would say, come up with three designs for this tree. And I've tried it a number of ways. I used to say, show me the tension, show me the harmony, show me the dynamic design for this piece of material. And so many times, the material didn't have the opportunity to be one or more of those design feels, right? And so that's where there was a hole in that exercise. And so then I would say, give me three different designs. And somebody would say, well, this branch could be this long or this long or this long. And that's three different designs. And it's like, okay, you're not thinking hard enough about this. If you empower yourself to execute what comes naturally, step back from that, document it, look at it, step back from that, and then force yourself to be objective. This is the best base. This is where I get the greatest amount of stability. It's the widest point. It's where I get the dimension in the base. It's where I see the root mass clinging to the ground. Okay. Now, where is the greatest number of changes of angle, spaces, and planes? Actually, it's over here. I don't like this front, right? I don't have an affection towards this front. But this is objectively the best line in the tree. Okay, I can look at 180 degrees, which gets me closer to what I actually like about the tree. And what do I like about the tree? I like the special features. I like this deadwood. I like this branch. I can't design a tree around just that singular special feature because I do have a base and I do have line, but I can get closer to it by sacrificing some of what I like and some of what I don't like I can embrace by looking at these things objectively. And now I'm here and now I have this characteristic and so I can use length in this way or I need to counter that because I don't have the base to support length in that way and see how close to your original compulsion that objective assessment is. Inside of that, you should be able to come up with a limitless number of designs, but there will always be one that will be the best and it will not be what you first consider. of that material. That is how you exercise that muscle, Joel. And here's the thing. Do you think that I don't do this? I mean, I love every tree. Otherwise, I wouldn't buy the tree. There's something about it that I love and I have an image of that tree when I buy it wherever I'm at that by now in my experience as a bonsai professional, I know that tree is not going to look the way that I think it's going to look as I fall in love with it and buy it right now. But I'm going to buy it because I see the potential and I am falling in love with something. When I put it on the turntable, it should always exceed expectation if I let the tree do the talking and I read the material. All right, awesome. We have a question from Marianne. If the tall cascade pot is old-fashioned, what kind of pot do you put the cascade in and how do you display it on a bench in the working garden? Yeah. So typically, when you're putting a tree into a cascading container, round, square, lobed, or mirrored, right? Where we're basically with this sort of and rubber band theory, when you're cascading, you're going to go narrower and deeper, but we're not going here, right? And when we're displaying a cascade in our garden, edge of a bench, getting exposure to cascading branch towards the south, sometimes we have to raise it up onto a platform, sometimes we have to create a stand to hold the cascade. Cascading forms, let's all be really clear, they're not convenient. I'm going to tell you right now, we'll do a tree sale, I'll put a few cascading trees in the tree sale and they will not sell. The informal uprights, the formal uprights, they will sell. The cascading forms will not sell because they come with it a challenge, they come with it a difficulty, they come with it a commitment to cultivate, they come with it a motivation, they come with it a customization, they come with it an imbalance, they come with it a strength and physiological challenge, right? To keep the strongest branch healthy, sustainable design, all of those things. But it is one of the most dramatic forms and one of the most special forms and that fraction of material that lends itself to that, sometimes there's nothing more powerful than a cascading tree, right? But yeah, Marianne, I mean, it's, it comes down to a container, a container that can physically and visually hold the weight and rubber band theory, it's narrower and deeper, right? To be able to give it that anchor and it demands that you come up with problems to get the sunlight to the branching on that tree when you cultivate it in your garden. Cool. Question from Manos. If during styling, first stage of the vortex, we initially leave more structural branches than needed, ignoring structural flaws, as backup options for the future and keeping more foliage now, as naturally might not actually be, is this going to impede the overall strength distribution and style characteristics? If otherwise we left less pieces, are those going to have better growth? I'm considering semi-cascade running juniper. Thanks. You always have to keep the battery of the tree turning. You never design a tree the first time with the structure you want to end up with at the end of that tree's journey, right? This is natural. Now, we can't leave structural flaws in terms of bar branching that are creating inverse taper right now. That's our first decision. When we do a branch elimination and cleanup, we eliminate structural flaws so we don't even have to think about them if they are causing immediate structural issues. If they are not, we got to keep our eye on them because the moment that they start, we've got to make decisions. Those become some of the remnants of what was. Those create some of the negative space. Those begin the aging process. A young tree is going to have several nodes of bar branches as it gets older, those bar branches start to take care of themselves through natural attrition. We are the nature acting on that tree. We need the vehicle. We need the RPMs. We need the energy system of foliar mass and the original design. And then over the course of time, we start pulling away. As we pull away, we start aging the tree. As we age the tree, we move into greater forms of the vortex. Now, you're saying, and this is really where people have a hard time thinking about this. If I keep these two branches, is this one impeding the strength this one will get? Well, that all depends. Are these branches both dense? What's the density of all the branches around them? If you have a super dense refined tree in a small pot in a refined root system and the energy is being distributed so much over the entirety of the tree that no branch is getting much energy and that's what's creating small needles or tight internodes, then yes, pulling this branch out will empower this branch to get stronger because now the energy is not being diluted. But that's when you're in the vortex in a refinement stage. You're talking about an initial styling. In an initial styling, I need this branch to get this branch to have the strength to grow. If I take this branch away and I do that too many times over the course of the tree and I leave very limited number of branches and a lesser foliar mass, then I impair the development because I don't have the RPMs. I don't have the sugar starch production. I don't have the vascular productivity in the root system to feed the growth of the branches I do want. And this is where we always leave. We always leave far more branches than we ultimately end up with. All right. And question from Evan. Do you see new styles that mimic natural forms or do you think everything can fall into the existing well of known styles? It's like I was talking about with the forest, right? Like here's your orthodox form of the forest, but there are forests with an infinite number of possibilities and our people creating them. That's an objective that I have at Mirai. I've been trying to create lots of different characteristics. There's a Doug fir forest on the gallery on a slab where this Doug fir has this big long root. So it's almost like a raft, but I planted around it, you know, very common occurrence. You know, and Mr. Kimura really started this, honestly. His client Oguchi used to commission him to make different forests that showed these different sort of iconic, you know, conditions in the native forests of Japan. Saburo Kato created mixed forests, another very innovative figure. And this kind of concept. But it's, you know, it's like that where you say, okay, well, there's this orthodox form of style. And then there's all these things that are not explained or not embodied by that, that are deviations of that. Are those new styles? If you wanted to try and name them, I guess maybe, but ultimately, is it still a forest? It's still a forest, you know? And I think inside of that, there are a lot of conditions that have never been executed in bonsai, but they are, they do still fall under the umbrella of one of these broader sort of classifications. So as far as I can tell, just off the top of my head, there aren't really new styles. Like, I think they're pretty well quantified, but there are renditions or iterations of these fundamental styles that have never been pursued, that have never been explored, that have never been executed. And I see that on a continuum, yeah. Right, and yeah, that's the questions that we got for bonsai styles in this lecture. All right, minimal. All right, I hope you guys enjoyed this. I did go pretty deep into how to push yourselves beyond the orthodoxy, and that was the goal of this whole thing, because bonsai styles is, in my mind, a pretty lame conversation, honestly. Necessary to have the foundation so that you can grow upon it, right? But that foundation exists, if you Google bonsai styles, you get a chart of all the styles, and you get lame illustrations of how they all look, and then we recognize, well, there's a much bigger conversation, and now you guys have that. Love you guys. Have a good rest of your week. Good luck at the end of the summer. Let's welcome the onset of fall and vascular productivity. Thank you. 
