what's going on everybody circling back to the discussion of cold shelters and that pivotal most significant piece of how we are able to protect our trees from those coldest winter conditions and we recognize that there are levels to which we protect our trees there are levels and techniques that give us a greater amount of protection but that kind of highest end amount of capacity to manipulate the temperature and protect our trees from cold weather cold environmental factors is the creation of a cold shelter now once we dive into the discussion of a cold shelter we recognize hey there are still multiple selections and multiple degrees of investment that a cold shelter can offer to satisfy each of the sorts of conditions that we need to protect our trees from and we recognize that there are a number of things that we can do to protect our trees from the cold and we recognize that there are a number of things that we can do to protect our trees from the cold especially if you're coming out of a harsh winter circumstance where you had to do a lot to ensure that your trees were okay or maybe you're concerned that what you did wasn't enough this is an optimal time to be thinking about considering pros and cons setting aside resources or making plans potentially for the following cold shelter projects that you could do to protect your trees from the cold the cold season to have something more permanent more effective or more capable of meeting your needs so let's dissect this and i made a list of cold shelters kind of from the least amount of protection and the most effortless construction all the way to the big commitment of a really permanent beautiful greenhouse okay and it starts with the lean-to now when we talk about a lean-to a lean-to is piggybacking on a permanent structure that already exists is this a Is this a garage that we're going to be utilizing a transparent piece of material here? And oftentimes when we start to look at this, I do like to utilize a double wall poly or potentially some sort of transparent material that still allows light. If we're going to be using the lean-to for a prolonged period of time, definitively needs to still allow light to penetrate through that wall and allow the plants to get what they need. We may need to put a plastic flap that stops the movement of air once those temperatures are cold so that we maintain the heat. But the benefit of a lean-to, it's fast. We don't have to work really hard to be able to construct a lean-to. We literally can secure, not just lean something against the house and say, I've got a cold shelter, secure a sheet of transparent material against a permanent structure, a garage, a house. It's very affordable in terms of its material. It's a minimal amount of protection, however, because we're saying, listen, typically in a lean-to, we're leaning on the radiant heat coming from the permanent structure. And we do need to be thinking, are we settling in for the long run where we may want to put those plants under a lean-to on the north side if we're in the southern hemisphere, the non-sun side, so we don't get the lean-to heating up? Cooling down, heating up, cooling down? Or do we want this to be more temporary? We're going to put this on the south side. We're going to have light continuing to add a heat element to that through the greenhouse effect. But we know that our trees are not going to be in there for very long. Ultimately, when we start to talk about these quick, accessible cold structures, we do want the temperature to stay as stable as possible. Radiant heat from the permanent structure? Potentially. Potentially, if we really need to batten down the hatches and we're constructing something quick and dirty, we could put a heater in here. But the small space of a lean-to is a very challenging area to put heat in and not have that heat directly contact or potentially negatively impact the plants. And that's where we say quick, affordable, using the radiant heat from a structure, but we recognize we have minimal protection. Inevitably, when we construct a cold shelter, we have got to understand that heat is not going to be in there for a long time. Heat blowing onto plants is a totally catastrophic event, far more damaging than potentially the cold that they're going to experience. And that's where we say in the lean-to, because your plants are going to be on the ground that that heater could be a little bit of a compromising circumstance. And we would hope to lean on the radiant heat from that permanent structure. Best case scenario, if we need another heat element would be to have a radiant heater. That's not blowing the heat, but it's just emitting the heat. a radiant oil heater might be just the kind of thing that we could get past a rapid cold snap quick and dirty construction again over the course of time it's going to offer you a minimal amount of flexibility a minimal amount of customization a minimal amount of protection ultimately but it is quick it is affordable and it allows you to lean on structures that you already have in existence to be the backbone of that creation of the lean to cold shelter okay now if we want to go a little deeper and we say listen the lean-to like i tried it last year it was a pain in the butt right like you know it snow fell off the eve i didn't choose the right spot it stayed too warm stayed too cold that the radiant heat wasn't enough um you know the the the rain accumulated on the ground and kept the plants to you know any number of things that can happen in a lean-to where you really have taken the quickest fastest and most minimal route towards you know the fastest and most minimal route towards you know the fastest and most minimal creating a cold shelter and we say we need to kind of up our game a little bit the next step from a lean-to is a hoop house or a polytunnel okay now when we talk about a polytunnel we're saying listen there is a and a lot of times people will use electrical conduit or a very flexible uh metal hoop that is set into the ground is that set into poles in the ground is that set into a cinder block that has some concrete is that just simply dug into the ground pounded into the ground right how are we supporting this structure in terms of a hoop house but the goal of a hoop house again this is now a moderate assembly because we're saying first and foremost you have to set up your hoops and hoop houses can be as tall as you want or as short as you want a lot of times in the nursery industry around oregon to protect new crops from rain and from late spring frost all of the nurseries along highway 30 coming out to mirai are all based on hoop house protection over the course of uh of the late winter early winter season and that's what we're talking about here early spring based on again that rain based on the necessity for some warmer temperatures in their crop and based on the necessity to protect from the late frost and all of them are active right now with the recent winter condition that we've had okay and so you see the flexibility okay but we have these hoops that hold this structure okay plants typically in a hoop house sit on the ground hoop houses are typically a very low head height so they are a little bit cumbersome to move things in and out but the advantage of a hoop house moderate assembly is that they're affordable in terms of material cost as a really nice step up from the lean-to that holds more trees that has a little bit more of an independent uh customized environment for cultivation and they offer that next degree of protection so we're covering the hoop house down to the ground on both sides with a heavy mill plastic hopefully transparent to be able to allow light penetration and take advantage of solar gain when we do have those warmer conditions and here's the other thing that we're talking about here is that we're talking about the next step of a hoop house and here's the next benefit of a hoop house it gets super sunny we pull that plastic back and open the hoop house up to light and air circulation as if the plants are outside that's the ultimate customizable feature and one of the things about a hoop house that makes it so incredibly productive okay we also have the ability if light is too strong and we know cold weather is coming we know the days are getting warm and the nights are getting very cold to cover the hoop house with a potential shade cloth to cut down on that solar gain so we avoid stimulating growth over the course of the day time and we don't have these rapid fluctuations of temperature okay if we are going to leave trees in a hoop house for a prolonged period of time in terms of having the plastic covering we obviously and always want to have an opening on both sides of the hoop house so that we can allow air to passively move through that cylinder airflow prevents disease from forming airflow continues to grow and that's what we're talking about here as the hoop house continues to add positive carbon dioxide into that environment for plants to photosynthesize and produce sugars and starches and when we start to think about the longer the bigger and the more prolonged the time in the hoop house is going to be we may even want to consider a ridge fan that blows air across the top of that to remove heat to pull cool air and fresh air in from the end and exhaust it out the other side so that we do have that airflow reduce that disease keep a lot of carbon dioxide and oxygen moving through the system and in general just cultivate a very healthy environment. Now you're seeing as we go from a simple piece of plastic to a removable piece to potentially shade cloth to both closures on the ends of that and then eventually to a fan a stepping up of degrees of commitment as well as longevity of the time we expect trees to exist in a hoop house. But again I want to reiterate this is a really accessible wonderful structure that we can create for our bonsai that is moderate in its assembly is moderate in its cost and gives us a fairly significant degree of protection and customizable cold shelter offering for the diversity of bonsai and the conditions that exist in our environment. I love the hoop house concept as a whole. It has just a really good mobile accessible cold shelter that bonsai practitioners can easily construct and really make usable for their environment. The last thing that I'll say about the hoop house and one of the big things that we always need to consider when we put trees underneath a solid material to quote unquote protect them is the power and presence of snow load. Because when we talk about a hoop house we have a bent piece of PVC piping or potentially a thin wall galvanized metal at most and we're starting to say listen distance between the ribs of our hoop house rigidity of the plastic tie down strategies etc is going to be minimally capable of withstanding heavy heavy snow loads. What does that mean? Maybe we need to be removing snow if we do get a cold event. Maybe we need to be very aware of it. Maybe we need to increase the number of ribs that support it. Maybe we need a ridge purlin. Maybe we need side purlins that run the length of it to give us that lateral shear support. Maybe we need to tie it down or maybe in our environment the amount of snow the weight of the snow and the issue of the conditions make a hoop house not a wise or feasible solution to protect our trees. Because you can imagine although they stay warm if that collapses and a significant weight of snow comes crashing down on your trees that in its self could do far more damage than the cold. So these are the things we need to be thinking about when choosing a cold shelter to be able to execute and find the best possible solution. Now once we start to look at the hoop house we start to say okay I'm already starting to get in pretty deep. What about a cold frame? I typically tend to think of cold frames as significant winter weather area solutions. Now a cold frame is taking advantage of the heat of the earth. We're in ground now with a cold frame. Oftentimes a cold frame is reinforced by cinder block or concrete or potentially wood retainers that allow that in-ground depth and structure to be held over the course of time. Now we're putting our trees down into this environment. We hopefully have a transparent lid that we will be closing when we get those periods of cold weather heavy snow etc. Again the lid needs to support the snow load or else we could have total collapse. But in general opening that up as much as we possibly can to allow light to allow airflow to check water inside of that system. But here we're really playing on that constant buffering capacity of the heat of the earth which is the same buffering capacity we're playing on when we set a tree from the bench onto the ground and take advantage of that seven to ten degree shift in temperature on the bottom side of the container. Now we're submerging the tree in that environment. Okay now this is time and labor consumptive. Let's be honest we're not building a cold frame unless we live in an environment where we're consistently getting cold temperatures. We're talking the far northern states in North America, the far northern countries in Europe, we're talking about you know the Minnesota type climates, we're talking about the Wisconsin's, we're talking about the Montana, or the far northern Washington Idaho's, we're talking about potentially Maine and some of those environments where cold frames make a tremendous amount of sense. We know trees are going to be deep in dormancy for the majority of the season and again time and labor consumptive as a permanent structure permanent or semi-permanent right we can do a much more shallow cold shelter cold frame in ground but not go as deep and not have it be as permanent. But it is going to be costly and it is going to be a commitment once we start to construct this so we want to think it through to how's the size and the quantity of trees that are going to need that kind of protection. We want to think it through how we provide care to those trees and we definitely want to be sure and certain that when we use a cold frame that we have conditions that are going to keep our trees dormant. Because it's going to be dark, it is going to have a minimal amount of airflow set into the ground regardless of whether we open the top or not and we need those trees to be in dormancy and plan on them being in dormancy to utilize a cold frame to the best of its capacity without adversely impacting our trees. Putting trees in a cold frame where it's dark and there's low air circulation when they are not completely dormant temperatures stay warm we can exhaust sugar starch supply and we can have real problems. This is a very advanced I would say cold shelter protection mechanism for very cold areas but here's the deal it's very effective the buffering capacity of the earth is a wonderfully magic tool and we see trees thrive in these types of cold shelters where appropriate to be able to efficiency of protection we see that being a big buffer. Okay and sometimes people go this far and they say you know what the heck with it I already have to have a cold shelter I've already got to create a permanent structure I'm going to give myself the greatest amount of capacity I'm going to extend my season I'm going to create an environment where I can look at my trees I'm going to have total control over the temperature and the conditions that exist and that's when we move into a greenhouse right now not all greenhouses are created equal we understand there's different shapes we can have an a-frame we can have a peaked roof we can have a semi-quonset we can have a gable right we can have a spherical round hoop house with tall side walls that demands a greater amount of structure greenhouses span the gauntlet we can have plastic we can have a insulated roof we can have double wall poly triple wall poly we can have glass right we can have any number of glazing materials that influence light coming in and the ability to insulate and retain heat from going out okay we can have lights inside of a greenhouse we can have heat beds and electrical we can just have a greenhouse be a cold shelter unheated and still have a lot of capacity we need air circulation in a greenhouse we need to plan to have a permanent structure that meets our needs in the environment where this greenhouse is going to exist and as a result this is time and labor intensive this is a permanent structure greenhouses are costly to build but they give you the greatest amount of control they allow you to truly dial in your growing conditions and environment over the course of the dormant season to be able to manage and continue to perpetuate your bonsai practice in those off seasons where trees are thought to be more sustainable and more sustainable and more sustainable and more sustainable a greenhouse extends the season it starts repotting earlier it prolongs fall dormancy later and in between them it controls the severity of the temperature the amount of moisture and the amount of air circulation and influence these trees are experiencing inside of that controlled environment right so when we start to think about it and when we start to go through that process of a greenhouse every aspect of a greenhouse has got to be thought out and considered and i find it very important to think about it and i've now been through two greenhouses actually i'm going to take that back we've got three greenhouses that we've experienced at mirai i studied greenhouse management in college and understand a lot about glazing materials construction airflow how to get ventilation how to remove heat how to keep air fresh how to suppress disease etc etc greenhouse construction design etc is a science and that's not to intimidate but that is to inform you that if it seems daunting if it's hard to understand what you need to get it and guess what that is the world of the greenhouse industry everybody knows this is a big commitment everybody knows this is a compute a confusing bite to try and take and consume and understand and meet your needs where they're at the benefit is is there are people that have done it including mirai and i would encourage you in the greenhouse discussion if you have questions forum q a let's talk about what you're dealing with and let's talk about the potential options greenhouses can can offer to meet your needs where they're at okay so to recap in terms of cold shelters when we talk about protection from winter conditions protection from cold conditions protection during the dormant season and we say listen i can sit on the ground i can wrap in a blanket i can heal in but i'm at a point where i need a more permanent solution or i need a physical structure to protect from the conditions that are uh you know painful and you know painful and you know impending and coming okay we've got a quick and dirty lean to fast affordable offers minimal protection but it can get you through some fairly significant storms it's just not going to be a long-term solution we got a hoop house which gives us the benefit of added control flexibility it's moderate in cost and assembly it's moderate in its protection capacity few weaknesses in terms of structural considerations and snow but ultimately a very effective structure we've got for the deep cold, for prolonged dormancy that allows us to kind of close the door and forget it to a large degree when we get those big storms. And then when we say, listen, that's not necessarily where I can be. Trees are going to be a little bit more active. I need a little bit more control. I want to extend my season. I want my bone type practice to have the maximum possible malleability control and customization. We move to the greenhouse and we recognize now inside of greenhouse, we're looking at shape, size, glazing material, ventilation, heat source, benching structure, et cetera. There's a lot to consider, but this is really the one where you empower yourself to be completely free and clear of limitations of the environment for the protection, for the maintenance, for the continued perpetuation of health in your trees over the dormant, cold winter environment and winter season. All right, quick and dirty, cold shade. Something we need to consider, things we need to know and the factors that we need to weigh out to be able to make the best decision for our trees and the circumstances acting on us. Do not wait to figure out your cold shelter until the cold comes. Do it now coming out of winter. Make your plans, find your resources, set yourself up. And guess what? The amount of trepidation and anxiety you're going to have when fall comes around, leaves start to drop and suddenly those unexpected cold snaps occur. You don't have to worry about it. You don't have to worry about it. You don't have to worry about it. You no longer have to be afraid because you've done what you needed to do to protect your trees and set yourself up for success in the bonsai practice. Hope this helps. Good luck with your cold shelter planning construction. You need any insight or feedback. Go ahead and reach out to us on the forum Q&A, and we'll be sure that we provide the knowledge that we can and the insight we've obtained at Mirai through our own experiences to try and share the wealth and help you on your journey. Love you guys. Enjoy. www.mirai.com 
