what's going on everybody talking about winter protection today and at what temperature do we need to take what action to give our trees the best chance of success now this piggybacks on the discussion of cold hardiness and all of the considerations that go into that cold tolerance perspective because just because a plant is cold tolerant does not mean that we don't need to take an action on that plant and protect it and so you can merge these two things you can marry the two pieces of information and we are trying to create this holistic 360-degree understanding of how do we go about the bonsai practice at Mirai and from this perspective how do we go about ensuring not only that our trees survive because survival isn't assumed this is not a question of how do I get my tree to survive that's the lowest possible measure of success we're saying not only survival how do I I know they're going to survive right I'm taking actions that I know they're going to survive how do they thrive how do they move into next year and just keep on improving in terms of their quality health etc that is where our benchmark is for the actions that we take ok now when we start to talk about winter protection we have degrees within which temperate species of plants typically tend to experience the impact of cold weather right and we know listen tropicals we don't even let them free some of our coastal conifers some of our coastal broadleafs we don't let them freeze right but for temperate species whose environments and and the tolerance of that species can accept a freeze the first time that we start to think about protection of any sort is that 28 degrees Fahrenheit or minus 2 degrees Celsius because we understand hey listen the 32 degree Fahrenheit mark or the 0 degree Celsius mark is when we start to see the foliar mass experience the impact of freezing where the most available plant tissue to the water actually crystallizing and rupturing a cell where we see that potentially being damaging but really it's the 28 degree Fahrenheit mark that starts to impact the roots ok now when we're talking about a deciduous broadleaf deciduous out of leaf it's not going to experience any sort of negative impact until we hit that 28 degree Fahrenheit mark soft fleshy growth in the spring will be impacted still in leaf in the fall will be impacted out of out of leaf when we're talking about true winter protection won't be impacted until 28 degrees but that 28 to 25 degrees Fahrenheit negative 2 to negative 4 degrees Celsius first stage where we need to think about protection ok 25 degree to 20 degrees Fahrenheit that 5 degree gradient negative 4 to negative 7 degrees Celsius another level of protection 15 to 20 degrees Fahrenheit negative 7 to negative 10 degrees Celsius yet we step it up again and when we get below that 15 degree Fahrenheit or that negative 10 degrees Celsius we have to think about alternative means let's break down the methodology and start to understand when do we perform what action to be able to protect our trees and ensure success now the first major piece when we start to talk about cold getting into that temperature range that can impact our temperate cold-tolerant durable species negative are excuse me 28 degrees to 25 degrees Fahrenheit negative 2 to negative 4 degrees Celsius we're saying listen I'm gonna leave that tree on the on the bench maybe I'm in an area that doesn't typically freeze maybe this is the first tree I'm going to leave after I'm atrum day this in an area that doesn't typically freeze, maybe this is the first freeze or the first major freeze of a season, I'm gonna insulate that container, okay? I'm gonna stop the airflow around the lateral portion of that container. Airflow over the surface, airflow underneath, okay, cool. I recognize that if it's a temperate species capable of tolerating cold, that the foyer mass should be okay, the vascular tissue of the trunk and branching should be okay, but the root mass is that piece that does not have the buffering capacity of the in-ground environment. And so I'm gonna stop the rapid loss of heat just by reducing the surfaces of the container that are experiencing that airflow. Yes, the top is losing heat. Yes, the bottom is losing heat. I'm stopping lateral airflow. That's a minor action, very limited amount of labor that offers a small degree of cold protection, okay? Now, when we start to drop into that 25 to 20 degree, negative four to negative seven, this is really when we start to have to take more actions. We would say, hey, listen, I can still insulate the container, but if I'm gonna experience this, especially if I'm gonna insulate the container, I'm gonna experience this multiple times or for a prolonged period of time. Lowering the tree to the ground is a huge action to take to protect a bonsai tree in a confined environment from freezing and having the roots experience a tremendous amount of cold pressure, okay? Because we're saying, listen, I set this on the ground. Now I'm stopping airflow on the bottom of the container. If you put a thermometer underneath the container, you set it on the ground and you close up the airspace, whether that's mulch, whether that's sawdust, whether that's leaf debris, whether that's a blanket, okay? You close up that airspace. You just have the lateral walls and you have the surface, okay, and I'm not saying we haven't gone to full on healing in yet. We're just setting it on the ground. Yeah, at Mirai, we have gravel. We just kind of mound the gravel up around the negative space where the feet elevate the container thermometer. Seven to 10 degree difference under that container versus the air temperature on the bench. Seven to 10 degree Fahrenheit difference. From the buffering capacity and the reduction of airflow, removing heat from that containerized environment. That's a big deal. That's a large gradient of temperature difference as a result of a singular action, negative four to negative seven, 25 to 20 degrees Fahrenheit. I do not leave my trees out to experience those temperatures, especially when I get to the lower portion of that, okay? Now we get into that 20 degree Fahrenheit to 15 degree Fahrenheit, that negative seven, to negative 10 degree Celsius. This is when we see things start to die, okay? And this is where we've got to be very careful. Obviously we're talking species. Obviously we're talking container size. Obviously we're talking degree of health in terms of cold tolerance. But now we're talking about protection saying, hey listen, I have that tolerance and still, I'm not gonna roll the dice because again, survival is not the baseline, right? That's a very low metric. The tree, the work we've put in, the investment we've made, the emotion and the love that we have for these things, the time we've spent, the money that we've expended. We don't want to roll the dice on this tree surviving. We want to say, listen, I know it's gonna survive. How do I keep this tree capable of being healthy and moving forward from where it's at right now? And this is when we say, listen, yes, insulate the container, lower to the ground, but this is where we really move to the healing in bed, which is a long term. And I would say if we're gonna get down to 15 to 20, we're probably gonna be experiencing temperatures, from 28 to 20 degrees and lower, more than one night, right? We're gonna experience that multiple times over the course of the winter. And this justifies a more long term winter protection approach. And we're saying, listen, healing in is to say, I'm gonna set it on the ground, but I'm gonna build a structure that holds that mass, whether that's straw, whether that's leaf debris, whether that's coarse sawdust, whether that's bark mulch, okay? I'm gonna hold that mass, not only around the base of the container, but all the way up to the rim of the container. Now, I'm not gonna cover the rim. I still do need some air flow, which is why we talk about coarse sawdust, why we talk about bark mulch, why we talk about leaf, why we talk about straw. This used to be the way that I would heal my trees in back in Colorado when I was in high school, middle school, high school. And even when I was in college, I would go home, my dad and I would construct a healing in bed for all of my collected trees and bonsai containers. Ponderosa pines could tolerate it. Rocky Mountain junipers could tolerate it. They would sit frozen solid in a bed of straw, in the middle of the container for five months out of the year, right? And that was a very great way to help those trees weather the storm. On the ground, definitely insulated, but insulated to a degree where there was only one surface that was experiencing the flow of air, and that was the surface of the container, okay? Below 15 degrees Fahrenheit, below 10 degrees Celsius, if we're getting this cold, this is a sustained cold, and this is really when we start to say, hey, listen, this is how it is. Let's spray some water, before we spray any austerity, before we spray any mud. Put the food into a beansprout that's like, I don't have it, got it, right? We're gonna spray a little bit of something or just gotta dip it in water. But those are all features that we can do here. And this is a great way to shear away these microorganisms that are just getting expensive in this world of meat Multiple approach. We're gonna build it on plants, and we're gonna plant it on the dumpster that they are questioning and they're asking for it. This is what I would recommend for those who queued right now in Virginia, particular a little bit longer. There is now a rate. that I don't know of a lot of trees as bonsai subjects that can tolerate prolonged temperatures below 15 degrees or below negative 10 degrees Celsius as bonsai and this is what you say okay I could check all of these boxes and still I cannot ensure survival and this is when we move to the cold shelter as a necessity now cold shelters are a complete and total subject onto themselves in terms of how far do we go what's the benefit what's the cost to benefit ratio what's the labor right what's the the engineering what's the capacity where you live and your zoning and your home and your space and your right this is a big discussion but recognizing that when we are in an area where we get temperatures that are consistently below that temperature gradient and we're cultivating any number of trees that we are investing in the next move in the bonsai practice is to set yourself up with a cold shelter and a cold shelter and a cold shelter and a cold shelter and a cold shelter that allows you to not again they have to survive that's that's to thrive set yourself up to thrive that's the goal and that's otherwise we really we really should not invest for the fairness of the trees for the sake of the trees for consideration of yourself and the resources the time the passion the labor the money the finances that you put into this you really do need to consider that as the next step of bonsai cultivation because that's really what ensures not just survival but thriving and that our time and our labor and our input receives the benefit of that and we stay in love with this art form and this and this practice of bonsai right okay so this just gives you a range of sort of the increased application of winter protection methods and the temperature ranges that you would apply them to to not ensure survival but ensure that your tree thrives and you have to mesh this conversation with the cold hardiness discussion in which we will discuss that next. order to be able to make the best decisions, but now you have the backbone of information that informs your practices of winter protection and how you go about preserving your trees through that colder portion of the season. Hope this helps. Good luck. Happy protecting. 
