Deadwood. One of probably the most significant components of our bonsai approach at Mirai is the utilization of deadwood and that contrast of life and death. Now, two weeks ago we started showing you guys how we reduce the living tissue on junipers to maximize the deadwood and start to tell that tale and struggle. We know that junipers in particular benefit greatly from the expansion of deadwood. But it's not to say that deadwood is not valuable on pines as well. And there's a lot of different clues that we can take from the deadwood that we're utilizing or that's presented to us in a piece of material or even the deadwood that we're creating to have clues about how this tree existed and how we can use that deadwood to maximize the appearance of age. I've got a really wonderful ponderosa pine here, extremely old ponderosa pine. Notice how checked and flecked and weathered the deadwood is in this section of the tree as well as this area up here where we're seeing a lot of weathering and a lot of desiccation. This is giving us a tremendous, tremendous display of age and survival on that mountainside. Now I'm going to rotate this around and I want you guys to notice how the deadwood shifts in this tree. Notice how we start to rotate and this checked, flecked deadwood that's had a lot of deterioration starts to smooth out and become much less weathered. This is giving me a direct indication that this portion was probably facing upright on the rock and was getting a large exposure to the deadwood. I'm going to rotate the ponderosa pine here, showing you how much of this area has been affected by this. This is showing the delta, delta, delta, delta, delta, delta, delta, delta, delta, delta, delta, delta, delta, delta, delta, delta, delta, delta, delta, and delta. All of that moisture and deterioration, freeze-thaw, super hot, super wet, super ultraviolet in terms of decay, and as we continue to rotate we see that on the back here although it is showing age, I mean don't get me wrong, it's not like this wasn't experiencing the weather. It's exposure to those elements that cause that reduction of tissue and cause that desiccation of tissue significantly less, which is a very big indication of that exposure. south-facing side in the northern hemisphere, as well as that side that's facing up on a rock where this tree could have potentially been laid down. Now this is really interesting because as we start to talk about deadwood creation and removal of some of those pieces that were alive and are now dead, you're going to get this contrast and this shifting pattern of what was once live, what was dead long ago, and what was originally present in that tree's core construction of vascular tissue. And showing that contrast of super weathered, less weathered, and almost not weathered but still dead, that transition is the epicenter of creating believable deadwood in our bonsai. 
