Coming back in this midsummer period of time for our deciduous trees we hit another key moment in the development of our deciduous material. Now you guys have seen how you prune for refinement once that first flush hardens before we allow that leaf mass to build up too much thickness in that interior twigging and that fine tip ramification. But over the course of the weeks between our refinement pruning and this midsummer check on our deciduous ramification we see that first flush of leaves having contributed to the establishment of thicker branches, longer branches, and branches that are capable of building our secondary scaffolding. Now coming back at this pivotal period of time we have the ability to wire, shape, set the scaffolding of our secondary branches, to really transition out of structure and into that next phase of that branch building process and deciduous material. And we also have the ability to prune back any branches that have have met or exceeded our expectations in terms of girth and length to really transition those branches strength from the tip to the interior to begin the tertiary building process. Now we have two trees that we're looking at today that have a variety of different scenarios we're approaching in terms of this midsummer pruning to really start to build and make those transitionary decisions in our secondary branching and we're gonna take a look at each of these specifically and all of the challenges that they are giving us in terms of that decision-making process. Now this Korean Hornbeam was a tree whose structure we set on a live stream in 2018 and it's been left to grow unchecked until this point and really the goal in allowing this tree to grow out of that developmental process was to create that plethora of secondary branches we could further enhance that scaffolding of each branch width and then we could build a secondary branch and then wire them and give them shape and then eventually transition that strength from the tip to the interior to begin the tertiary build process. The construction of these secondary branches and allowing them to thicken to a point where they form our scaffolding took a fairly significant period of time but now coming back at this point in the year that midsummer pruning session we're really looking at which branches have exceeded the length we want have achieved the thickness that we want and how do we take those branches to really guide that secondary structure. We're going to be pruning all of the branches that have gotten too long or thick enough to be built a secondary ramification. We're going to be wiring those out over the course of working through the tree to really set that enhanced structure and in that pruning process at this time a year we may experience another really weak push but we're really going to be looking to next year and coming back and taking the growth we get as a result of the work we do now pruning it earlier as that first flush hardens and really starting to construct that finer tertiary ramification based on the transition and the shape we establish in this working at that midsummer time frame. This is a pivotal moment in this tree's life and if we do everything correctly this will be the biggest load of work that we have to perform in terms of taking off the initial structural wire and rewiring any of the structure plus all of the secondary branches that we've built to create that initial pad. This is the pivotal scope of work that if we take the time and we apply the technique to we can get it from the developmental process to that clip-and-grow action of creating tertiary branches and have the highest aesthetic value as a result of the execution of these scopes of work. Secondary branch pruning is so pivotal and secondary branch wiring so incredibly important to set that scaffolding dictate that shape size and length and really create the backbone for all of our future ramification to be grown upon. Single action at this time with this scope of work is what really defines and creates the ability to move away from wire in our deciduous trees as a broad generalized approach. That first structural setting and then that secondary setting, two big scopes of work to move into the clip-and-grow methodology of tertiary creation. The pomegranate has exceeded our expectations in terms of its development and growth. It was repotted on the live stream and structurally pruned in the spring of 2018. We came back on the live stream in the spring of 2019 and took all of that secondary growth that pushed as a result of that structural pruning and wired it out to enhance our secondary scaffolding. We wanted more and further development of those secondary pieces to gain the length to gain the girth and we allowed those to grow till this midsummer period of time. Now we get to come back in, assess, check, make prunes that transition the strength from the tip to the interior to build that tertiary ramification, but also give shape to further secondary branches that have emerged as a result of all the work we've done and the health and vigor that this tree has accumulated over the course of this year. Now inside of coming back and addressing our secondary scaffolding, we want to remove structural flaws, be very considerate about the length and strength of all of the branches that we leave on the tree, and really focus with a tree of this kind of enhanced secondary ramification with the push into the tertiary development by the way that we prune this tree. Obviously we have some secondaries we can continue to guide with wire and enhance that structure, but really our focus with the pomegranate, being so much more evolved and developed than the hornbeam, is that pruning process at this time of year to really transition into that tertiary ramification building that we will continue to prune. Over the course of next spring as we approach the pruning process earlier in the season as that first flush hardens. This is a major moment in this pomegranate's evolution. This will be the peak of the wire content that this tree will hold and starting next year we'll be reducing the amount of wire on the tree as we start to refine it and build up that tertiary branching system. Deciduous trees are such a constant construction process and understanding that we have to go from those structural decisions, really move into the building once we achieve that structural goal for each branch into the building of that secondary scaffolding. Once we've achieved the secondary goals of that system, pruning again to transition into that tertiary building and understanding that that structural setting and that secondary scaffolding demand our attention in terms of observation of the branches thickness and length as well as wiring to create the shape that allows us to set that initial aesthetic that we build from the clip and grow method, the tertiary ramification. If we execute the structure well and we come back and we execute the secondary branching decisions well, then the rest of this tree's life as a bonsai are set and put in a very positive direction towards greater expansive accumulation of tertiary branching. This is how you build the deciduous model from that structure to that secondary ending in that tertiary ramification. We've got one more pivotal time this year where we're going to come back to our structural elements in an elm we worked earlier on and talk about those decisions to transition. But now you have in your toolkit that concept of refinement pruning, the concept of handling your secondary ramification, and eventually with that structural component, you're going to know everything you need to know to create a world-class deciduous bonsai. Good luck, happy pruning, happy wiring, put the time in now and it will forever pay you back in the future. Enjoy your deciduous bonsai. 
