Understanding how to prune our deciduous trees and when they should be pruned hinges on what we're trying to accomplish with that tree that year. We might be developing, elongating, thickening, healing, expanding the leaf mass or building the root system. We might be constructing that secondary scaffolding and allowing those secondary branches to further build or hold them back and push the energy to the interior. Or we might be at a point in the tree's development where we're refining the finer ramification and building that dense network of beautiful slender twigs. Depending on what we're trying to accomplish it dictates the action and the timing for how we go about pruning. In this video we're going to dig into the refinement pruning process. How do we take trees whose structure and secondary scaffolding is set and how do we manage larger leaf, smaller leaf, and linear growing varieties of deciduous material to maximize this pivotal moment in the season to really refine and build that tertiary ramification. Let's dig in. When we prune for refinement in our smaller leaf deciduous varieties like a Chinese elm, our goal is to take those singular elongating shoots that have occurred over the spring season and prune them back to two viable buds that we can identify that will hopefully take over and transition that strength into two new pieces of ramification. The benefit of smaller leaf deciduous varieties is that they allow plenty of air penetration and plenty of light penetration into the canopy to maintain even distribution and balance, but we do have to check those strong elongating shoots and transition that energy to two finer pieces of ramification. Now in this process we still might have some branches that need further elongation, secondary development, or thickening, and we have to be objectively thinking about design every time we sit down to prune one of our deciduous trees. No branch is perfect, no design is finished, and we need to be thinking critically as we go to refine our deciduous trees. In smaller leaf varieties, this transition doesn't demand that we partially defoliate or reduce the size of the leaf mass to get further impact to the pruning process, and this makes pruning smaller leaf deciduous varieties extremely easy, efficient, and capable of creating the finest ramification in our deciduous bonsai. To achieve this, we're going to use our in-the-fine pruning of our intermediate sized deciduous material. We kind of have the meshing of multiple worlds and concepts. In refinement pruning of our intermediate size deciduous material, we kind of have the meshing of multiple worlds and concepts. with the hopes of producing two finer pieces of ramification. But with that intermediate-sized leaf, we have to make a decision. Do we fully remove the larger leaves, allowing air to the interior, light to the interior, and increasing the likelihood of that ramification actually emerging? Or do we halve that leaf to leave a little more leaf mass on the tree, but decrease that sugar production to encourage that ramification to form? Now, when we move to pruning our larger-leaved deciduous varieties, this is really when we start to think about how do we increase sunlight penetration into the interior branches? How do we reduce the strength of the exterior growing pieces? And how do we make this transition push to the interior branches? And what are the pieces of ramification from every single elongating shoot that's occurred over the spring season? In our larger-leaf deciduous varieties, we're forced with, in the pruning process, again reducing from one shoot back to two viable buds and nodes that will hopefully turn into ramification. But we aid the process of light penetration, air circulation, and the viability of those two shoots that we've pruned back to to push by the reduction of the physical leaf mass itself. And also, we're able to adjust some of that to be enough to work on the plant-based branches, and just significantly increase that time to produce more leaves. So, these are some of the things that we can do to increase the amount of leaves that are brought to the orchard that we're able to plant. Now, as we get to the part where we're going to having a garden, or where we're going to start to complete our pruning, we're going to have to take into consideration that I recommend that we do it nowadays, pruning in our larger leaf varieties of deciduous material means that we're going to be halving or even cutting the leaf mass down by 60%, leaving one-third of that leaf intact, decreasing the amount of photosynthetic sugars produced, and enhancing the tree's encouragement or ability to produce another flush of finer ramification at this time of year when that spring flush is hardened off. The European beech is a perfect example of one of these deciduous varieties that has a lot of strength, and when its spring flush pushes, has a tremendous amount of size that it adds to its leaf that can decrease the interior branches from continuing to develop. You'll notice the reduction of the leaf mass in addition to the pruning of the elongated shoots. This not only refines the branching, but also stimulates the tree to produce a second, finer ramification. You'll notice a minor flush of growth from one shoot to two pieces of finer ramification. The deciduous variety is a perfect linear growing deciduous species to analyze how we reduce that, strengthen the tip, and direct it into those finer tertiary pieces, how we selectively remove and partially defoliate branches and pieces of growth that are unnecessary, and how we enhance that structure so when the tamarind is ready to be planted, it can be planted again. As long as the tamarisk is in its deciduous form, we maximize its visual aesthetic. Finally, we elongate the branches and leaves, nothing new here, and we enlarge them more to help ensure that the traces remainunciall. Thanks for watching and I'll see you later.... Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. 
