going on everybody hey hey hey oh my goodness january i saw on the uh the weather that we're expecting our first snowfall in the pacific northwest which for some of you is laughable but for me uh i did have the slight ignorant optimism that we would make it through an entire winter without snow which saves me so much trouble honestly blocking trees bracing trees setting trees down picking trees back up taking down the rain cloth putting the rain cloth back up like if we could just like circumvent the snow i can deal with the rain but anyways i hope you're all doing well i was just um i was just uh sort of on the road for a minute working with some clients got a little bit of vitamin d it was very nice uh some warmth some of those sunny california vibes and uh and now we're back in the shop uh and i'm starting to almost think of mariah as like a lab you know it's like a lab because i come here and i work out a lot of these concepts and then i and then i'm able to go out very infrequently go out right i'm kind of a hermit these days but go out uh and exercise some of this newfound uh aesthetic opportunity with uh students trees clients trees etc so it was a good time anyways uh mariah lecture series we've got a fun one for you today and the reason that we're doing this is because um you know focusing on the aesthetic in the wild and how we capture it in the miniaturized form is because so many people talk about bonsai being a representation of nature and miniature and then the finished product is a trident maple that looks like a pine tree or a juniper that looks like a pine or a pine that looks like a niwaki and not anything representative of the native environment right and then we say we're doing nature and miniature right and it's like that's pretty far cry from nature and miniature as far as far as i can see i mean nothing nothing wrong with being open to interpretation uh and having your own abstract subjective take on things but how do we right in the process of taking this massive image in the macro and reducing it how do we maintain those elements that make that so spectacular in its natural form that is exactly what we're focusing on today how to abstract the macro form of a tree and represent it in a miniaturized space okay all right so we've prepared a number of species uh that we're going to be working with and we're going to start out with just the absolutely spectacular beautiful and highly uh desirable point lobos state park in california just south of monterey on highway one and when we start to look at point lobos the the there's a a number of compositions that i've created to represent point lobos but there is the og uh kenoshita cypress which was born on this coastline as a collected piece of material you guys have seen this in the icons of august born on this coastline as a collected piece of material uh that was also manifested designed and applied to the natural environment and so i'm going to show you this that's how it evolved on this coastline in mr kenoshita's garden in monterey and then through a circuitous series of changes of ownership found its way to mori in anything then a representative uh space of the monterey cypress okay now when you saw this on the stream the very last time this was a very very kind of tight crown right here with a little bit of length over here and a little bit of length over here we've since let this thing reel up into the water so there's not a lot of things to do in order to get this to work but you know we haven't given many years of this to the lake we've since let this thing reel up into the water we haven't given many years of this to the lake elongate and you can even see the natural structure that's forming this is all just allowing the Monterey Cypress to respond to the styling that we gave it now is it overgrown yes slightly right slightly and this is where we start to recognize that we've got to play the game of interpretation okay but first and foremost let's just look at some of the thematics when we're standing here in Point Lobos in this grand forest and how they start to relate to the Kenosha to Monterey Cypress okay so first and foremost there are a lot of Cypress through here that have contorted trunks but for the most part a lot of these trees are giving you that very steadfast upright form some of these on the edges of the cliffs are where we get some of those really radical forms but Monterey Cypress is a pillar species it is an absolute powerhouse and does not typically have a tremendous amount of control over the trees that are in the trees that are in the trees that are in the contortion right that's not it's not a juniper it is a very stable species with a root system that is delicate to walk on and very very sensitive in the macro environment for large populations of people but steadfast and strong in terms of holding the stability of these trees and you'll notice that the Kenosha to here very very strong base that clearly has evolved over the course of time by cleaning out the bottom of the root system pursuing this sort of lateral root system we build that lateral woody Nibari but this steadfast trunk that starts to get into as we get into the height where the topography notice straight straight straight straight straight straight straight and then all of a sudden BAM boom right Bing bowl look at this right that's That's when we start to cross the threshold of protected topography, either the mass of these more contorted guys on the side of the hillside directing the wind and all of a sudden, bing, we get that, or the actual rock formation's geology and landmass itself. Okay, but those sinuous movements give rise to inspiration in the branching lines. Now notice, and again, a lot of this I took on ownership of after it had already been built, but notice this synergy here between the branch lines. Just if I start tracing some of these identifiable branch lines that exist through the tree here, we go up and we fork right here. Oh my gosh, look at this. We fork right there. We fork right there, right? We're seeing a lot of that first and foremost up and out in the coastal form. In this windswept environment, up and out. And the continuation of up, out, up, out, up, out, up, out. And I say this all the time, up and out, up and out, up and out, up and out. And people say, oh my gosh, this is so ridiculous. Well, we go up and we go out and we go up and we go out, we go up, we go out. This is pivotal interpretation of the native environment in an abstraction pulled into the micro-representation of the miniaturized form. But it's real. People say, we really want to learn how to do this. And then I say, go up and out, up and out, and up and out. And then somebody kind of comes up and out. And then they're like, but I want to go down. And it's like, but that's not what this is, right? That's not what this is. And getting to see where this comes from is of utmost importance. Now, there's a lot of really fantastic deadwood, obviously. The lowest, notice the canopy basically has kind of a homogenous line. And you even see it on the cliff sides here where everything below that is dead. Now, this is a product of wind. This is a product of shear. This is a product of sail effect. This aerodynamic unit, which we will see, but you can kind of see it here in the background, this aerodynamic unit, this is what allows the foliar mass to be able to guide the wind without having so much mass that it's going to tear the tree apart. And all of this, when they're young, they're very dense. They're very dense down low. This all gets stripped away, and we kind of get this wind tunnel effect of this homogenous sort of aerodynamic unit, as you're starting to see here. That was really the original concept for this. Now, with the wire off of this piece, some of these structural branches have risen up, but they're actually in the micro design of the Kenoshita is a band of bareness through the middle here. And then we've got small little aerodynamic pads that exist in here. And the biggest one is this. This branch right here, having a lot of aerodynamic capacity in two different forms there, is how that tree is designed to be able to emulate these types of things. So let me take you to another reference of the aerodynamic form. Now, I'm going to bring you into this piece right here, which is a fantastic second demonstration. Now, notice the lower mass here. Notice the void central area here. Notice the compression, right? When you hear me say, compress on one side and expand on the other. Where does that come from? What does that look like? Compression where the wind impacts the tree. Elongation where we start to see that sail effect transitioning and giving rise to the capacity for more photosynthetic mass to fit inside of the aerodynamic system. We have impact. And then we have the transitioning out, okay? Now, that pointed triangular pad of the elongating form, where does that come from? Well, in the coastal realm, it comes from right here. Right there, right? You see it on all of these pieces, okay? You see this in the alpine with hemlock, with spruce. Always a triangular pad. Always a triangular pad being formed unless they are an understory plant that is crushed by snow. And that starts to determine what's going on. And that starts to determine a completely different aesthetic inside of the tree, okay? So, as I'm looking at this, when this was really tight and heavily pruned, let me come back to this piece. When this was really tight and heavily pruned back in here, it had the makings of a Monterey cypress. But really, it's with the elongation of these pieces that now fit into this that I have the ability to take the Kenoshita that much farther. And also why I had to let it beach ball out. And why I've continued to let it beach ball out. Because it's continuing to give me information that is so pivotal to being able to really understand the nature of how we magnify the representation of nature in miniature, okay? Now, notice the irregularity of the branching here, okay? We have these forks, everything coming up. But these moves, right, that are irregular. Different angles. Different spaces. Different planes. We've got three dimensions happening here. Some of these are rather long. And then they get into these tight little squiggles. Some of these are rather contorted in here. And then they get into looser angles. What is good movement? What is natural movement? Different angles, different spaces, different planes. Where does that come from? That's where it comes from, okay? So, seeing some major characteristics. Now, I'm going to zoom you into the interior portion of the Kenoshita here. And now we start to see this framework and structure set up through both the interpretive, right? And I would definitely say the interpretive wiring of this piece. But also the response and the growth habit. Notice some of these sharper angles. Notice some of these. We've got looser angles. Longer angles. You see a little bit of the wire still in the canopy of the tree. I better take a look at that because this thing has really crushed over the course of time and beach balled out. We're coming here. We're coming here. We're moving up through here. We've got these kinds of angles that then follow areas that are elongated. Okay, exact same style. Exact same reflection and exact same representation. So, if you say, I'm going to go to Point Lobos. What am I looking at? Let's just go ahead and derive. Okay, we're looking at the lower trunk to the upper trunk. Change of aesthetic with the implications of wind on the physical structure of the tree. We're looking at branch lines and their interaction. For movements. Changes. Shape of the crotches as they are planing out into the aerodynamic form. We're looking at where the wind hits and where the wind exits the canopy. The aerodynamics. The triangular pad formation. The low compressed apical region. We can pull all of that into our representation of nature in miniature. You have three to four strong aesthetic points. And less I forget, up and out, up and out, up and out. As a representation of the coastal form influenced by wind. We have four strong aesthetic takeaways that if you use those as mantras for the creation of a cupressus representing a coastal environment. You will automatically put that piece in a position to successfully represent nature in miniature. Okay? All right. Cypress number one. Cypress number two. Boom. Let me get to the broadleaf. Okay. So we showed images of the angel oak when we were using it as inspiration for the angel oak boxwood. Okay? But coming back to it where we actually get the ability to see why did we choose to take these pieces down and into the ground. If I can remind you, these were branches that were out here. And you're saying, okay, they're very long. They're very spindly. But when you start to see the opportunity with and what was the connection point between this tree and the larger angel oak. Short, very buttress trunk showing that anchor point. Long. And this is very typical of boxwood. And everybody says, oh my gosh, these branches are too long. So I'm going to cut it here and I'm going to cut it here and I'm going to cut it here. And I'm recreating nature in miniature. So I'm going to make this tiny little broom form tree that I've cut back dealing with these branches that are never going to form secondary or primary pieces that thicken in my lifetime to actually merge the inverse or merge the transition of taper, heal the scar, and start to show the refinability. Meanwhile, we have this huge canopy that shows absolute opportunity to reflect nature in miniature if that, in fact, is the goal. And we're not just trying to duplicate. Okay. We're trying to create a scale and proportion created by the traditional model of bonsai magnified by the confines in the box of the Coke-Fu model. Right? And so it was the length of these branches that I saw in the angel oak long ago that I thought, ooh, that's interesting. And there's actually an Oregon white oak on my way into Portland from Mirai that has this short buttress trunk and then all of the branches come up like this. And they go straight towards the sky and the canopy is all out here on the tips. And it is old and it is very, very impressive. It was that character. So I had the buttress trunk. I've got the buttress trunk. Right? I've got the presence of lower branches. And, in fact, I had one that in the field self-layered. This was self-layered. I did not do this. It came out of the field that way in the bald and burlap. The burlap was out here. This was planted and this had its own root system developed. And I'm saying, okay. Well, that's a little bit of a hint. Okay? And then I've got these long elongated branches with a tremendous amount of ramification out here at the tip. And I'm saying, okay. Well, this has every single implication to be able to represent nature in miniature and a very specific and iconic piece of nature in miniature. So when I started looking at the angel oak, I noticed that there's a tremendous number of these pieces that hit the ground and then look at what they do. They come back up. They hit the ground. And then what do they do? They come back up. They hit the ground. And then what do they do? They come back up. This is happening in an almost 360 degree. Obviously, this perspective does not have a lot of branching coming towards us. I have not been there to see it myself. I do plan on going. And, in fact, I wanted to style this tree in front of the angel oak as a Mariah in the wild. It wasn't going to happen in the timely manner. This boxwood needed work, deserved work. And I was inspired to do the work. So I used imagery. But I would love to see why there's no branches. I would love to see why there's no branches in the foreground here. There's probably a structure, a park, or some sort of, you know, sort of human-related impediment, I'm guessing. Maybe there's another massive oak. I don't know. Maybe you guys know. But here's the other thing. So we had this. I had these long branches. I pulled these down into here and then picked these back up. Right? I've got this one here. I've got this one here. So we've got a lot of that mimicry. But then we start to see these branches taking these irregular turns. We see some of these branches. We see some of these branches crossing over each other in the canopy. And I started recognizing, oh, my gosh. I mean, some of these branches snake through the canopy and do things that we would otherwise cut them off to simplify and clarify. Now, this is one of the big takeaways of representing nature in miniature. Okay. I have this opportunity in the macro. But when I compress it to the micro space, I have to have the quality of the turns, the angles. The, the, the. The. Inner nodes between the curvature of those pieces of movement in the branch that allow me to execute this in the micro here and have it work. Right? And a lot of times we're saying, well, I see branches cross in a macro tree. So I'm going to cross branches in a micro space. And it doesn't have the same acceptability or joie de vivre interest that it has in the macro form. When we start trying to justify superfluous or flawed character in the branching because we saw it in the greater native environment and we're trying to miniaturize this. This is where design can fall apart rapidly. Especially if we're looking for inconsistent but circumstantial occurrences that we're using to justify a major design pillar. And that is to say, okay, I've got this massive pine tree. There's some secondary branches in the canopy that cross over. Now I'm going to take that in the miniaturized form and I'm going to cross over my primary branches because I saw some of the canopy branches being crossed over in the macro form. That is not an adequate or accurate interpretation and abstraction of the macro larger tree into the micro tree. Okay? But some of this primary, this is primary ramification. Primary structural branch formation. When I have that in primary and I have it not just once. I have it in abundance as we see these pieces in the structure creating these lines that interact in these very interesting forms and ways. Now I have a consistency of theme that I can apply. And we had those characteristics in this. But I also cut several of those flawed pieces out. To get rid of areas where I had three primary branches coming from a singular junction that was starting to swell. And I took out the piece that was the most convoluted. And I left the accuracy of these pieces because I also have that kind of structure and character in the inspiring piece. Okay? So this works. But I left where I could and where it was attractive and proportional and to scale. I left these overlapping lines in these interesting forms. These interesting areas of the tree. Because that started to pick up on the natural character here. Okay? So the features that we're representing in the abstracted form. Having the capacity in the primary area of the trunk or the primary branching. Showing breaking of the rules. A break from tradition. The ability to show character and nature of the species in the primary realm. Again. We see up and out, up and out, up and out in the coastal form of the cypress. Now we start to see branches going up, out and dropping down under the weight of the elongated foliage mass. In that lower branching for a broadleaf tree. But we also see the up and out moving up and out with irregularity. And we see the intersection of interesting lines. Okay? Nowhere inside of this boxwood do you see circular lines. Created by the overlapping form. Okay? I'm not creating this, excuse me. I'm not creating this type of a form when I start to overlap those pieces. And notice in here, you don't see circular shapes ever taking place. Let me get through here. You don't see circular shapes ever taking place inside of this canopy. This should definitely be noted in our mind. Okay? I mean. I'm not really picking. But watch this. Even in our greatest area of risk. This starts to form. Right? There's one. Aha. Aha. You got me. Okay. But watch this. Even here. These start to parallel each other. But they avoid the closing of that circle. It's very interesting. Look at this. Look at this. Look at this. We say listen. Watch this. They parallel each other. Oh my gosh. Watch this. Boom. Boom. Okay. Now we go here. Now we go here. This is not circular. Right? It's always ovular. Is there a place where you could find a circular form? Yeah. Maybe. But I would be willing to bet that in observing the primary structure of the Angel Oak from down below, you are going to see a sustainable, productive, accurate canopy taking place. And you say, okay. Why don't we form a circular line? Because it draws your attention in the bonsai form. Why don't we form a circular line in terms of structural integrity of the tree? Because branches don't grow back together into the spaces that would impede each other from having that sustainability. Right? At least not in an ancient form. And if we're representing age through the design that we're performing, now all of a sudden we have the ability to interpret that, grab onto it as a backbone of our design concept. Okay? So what I'm saying here, listen. This notion of the tree needing to constantly be compacted is totally broken apart by the form of the broadleaf, especially in its more ancient asymmetrical form. All right? They don't have to be short, squat. The first move on every broadleaf is not to cut every branch back to the base and to build out a triangular pine tree form. That's bad mojo. Right? You take out the hierarchy. You take out the age. You take out the interpretation of the material that gives you the ability to reflect generational branching. Right? The notion of up and out in the broadleaf form, but ultimately the tips coming down under the weight the longer that that branch gets, very major concept for the broadleaf form. And the notion that we have irregular lines that can cross in the primary realm, giving us the opportunity to buck any source. Right? It's a sort of dogmatic application of branch selection and handling. Based on the traditional model, as long as we do it within the primary realm, we avoid circular creation of lines. And each of those structural branches has its own sustainable space to exist in the design. Very major elements that we can take from this interpretation of nature and miniature. And I do feel like we did it pretty darn well. When we started representing the angel oak. All right. Here we go. The juniper. All right. Now, these are two different species of juniper. Sierra juniper right here, taken by, I believe Lonnie shot this when we were up on Tioga Pass, heading from Yosemite to the 395 on the east side of the Sierras. Some of the most ancient Sierra junipers up on the top of Tioga Pass, still within Yosemite National Park. And then the Rocky Mountain juniper, collected by John Muth, originally designed and styled in collaboration between he and I, way back in the 2010-11 realm. Was at Mirai here for a few years recently, now exists in a private collection. What are we seeing here? First and foremost, the upright form of juniper. Now, if you, and Randy and I talk about this a lot, when you have a tremendous number of contorted junipers, oftentimes a straight trunk juniper with deadwood rotation character and interest becomes more novel than all of the contorted junipers, because you see so many contorted junipers, and the straight trunk junipers have their place in the bonsai form, okay? So we're talking about high elevation mountain sentinels here, right? There's a rotation. If you notice the rotation to the grain that happens here. It goes around the tree. Notice this rotation going around the tree. Almost all trees rotate, okay? And notice this rotation here too. Very subtle, okay? This is a very, very high level tree that exists here, okay? In the Sierra form, rapid transition of taper here. Rapid transition of taper from the base to the tip. What we're working with here is a beautiful transition of taper as it moves through the structure up into this piece here. Obviously, we have a little bit more Rocky Mountain-esque deadwood in the Sierras. This type of deadwood does not last because of the tremendous snow load. Rocky Mountain is a little bit more arid. We have that. Now, this is where I think we can look at these two and really see. Notice the different branches that exist inside of this, okay? Our canopy here and our crown is made up of a few different elements that are sort of creating this slightly domed out canopy. We come up into here. We have our slightly domed out canopy. Okay. Notice that the canopy is very small for the size of the trunk, okay? Notice that our defining branch is up here in the very top of the tree. This is very much an ancient aesthetic, having the defining branch up high, okay? Notice that all of these are relatively similar in length in terms of the branches that exist along this, and these are dropping down. These are sitting lateral. Some of these are coming up. Some of these are coming up, right? So we have different branching lines, and I'm just drawing all of the primary lines that create the canopy of the tree here, okay? Because this is important, right? We have irregularity in the canopy of the tree, showing snow, showing wind, showing elevation, showing desiccation, okay? So when we start to look at how these branches have been handled here, yes, maybe these are slightly too long. And as this was a tree that had very elongated foliage, we had to keep it all, strengthen junipers. This comes from the foliage, build the interior health and strength, and then cut back to, and we gin the tips, and that's how we gain some of this character that you're seeing here in the bonsai form, okay? But the up, the out, the down, and then this dropping, right? With the goal, ultimately, currently, width of the canopy is too wide to show the verticality here. Notice the narrowness of the canopy of this tree. Oh, notice the narrowness of the canopy of this tree, really showing the height and giving you that sentinel-like form. As we build this, as we build these interior branches, piece coming up, giving us really interesting form here, and really interesting form here. I love this. Notice the continuity of these branching forms from the right to the left. Okay, I would love to see this, this wide with these tight paths. And maybe a gin here and a little bit of foliage here. Okay, I totally see this tree taking on some ancient vibes. We've got to consider the live vein presence. We can't just whack off any branches because we want to maintain the live vein that give us the sense of the spiral. But that irregularity, some come up, some drop dramatically down, some drop dramatically down through the totality of the tree. I mean, some come all the way down through that canopy of the tree. This is giving rise to what? This is giving rise to both snow load aesthetic, but it's also one of the techniques we either go up to take out lateral length or we go down to take out lateral length. And so many people say, I got to cut, I got to cut, I got to cut the lateral length out of the tree. Okay, you're not wrong. You can cut the lateral length out of the tree, but you can't do it from the beginning. Okay. One of the mistakes and impediments to getting interior growth inside of a tree that gives rise to the capacity to create a tight compact sentinel Sierra juniper form like we're looking at, is that they never lay out the long leggy foliage, get the strength built up, the foyer mass built up that gives rise to interior growth of a strength. And most of us in cleaning our junipers follow the dogmatic approach of we've got to clean out the crotches. We've got to take out those interiors. And the pieces that actually lend themselves to becoming the branches you could use to illustrate the aesthetic on the right side of your screen from the productivity of the handling of the shape on the left side of the tree more often than not are taken out because we are just repetitiously applying the same concept of thought and not thinking, what am I trying to accomplish? I want a tighter, more compact tree. Great. Build that from. Utilizing the foliage. Utilizing the foliage on the tree to generate the health that empowers you to get those interior branches. Stop removing all of the crotch growth. Save the strongest pieces that will give you that branch formation on the interior. And once we build that, gin the exterior. Because one of the other things that we should be noticing very clearly in this Sierra juniper is the fact that almost everyone... Notice the white streaks through here. Notice the live and dead interaction. The gins on every branch. Look at this tip right here. Look at this tip right here. Every one of these primary structural branches, even out to the secondaries and continuing to the tertiaries that have atrophied, have deadwood in them. So when you build this interior branch... Excuse me. When you build this interior branch... When you build this interior branch that takes off like a sucker and we start to say, okay, well now I'm going to use that as a contorted piece in here. And I'm going to build this tiny crown here. Well, now we can gin this piece right here. Now we get rid of that length. Now we gin that piece right here. And that stripping of that bark should pull all the way back up onto this primary piece. Now we're not stripping all of the living vein or else that branch goes away as does everything else. But we are integrating the dead into the living branch structure as much as we can. That can happen from pulling the live vein up onto primary pieces from reducing the live vein on the trunk and creating more shari. Or that can happen from integrating the deadwood when we start to remove the bark on the tips and pulling it up into the primary structure to show live-dead interaction on the different hierarchical levels of your primary, secondary, and even into the tertiary. But when we start to miniaturize the macro to micro, it's tough to get that tertiary gin to be looking the same as this quality little piece showing scale on this massive Sierra juniper. Okay? So we're saying, listen, first and foremost, narrowing the width of the canopy is what gives you the impression of a tall vertical tree. We see that in the Sierra proportion. We see that slightly lacking, but we understand we're building that in the Rocky Mountain juniper proportion. Okay? The presence of deadwood across all of the hierarchical levels from the trunk to the primary to the secondary, major indication of age in juniper bonsai as we draw inspiration from the native environment, those pieces as we start to reduce these tips, pulling those back up into this to reduce the silhouette, definitely a major addition that we could take from the inspiration here that makes the micro more believable. Okay? The higher branches in the canopy, being your defining branch, giving rise to a generation of direction, compression on the apex, elongation on the apex, longest branch in the upper canopy, these pieces of the puzzle can give rise to that ancient form. So we start to have this type. Of an aesthetic. Right? We have the inverted of the triangle. We almost have a diamond. Okay? And when we start to think about the branch formation, irregularity, showing the elements that are creating this aesthetic, snow, any of these laterals, wind. When we start to see that intermixing at elevation, some drop, some emerge, some move up phototropic. When we move up phototropically, it's the intersection of these pieces that allow us. And you say, how do I make that decision? Again, in the micro form, the reason that we want to raise to show wind or phototropism, lower to show snow or branching weight, ultimately comes down to wanting to narrow the width of the silhouette to show scale and proportion. All right? Few things to pull in to your bone side practice and approach from that one. All right. That's juniper. Let's go to pine. Now, I really, really, this project, when we went to the Rockies, changed everything for me. Yes. The Olympics was fantastic. Yes. Crater Lake. I knew there was potential. The Rockies Mirai in the wild project was the project that I think had the most profound impact on my impression of nature and miniature. It truly, the Olympics was great. Fantastic experience. First one we did. Crater Lake was also fantastic. We learned to embed ourselves in the landscape and suffer a little bit with the elements that exist. But the Rockies project was where I saw trees taking on a form I'd never created in bone side. And this is a limber pine from the ancient limber grove. This is a bristlecone pine. Aristata variety, which is the variety that exists along Windy Ridge, definitely did not exist. They did not come from Windy Ridge. And this was not the tree that was a part of the project. But it was a tree that was created in the spirit of this project. Okay? So we sat in front of this limber pine here from roughly like 6 p.m., no, maybe 8 p.m. in the evening time in June, longest day light length when we did this project in the Rockies. And we were there until about 3 or 4 in the morning capturing this as the stars moved overhead. And the stars moved overhead in just a phenomenal time lapse up in this project. But the thing that continued to echo through my mind about capturing truly windblown trees in the native environment and duplicating that aesthetic in miniature is that we see the windblown effect in the deadwood and the primary structure. Okay? And that's not to say there's no deadwood on the windward side. The windward side of the tree. Right? And that's not to say that all the deadwood on the leeward side is necessarily this dramatic, you know, like flame-shaped deadwood. But we have these pieces that carry this notion that foliage was trying to grow against that. And we see it echoed. And notice this branch right here. This is a very important piece. So I've got the primary pieces. And look at what this does. It goes into the wind and then up. Up. And now it comes over. Okay? And look at this much more juvenile branch. Into the wind and up. And these branches moving with the wind. Moving with the wind. Look at what's happening here. This one actually drops down. Now it does not come into the wind and drop down. Right? It's dropping. Because we've got all of these pieces that are here. Look at this and here. Look at these and here. Look at them circle back. Right? Notice this primary structure. You're seeing how it's created. Right? But then we get these few pieces that drop down moving in the same direction. Well, that is what gives rise to this branch. Okay? And this piece right here is what gives rise. To these branches. Right? And then these pieces here are what's illustrated through these pieces. Right? And through this. Watch this. Yes. Yes. Okay? So we see those thematics in terms of the structural lines carrying all the foliar mass. But notice it's not coming up over here and then forming a cute little pad. That's not what happens. These pieces are sort of existing in this type of a form. Almost like a broadleaf canopy in the most narrow acute angles of its branches. It's coming up and then it's kind of existing here. And you start to look at this and you start to see in this aristata here the structure of these foliar pads. Quote unquote pads. Is not pad formation as we know it. Where we lay it out like a fan shape. These are triangular in form as are these. Triangular to move with the wind. Which is not a standard pine form. But is a definitive form of a windswept tree. We have the aerodynamic establishment of the canopy. Right? And that means that on this side it doesn't mean that we take off all branches that are growing into the wind on the windward side. But we understand. We either carry them up as a response and back towards the canopy. Or we carry them down as a response. And back towards the canopy. Or in the direction of the wind. Right? So if I carried something down like this. I would have to be insinuating that there's a large boulder over here blocking the wind between this branch and this branch. And that does happen. Now you're insinuating topography. Now you have the ability to represent that through a stone. A slab. A container choice. Which we've done with the Sierra Junipers long ago. And the circular Eric Krzyzewinski. But we're seeing how we execute the wind informed shape and design on a higher level. By observing those windward and leeward branches. And how they behave inside of the design. Okay. Now I have all the insinuation I need. Little bit tertiary in terms of its scale and proportion. Although it does echo this. We've got some of that macro right here. Right here. We've got, you know, this piece that clearly was, you know, succane to the elements. But here's another one to look at. Notice the shape of the container giving rise to direction with the tree. Okay. That's another big part of the composition. And people say, oh, Mirai creates, you know, avant-garde trees. I actually don't think we create avant-garde trees. I think we create trees inspired by some of the most common places on earth. In terms of just looking at the way a tree grows and representing it in miniature. By pulling on these pillar aesthetic pieces that scale from the macro to the micro. Okay. We've got some of the features. Check. We've got a handling of primary branching structure. Check. We've got the formation of the foyer pads in a wind-informed shape. Check. We've got interaction of the foyer masses in an aerodynamic form. Check. All right. Those are the pieces I'm going to abstract from the native environment to make a true blue. And let me just go ahead and take all of this out now. Now that we've talked about it. Let's take all of it out. And just say, number one, did we do it? Which I do believe we did. Okay. I believe we did it. But I also think there's another level to this. Okay. Because these level off. These continue up. And I find this to be a consistency. So should these continue up and up and up? And should this continue up and up and up? I think that would get us closer. Do we have too much mass here and here? I do believe we do. A little bit of mass showing the aerodynamics, some negative space in here between this branch and maybe the interior portion of the canopy. Does it mean that I missed representing nature in miniature through what we did the first iteration? No. No. Just like the upright juniper. You've got to grow it. And then you say, where does it go from here to become a better iteration? Well, greater amount of negative space. By the reduction and remnants of what was in the expansion of the deadwood, enhancing the degree of asymmetry, all start to show this greater and greater degree of age. And we say we go through this vortex of evolution. Even when we're recreating nature in miniature, when we start to utilize these non-conventional to the bonsai realm and what we're all taught in the fan-shaped pad with all the branches down, right? And we say, okay, I know what that becomes over time. But all of a sudden, when we go through this vortex of evolution. But all of a sudden, when I carry this up and I'm moving this in this way because the wind is coming from here and I've got this going out here. How do I evolve this? It's the same. Right? It's the same. We're going to continue to compress here. We're going to create space and negativity in here. We're going to leave behind deadwood in there. We're going to increase the appearance or asymmetrical push in a direction. We're just not doing it with that standard fan-shaped. Pad. And so we have to seek that inspiration. Look at how that occurred. Look at how this deadwood is represented. Look at how. Look at the lines, the very sparse sparing. You realize how many branches were in here? And then you look at what's left on this. That is what we're leaving behind when we start to create this kind of deadwood. We're leaving behind the choice, solid, stable, interesting lines when we create that deadwood. We are now narrowing. These pieces in that upright form instead of narrowing them in that laid out pad form. Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. We still age these designs. We still evolve the aesthetic of the tree. But we are doing so with far more scalable elements that execute the environment, the species and all of the elements acting on that tree to create that natural form in the miniature space. Okay? Now, here's what I'm not doing. Let me just walk you through this. Okay? Because I've told you all the things that we are doing. And let me go ahead and take away all of this stuff again. Okay? Here's what I'm not doing. All right? I'm not seeing these branches that are kind of up in here. And I'm not seeing the, you know, this. And saying, okay, so I can't wire this into an organized form. I'm going to have these branches here and here. And I'm going to have these branches here. Because I see that in this canopy here. And then I have this here. But some of them come back out. So I'm going to bring those back out. You know, you can go to interpretation in the macro form and apply it. And this is really where natural bonsai gets bastardized. You can apply it to the degree where you don't even need to apply wire. Where your wiring is pretty low quality. Where you don't have a definable form. And all of a sudden, you get into a realm where it's not really art anymore. Right? Where it's not really design anymore. Where it's not really high level craft anymore. Where there's really no necessity for technique. And you can walk yourself in interpreting the macro form in a miniature. And say, I don't really need to do anything. It's a tree. It's a tree. And it's like, okay, well, then we're not doing bonsai anymore. Right? There is a line inside. Inside of this design of representing nature in miniature. Where we start to take these elements and we abstract them. Where we still need positive and negative space in the miniaturized form. We still need controlling the size of the pads to show scale and proportion. So it looks like a bigger tree. Right? We still need, in this bigger form, we can have outliers here. And still see the general contour. In this smaller form, if we have outliers here, we lose the contour. Because we don't have the same amount of space and the same gajillion branches that are starting to create that organization. There is negative space here. There is negative space here. There is negative space here. There is negative space here. Right? We need those things. And we need them in a little bit greater quantity in the miniaturized form. To show that scale and proportion in all of the elements. That make that tree look ancient. The traditional form gets super dense. You can barely see the inside of the tree. It makes the tree look younger. Right? These are all of the things that started to feed when I first saw the bristlecone pine. Giant sequoia in the redwoods. I recognized at that point in time I was never going to make bonsai the same. I didn't know what it was going to become. But it was not going to be what it had been. Right? And since that time, whether it's the reiterations of the redwood. Whether it's the windswept form. Of the pines and the high elevation areas. Whether it's the upright form. Whether it's questing to represent 5,000, 4,000, 3,000, 2,000 years of age. Depending on the material merit and what we build it to be. All of these have been works in process over the course of the past 14, 13, 14 years. Right? Because I saw the bristlecone sequoia in redwood at the end of 2010. At the end of 2010. Beginning of sometime in 2011. Right? So from that point to now. About 14 years. Okay? And none of them in their first iteration were good. Right? My first windswept was horrific. Not horrific. But unsustainable and not that great. Okay? My first, you know, reiterative formal upright redwood. Noncommittal. Right? I didn't understand how to use it. I didn't know where it belonged. I didn't know how to form the apex out of it. I didn't know how many of them I should have. Right? But, but, and I had ones where I went way beyond. And the reiterations took over the design. And it became unsustainable. And I had ones where I nailed it. And I had ones where they got too thick. And it spoiled the proportion of the tree. And I had some where I kept it just right. And now I know where I'm at with that. And I can use that tool. Same with the windswept form. How do we handle the windward side? You know? In this, in this notion. How do we handle this pad formation? How do we accept this break from pine pad formation to the windswept pad formation? How do we balance the energy in those different expressions of branching? So many nuances to understand. Give me one second. My heater broke in the house. And hopefully somebody is coming to fix it. That's what I'm aspiring, aspiring to do. Aspiring to see here. Yes. Great. Okay. That is them. All right. Okay. So it's been a work in progress. And I would say to, to the point that looking at these images and what we've created. And seeing where the aesthetic in Mirai's trees was born out of representing nature and miniature. We don't, I still make traditional trees all the time out of really wild rugged material. You understand that. You understand the material guides the dance. We are definitively utilizing the insinuations from the material to develop our imagery. But when you have the chance to create something wild. Now you are tasked with and challenged with being able to make sense of the elements in the native environment that allow that tree to truly represent that landscape and miniature. That's all I got for you guys. Yeah. We got some questions. So question from Treebeard Steve. He says bending primary branches down is a technique you teach for promoting back butting behind the bend. Would you, would you comment on the balance between that and the quote up and out with, for example, a Japanese black pine? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. SO yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So yeah, yeah, so I think that's really, I think that's a really great point that you make there. So, you know, when we bend branches down, we take the oxen and neutralize it and allow cytokinin in , and it stimulates back butting and, okay, well, what if you wanted to create a natural Japanese black pine? Well, a natural Japanese black pine is a coastal tree. From what we've just discussed a coastal tree is up and out, up and out, up and out, up and out, a sand canopy and triangular form. Okay. aerodynamic. Japanese black pines, no different. Most of the time, the really old ones that you see have had their soil eroded and are exposed root on the coastline with these big, you know, sort of canopies that would look very similar to the Monterey cypress in their actual execution and form. And you say, well, would you still get the back budding if you have branches going up and you laid them out in this fashion, right? Well, you would definitely get the back budding from taking that verticality to lateral in the transition of auxin, right? It will stimulate the back budding, not to the same degree, but it will. But here's the other thing. Do you want the same density, interior growth, et cetera, forming in that coastal iteration as you would in this dense, perfect needle set, very short, highly ramified branch in the traditional model? And I would argue, a little bit more air, a little bit more space, a little bit more visibility is going to give you a little bit more accuracy of the aesthetic in the coastal representation. So the same, you know, just like we sacrifice our attachment to an aesthetic, we also sacrifice our attachment to all of the pieces that went with that aesthetic of the traditional model. And to some degree, that density and back budding is a sacrifice that serendipitously, happens to work with the aesthetic. Cool, all right. So next question, from Brian. On container selection for trees imitating nature. When to choose ceramic, when to choose natural, or man-made stone vessel? And I you kind of touched on that a bit, with the Rocky's piece, but yeah. Sw 눌러. What would that be? Kind of basically, at what would you count number? Probably usually cabo. Yeah, you always have equal distance, or do you? Yeah. If at some point that line, or a tap is significantly, else shortly, there is a moment, and so when we've mentioned Beckham, if you're know his distribution of conjunctions, or a kind of nature or something, that happens to work with the aesthetic. At what point when you're inspired by nature and looking at the natural form, do you choose like a ceramic vessel versus like a stone or, you know what I mean? Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. That's a really good question because, you know, the overwhelming realization that I think a lot of people have had, and I watched Walter Paul go through this when I was in college and he started finding like stone, the overwhelming realization that you have if you're recreating nature in miniatures, like, well, you kind of want to plant everything on a stone, right? But like there's merit to the architecture of the ceramic. There's merit to the contrast of natural versus man-made, of organic versus geometrical. And there's a modernism that we've been, you know, trained to see. There's an organicism. There's an organization as human beings living in the built environment that we value and enjoy that aesthetic and that juxtaposition with. And so all of a sudden, you start to recognize that the container is yet another conduit for you to convey context and intention in your compositions. And that all becomes a personal preference. And I think more importantly for me, it starts to become demonstrative of the, you know, the context of my compositions, you know, because there's color, because there's color tone, because there's shape and detail that execute different aesthetics, because there's materiality, because there's texture, because there's scale and proportion in the vessel. Just because you have a natural tree doesn't mean it needs to go into a natural ceramic. You can have a natural tree in the most modern, sleek, man-made ceramic and the context of it, if it's about color, texture. Environment, human nature, interaction, whatever that is, that can be a critical dialogue created by that choice and selection. It comes down to what are you trying to say? And ultimately, this whole thing right now that we're talking about, it moves away from bonsai. Bonsai being a Japanese term, a Japanese, the approach of bonsai as a Japanese cultural model. Right? Right. It's a model of preservation post-World War II that has a very constrained and controlled model to it. This is something slightly different. Maybe it's pre-World War II bonsai. Maybe it's pre-1900 affluent, you know, economy bonsai. Maybe it's, you know, bonsai as a metaphor. Maybe it's bonsai, or maybe it's trees as a metaphor. Maybe it's an art form. Maybe it's an art form as a representation of nature and miniature that loses some of the baggage of bonsai. But I don't spend too much time worrying about that. When you think about the container and the tree relationship, though, you have to consider all of that. You have to consider all of that, because all of that weighs into it now. Right? In terms of what you're trying to accomplish. Cool. All right. And question from Danielle. A year or two ago, you mentioned testing out the aesthetic of fire with current events down here. I am curious how the trees fared, and if you were able to elaborate techniques for that look. I tested it on a few nursery manzanitas. It did not go well. Trying to achieve the, which, yeah, there's visuals in my mind there for that. Trying to achieve the burn look while keeping the longevity of the char. It's not going to be a good idea. I'm not going to give you a good example, but I'm going to give you a good example. I think the tree, with not killing the tree, proves difficult. And I think, I mean, the redwoods is a great example. Yeah. So you'll be seeing the project where we used fire sometime in the near future. Definitely first quarter of this year. And I think it's better to let the visuals speak for it than to try and outline it. I just want to say I hope you're safe down in Southern California, Danielle, and that everybody's okay. It was a total tragedy. I was actually just down there. I got back yesterday, the day before. Yeah, it was catastrophic. Anyways, I hope you're okay. I did not in any way mean to laugh in light of what's transpired. I laughed because, yeah, when we apply fire to a tree, there's a lot of opportunity for bad things to happen. And, you know, my exploration of fire was with the redwoods, which are a species naturally. They're designed to burn. It was a Mariah in the Wild project. We completely burned out the inside of a living redwood, and it is thriving right now. So a lot of strategy went into that, a lot of hypotheses on being able to do that and burn the living portion of the tree and have it survive. And I think ultimately where you see the really impactful scars of fire on ancient trees, they've been burned multiple times. And that also is rolling around in my head as an opportunity to potentially apply fire to that tree more than once as the wood dries, as it changes, as it shifts, as it heals, to continue to deepen the impact of that fire in that area of the tree. So still a work in progress, but it was successful for us based on, I think, the preparation planning and strategy that we applied. But yeah, if you just light a tree on fire in a miniature form, it's going to be tough for that tree. But yeah, if you just light a tree on fire in a miniature form, it's going to be tough for that tree to survive and recover. All right. And another question from Manos. Have you ever been inspired by any old Japanese maples from Japan? Have I ever been inspired by any old Japanese maples from Japan? Japanese maple in Japan, if you go into the native environment, is like an understory tree. So it's a lot like our vine maple here in the Pacific Northwest. It's not some big, grand, statuesque, stately icon of the landscape. They're actually very thin and flitty and whimsical. And I would say, from that perspective, I've been inspired greatly and use our vine maple to represent that, as well as some of the air layered shishigashira and other trees to represent that dainty, delicate understory scenario that's very malleable and elegant and sparse and airy. But there are some cultures. I'm cultivated and highly taken care of. If you listen to the Mr. Maple podcast, they talk about this one maple, that Japanese maple that they went and saw in Japan that just blew their mind. I've never seen anything like that. I know it exists. I've seen ginkgo that have absolutely blown my mind. But Japanese maple specifically, I've never experienced that myself. All right. And a question from Joseph. Coastal redwoods. Besides the... Oh, sorry. Okay. Besides the primary formation of branches accelerating up, being highly apically dominant, and even basal growth contributing to that vertical upward motion, for a true to form upright, what will give value to the baseline tip features of the sequoia? It's hard to find pictures similar as described. Yeah, well, I mean, there's like very few images of that. And then I remember when I first started creating... Yeah. When I first started creating the reiterative form and all my students who live in Northern California came here and they're like, that's not how redwoods grow. And then one guy even went as far as getting his buddy's research paper on these like line plot drawings of redwoods and reiterations. And there were very few reiterations on the trees and my trees were full of reiterations. And so then I was like, well, this is odd because when I've been down to the redwoods, that's exactly what I see. And so I had to go back down to the redwoods and I had to go to Del Norte. And I had to go to Jed Smith and I went to Avenue of the Giants and I went all the way as far south as Roaring Camp down by Santa Cruz and I climbed the old growth redwood at the top of 17 between Santa Cruz and San Jose. And then I went back up to Prairie Creek, which was the first grove that I saw and it's the grove that I continue to return to that has the most trees with the most reiterations, which I've now come to firmly. Believe, which is backed by Lucy Kerr, who this is big canopy tree research, that the number of reiterations are a direct demonstration of age and Prairie Creek is probably the oldest redwood grove that exists in North America. So when people were saying that's not how they grow, it's like, well, if you're looking at a tree that's six to 800 years old and you're telling me that's that that's not how 12, 14, 16, 1800, 2000 year old redwood grows, we're not talking about the same thing, right? Like it just became something different. So in order for you to grasp the concept, you've got to go find the oldest trees that carry these features. And if you're speaking specifically about a redwood, the beauty of Prairie Creek is you can change your elevation based on the trails to be able to look into the canopy of trees. You can see obviously silhouettes in the sun that show you the reiterations and their dominance and getting to a point where you can see the apical regions of the redwoods where you recognize it's a series of reiterations that actually forms the dome. Crown and then transitioning that into the bonsai form, where a series of reiterations creates almost the same crown formation as the rounded billow that we see in the way we handle canopies traditionally. But it's a different mechanism by which they get there. You start to create an aesthetic that's authentic to the redwood. Yeah, I think with the amount, the range of the redwoods and just my own experience being there a couple of times and talking with Lucy in particular is like most people's experience is the 95% of silhouettes. Yeah. It's like you're in the secondary redwood forests. Yeah. Absolutely. You got the 5% that really represent what you're interested in, which is the ancient form, right? Yeah, I agree. I totally agree. And then inside of that 5%, you've got a .0001% of the most ancient and they happen to be in this very specific pocket that has inspired all of my work, right? Yeah. Prairie Creek is where I go to hang out with redwoods. I love Jed Smith. I love Del Norte. I love all of the other redwood groves. There's nothing like Prairie Creek. Okay. And looks like... Oh, Backcountry Dan said, just wanted to say, excellent stream. That was helpful, especially the Windy Ridge discussion. I've been planning to take the next step on my Windy Ridge inspired limber pine. This adds a lot of clarity for my vision. Nice. Nice, Dan. Thank you. Thanks for tuning in, man. Appreciate it. All right. And that's it. All right. We did it. Okay. I got a heating system I got to go reconcile. It's 1111. I'm actually wiring the Crater Lake limber pine right now. Miguel's in there working on an upright limber pine that abides by all of these aesthetics. I got some nematodes I'm going to apply today. I'm working on supplemental nutrition periodically in the winter time just to keep things in check and keep calcium levels up. So we're busy here at Mirai. Happy Friday, everybody. Love you guys. Thanks for the support. Let's keep rocking. All right. Nature in miniature. Find those iconic components. All right. I'm going to show you a little bit of a sequence that you can miniaturize and you're off and running. Love you guys. Mwah! 
