What's going on guys? Circling back to the idea of epoxy anchors and today we're going to be applying some epoxy anchors to this beautiful piece of lava that we're going to be utilizing in a kusumono creation for a particular display of a tree. But inside of this creation this is how we would handle the application of epoxy anchors whether it be a vertical stone, a lateral slab, any stone work where we're not going to be drilling all the way through because the visual presence of the wire would be so incredibly unattractive that we need to just apply the wire directly into the stone to disguise that location that we're going to be securing whatever plant material we're going to try to secure to the stone itself. So this is the epoxy anchor process. Now before we begin let's just take a look at our tools and understand exactly what we're going to be using to drill this stone. Now we're going to be tuning in and utilizing the same ceramic tile bit that we've been utilizing to drill a lot of other stone or the ceramic body of a container if we had to have to add another hole. This is a spade formed bit sharpened on both of the edges so as it rotates it cuts the diameter of the width of that spade. Now I have two of them here just to show you how big that contrast of sizes can be inside of this drilling process. Obviously we want to choose the size in terms of the width of the spade that gets us enough space for our wire in the epoxy to enter the holes that we create but not so big that we over drill it have to use more epoxy run the risk of damaging the stone when we don't need that size of a hole. So I'm going to set this big piece off to the side and we're going to be using a small bit today to be anchoring some very thin aluminum wires that we're going to utilize to tie down some understory accent plants to this piece of lava. So I have my drill with my bit loaded I've got my spray bottle that's going to be utilized to cool not only the bit but the stone so that we decrease the potential for the stone to fracture. Now a few things that we first need to be aware of before we start drilling the stone. Number one how deep do we want to penetrate the stone? This is a direct reference to the size of wire that we're going to be putting into the stone that we're utilizing as that anchor piece. We want to make sure that we get the wire amply set inside of the stone but we don't go so deep that we have to use an excessive amount of epoxy and we don't want to go so deep that we potentially break the stone. Every stone is going to be different in terms of the way that it fractures and the way that it breaks. If we have a sample piece of stone we can test what it looks like to drill that stone and know its tolerances. Today we're going to be using a very very thin 1.5 millimeter aluminum wire very small gauge of wire to tie down these accent pieces to this stone for a kusumono piece. I don't need to go super deep, deep enough to lodge the wire into the stone, deep enough to have enough epoxy to hold the wire in the stone. I always like to start with a very fine before I start drilling. Now I've marked out my spots on the stone where I want to add anchors to be able to accomplish the composition that I'm looking to achieve. It's always smart to strategize where am I going to be anchoring to so that we know prior to ever starting the process how many locations where they're going to be to accomplish that desired aesthetic of the epoxy anchor method. Okay I'm going to start with location one here we're going to penetrate see how hard the stone is as we're drilling. This is going to be a little bit loud but let's just see how this stone drills and how deep we need to go testing that wire gauge and its seat inside of the stone to make those determinations. Okay very, very soft in terms of the stone that we're drilling today. Easy to drill so I need to take that information into account when I start to make the other holes in this stone knowing that I don't have to apply a lot of force to the drill to get it to actually enter the stone. Let's take a slight look. I'm going to cut off a sample piece of wire. Okay let's take a look at how deep into the stone we've penetrated here just to get an idea. It's always nice to have a depth check. Looks like we're about three-eighths of an inch maybe closing in on a half an inch and that's plenty of depth to be penetrating into the stone. So now that I know that I have a half inch of depth penetration this is where we get into the nuances of epoxy anchors. I can't just plan on sticking a plug of epoxy into that hole with this wire and assume that I can apply a significant amount of force and have that epoxy hold. We have a cylindrical hole that's been added to the stone knowing that that cylindrical hole doesn't really have any stopper for that epoxy plug to pull out. We could effectively plug that with epoxy, anchor that wire, apply pressure to that wire even after the epoxy is hardened and chances are it's going to pull directly out of that stone. So in addition to the first hole where we plan on anchoring our wire we also need to add a second hole that works almost like the formation of a Y to create a belt of epoxy that enters the hole at two different angles so it can't pull out and has that width holding that epoxy and that wire into the hole when we go to apply force to secure that plant material to the stone. Let's take a look at that second hole, the angle and the concept behind the drilling so we see how we set ourselves up for success in the epoxy application. Now when I come into this second hole I'm going to work very hard to change the angle of my drill. I'm going to go in at that angle that gives me that Y formation. My initial hole and my initial angle is here. I'm going to go ahead I'm going to stay inside of that same hole but I'm going to rotate my drill to create a different angle in a different space to add that second hole and that constriction of the epoxy pulling out. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to drill this with this soft stone. I'm going to leave my water off to the side and just use it to treat the drill bit at the end of the application of the hole. Okay, so now I have a hole that penetrates a half inch deep in this direction. I pull back out and I have another hole that penetrates a half inch deep in an opposing direction. So essentially what I'm going to do is I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to go ahead I've done is I've created two different angles that my epoxy is going to be applied to. Now that I have that spacing and differentiation of angles I can apply my wire into one hole but put epoxy into both of the holes the hole with the wire and the hole that was drilled to create that anchor point and my epoxy will harden with a Y-shaped form that has no possibility of pulling out of that hole once it hardens and anchors that wire. This is the fundamental crux to being able to apply epoxy anchor and not have it pull out when we really test the strength of that hole trying to tie that plant material to the surface of the stone. Now before I can apply the epoxy anchor I need to conform my wire but I also need to make sure that my holes are cleaned out so that there's no residual residue of the drilling process in those holes. I'm going to do so with water just to make sure that the surface is clean and the epoxy contacts the surface of the stone itself. So now we have a really nice clean hole all of the contaminants that are in the hole are out of it I want to come back in with a rolled up piece of paper towel and just soak up any excess moisture that exists inside of that hole. Sometimes just rolling up the paper towel is all that we need to be able to insert it into that hole and really soak up that moisture but if we need a little bit of added assistance because the stone itself is very very sharp or has a lot of surface texture to it we can also have a really nice thin chopstick prepared that we can utilize to sort of work within that space and just soak up all of that excess moisture. You can see how wet that paper towel is and how much water was actually sitting inside of that stone. I'm going to soak up the water from the other opposing hole as well so both holes are clean and ready to be anchored. So now we have both holes drilled, we have both holes cleaned and we have both holes dry. Now we can come back to the aspect of our wire and really forming this wire to become a good epoxy anchor and the formation of this wiring is also pivotal to this being a functional system. Most of us probably think we could just insert this singular strand of wire into that whole epoxy and it should be fine but again we have no gripping surface for the epoxy to hold that very smooth surface of that anchor wire that we're trying to get solidified inside of that hole. We've got to create a shape that that epoxy can grab and actually hold that wire with. So I'm going to go ahead and just take my pliers, I'm going to bend my anchor wire in half here and I'm going to come back and just pinch the very tip of this wire to get a nice sharp bend to the wire. Now watch how I do this, I'm going to insert my thumb just right there where I'm going to be pinching. So that I spread that wire out, I create a nice sharp hole but I also have space for the epoxy to be able to enter that wire and I'm going to spread that wire a little bit to create a little bit of space so that the epoxy can load up in front of that V that we've formed there and properly anchor that wire so there's no potential for it to pull out of the hole. Now obviously I want to test and make sure that my depth and formation of the wire allows me to get to the actual end of the hole. So that we've got that really beautiful seat so I'm just going to go ahead and experiment and sort of form that wire to get full penetration into that hole. Now if we do this correctly we should do so and be able to spread that wire and have that wire sit in that hole perfectly anchored and placed all the way to the depth of the initial hole that we drilled. If we do this and we have that kind of depth to that anchor we know we're maximizing the depth of the hole, we're maximizing the function of what the epoxy can provide in terms of that anchor. And we've also created the space to be able to fill those holes to their maximum degree and further reinforce our ability to add a lot of pressure to this system and not have the anchor fail. Now that that anchor is placed inside of the stone let's go ahead and prepare our epoxy. Now what we're using today is just a standard two-part epoxy that adheres to almost any material, stone, masonry, metal, wood, this is a very universal epoxy that we're utilizing. If you look out and I'll show you the core what you'll notice is that there's a darker interior and a lighter exterior. These are the two parts of the epoxy that when we start to pinch in and really massage these materials together when they bind they start to create the chemical reaction that causes the hardening process. Now I'm going to cut off a piece that not only gives me the ability to fill the first hole but also the second hole so that I've got all of my epoxy mixed at once because this does start to harden fairly rapidly. We lose work time very quickly so we want to be prepared. With my razor blade I'll cut off a little bit more than I think I'll need to fill both holes. Just a nice single sort of slab of two-part epoxy. I'll take off the exterior wrapping that protects it from adhering to the packaging that it comes in. Most epoxies are going to have some sort of plastic protection so that it doesn't stick to the wall of the tube. And then I'm going to work this together. Thoroughly, just by pinching it in my fingers and making sure that I get a really thorough meshing of the two materials, uniform consistency of color, uniform consistency of texture and even distribution of both parts of the epoxy so that we make sure that it hardens at the same rate and that all components of the epoxy harden entirely in this anchoring process. What we see here is a uniform gray color. The exterior was white, the center was a very dark gray. Now we have a very light gray uniform color. When we see that uniformity of color always folding the epoxy back on itself as we mesh these two components together, that uniformity of color and no bands or streaks inside of the epoxy showing the different components, that means that we've got a universality or a meshing of the two parts that's going to cause a very consistent hardening and solidification of our epoxy. I can go ahead and I can break off one singular section. Now when I break off this singular section, I'm just going to roll it. I'm going to roll it kind of nice and clean into a cylindrical form that will fit very easily inside of the hole that we're going to be anchoring this to. I'll even kind of thin down the tip to make sure that it doesn't catch on the hole as we anchor. Now I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to try to feed this as far into that hole as I possibly can, filling all of those areas and using my chopstick now to make sure that that hole is completely and totally filled by the epoxy. I'm going to focus on the front. I'm going to drill the first hole first just to make sure that it's got all of the material in that first hole where the actual wire itself is placed, packing it in really nice and tight, pulling chunks off of that epoxy and just continuing to push and fill and push and fill, driving that chopstick inside of it to make sure that all air spaces have been eliminated. Once I start to see it oozing out towards the hole that I've drilled adjacent to my initial hole, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to another initial hole. I know that I've got that hole filled. I'm going to come back now and I'm going to roll this into a really nice cylindrical form yet again but I am going to have to roll this cylindrical form a little bit thinner to get into that secondary hole because we've had some bleed-over of our epoxy from the first hole. I'm going go ahead and I'm going to insert this into the second hole and in a similar fashion, I'm going to use my chopstick to drive that epoxy into that second hole, filling filling it in its entirety, drive that chopstick all the way into that hole, utilizing chunks of that epoxy, just keep that nice big chunk of epoxy right next to you so you can just pull pieces off and feed it into that hole, filling it until it's completely maximized in terms of the amount of epoxy that you can work into that space. And once we start to see that epoxy pushing out, now watch what happens when I drive in here, notice that it's pushing epoxy out there. That means that as we get that resistance in both holes and we're driving in and it's pushing out in other areas, there is no more possible potential space for that epoxy to fill inside of those holes, that means that we're finished. And I like to put a last finishing touch right on the top of this, just to push that final finality and unify those two pieces of epoxy that are going in those adjacent holes together, like to pull the excess off of the edge of the stone, really drive it into that, that location so that we've got that nice seated creation of that epoxy anchor, really solidified and clean, minimal impact or visibility on the surface, even though we're planning on this being covered by plant material, sometimes in the creation process that changes. So really reducing and necking down the floor space or the surface area that we see that epoxy ensures that it's gonna be an invisible component when we go to anchor our plant material to the stone. Now that we've got that anchored, notice that my wires are split and the epoxy is in the center of that wire. I've got the hole that's moving in this direction filled, I've got the hole that's moving in this direction filled, that Y-shaped formation of those holes is gonna create two legs in that epoxy anchor that are gonna be impossible to pull out when we apply force to this anchor. The fact that we created that nice V-shaped form to the wire means the epoxy is sitting in the center of that wire, anchoring that V-shaped form into the hole. There's no possibility for this epoxy anchor to ever fail outside of the wire itself breaking. We've just created a perfect, flawless, functional epoxy anchor inside of this stone that will function and also has a minimal visual impact to allow us to maximize the quality of the stone composition we're creating. End servicing is the process to make the ничего End servicing is the process to make the chocolate into a must in the end project. Okay. Okay, so we've placed four anchors on this side of the stone. I have some marks here and some suspicions that we're going to want to mount something here. Before I make those holes, though, compositionally, I'm going to see if this is enough with the plant material we can create on this side of the stone with the anchors that we've placed in the stone to be able to make a really beautiful composition that maximizes the visibility of the stone and the interaction of the plant material with the stone that we're going to be applying. So I'm going to hold off on these. But in four locations, we drilled those two holes in the same region in that Y-shaped form to get that distribution of the epoxy. We formed our wires and then spread them out so that our epoxy could sit in the crotch of that wire and really mount it to the stone. We've fully filled each of those locations that we've drilled so that we make sure that we have total epoxy accumulation and occupation. And now it's time to just let it sit and cure. Now, as far as epoxy curing. Every epoxy is going to have a different cure rate in terms of when it's hardened enough to work with it and when it's fully hardened to its maximum capacity. I do like to let epoxy sit if I have the time until it's reached its full hardness and full cure capacity, because then we make sure that with that extra little application of force that we need to anchor that piece of plant material to the stone, that we don't start all over again by dislodging that wire from the epoxy. Always letting it harden ensures we've got the right amount of time to let it sit. And that's what we're going to do. And that's what we're going to do. And that's what we're going to do. We've got the best possible potential for success. However, when we're dealing with really light material or when we're dealing with a situation that doesn't require that amount of force, there is flexibility inside of that system. You be the judge based on the creation that you're trying to bring to fruition. Anyways, I hope that this helps you understand how to utilize epoxy to create a wire anchor inside of a stone, minimally visible, maximum functionality, giving you opportunity to be able to bring your work to fruition. With our euro profile image, you're going to see two of exact results in one of the following slides first. bushes And then you're going to see two green and yellow lines continuously merging into that cut out bolster which is the Duct And then we're going to As I feel giving you a little bit more amount of time to learn how to cut som, you could easily cut coyote If you want to know more about the answer, just give me a moley If Hang Out Of This Also knot up talk about 
