what's up everybody super Tuesday welcome super exciting stream tonight the culmination of a whole lot of really really really hard work and a tremendous effort by by everybody that is that is on the Mirai team and and then a lot of other people that have contributed just their the brilliance and their artistry and design and knowledge and advice and and you know a major milestone for for you and us as a community seeing the the launch of the new Bonsai Mirai website that you guys finally get to see kind of this vision that we've had in its totality and the way that the live stream connects to the information that provides us the inspiration to create trees that that connect right and I think this is the big piece of the puzzle of of being able to make bonsai an art form that has the ability to translate and send um you know a community of people that don't know that they love bonsai or don't know that bonsai is valuable or don't know that bonsai has a significant purpose uh in their life to help them reconnect to the environments and the places and the cultures that create them and and bonsai is such a beautiful mirror reflection of that uh and so we're going to celebrate that tonight we're going to celebrate our efforts together uh Kendall on the on the chat tonight hello we got uh Mr. Arthur producing the stream as always hello everyone we got the silent but deadly lime on the audio and uh and we got Ricardo on the detail cam and we also have a very special guest tonight we've got uh Brian Swarthout in studio who is uh who's the designer that brought you guys Mirai live he's also the designer that brought you bonsai mirai.com um and so uh you know I just want to take a minute to uh to give credit where credit is due this team has put in a tremendous amount of blood sweat and tears to elevate the level of bonsai as an art form from Arthur's images to Ricardo's video clips to the quality of the podcast and the sound that you're hearing from uh from lime Brian's design and then you know a really big uh special thanks to to Kendall for one the written content that you're reading on the blog but number two just the design effort that she put in to bring in bonsai mirai.com to life is really you know I can't uh it makes me a little emotional I can't thank these guys enough for everything they've done to help us further explore bonsai as an art form um so is there anything that we need to cover before we start I I think we can dive on in we should let everybody know this week we're holding off we're not having a live Q A because of the web sale there's just a lot going on yeah and just to remind everybody the web sale begins on Thursday there it is at 12 p.m Pacific Daylight Time that's right 12 p.m Pacific Daylight Time it ends on uh Saturday at midnight okay Saturday so that Saturday at 11 p.m 11 59 p.m okay so from Thursday at noon to Saturday at midnight uh trees pots stands you got it it's all there and then the covered roll covered wagon rolls out next Tuesday a week from today we will stream from BSOP and we will step foot into the covered wagon and Arthur and I will take off across the country you guys need stuff shipped or anything on the web store uh sale that you guys feel is appropriate and you can't live without uh consider the covered wagon if it works um what else is that it I think that's it yeah in terms of announcements all right um so the the nature of this stream the title of this stream is evolutions and I think as a community we've evolved significantly as a a family here we've evolved significantly and and also these trees that continue to be the backbone that unites all of us have continued to evolve quietly and on their own um and uh and and you guys contributed to the creation of all three of these pieces we did it in studio we had your feedback uh we engaged with you guys we got information from you we got inspiration from you uh hopefully you got something back from those sessions because we got a lot out of uh you being a part of this in helping us make this happen we wanted to share the progression of uh some of some of the a few uh select pieces that we've been working on and um we're going to launch you into this first video take a video taking a look at the shell it just that kind of it just kind of continues to evolve over time as we're going to launch you into this first video take a look at this uh it just continues to evolve over time for India�츠 just things that we've been working on over time and um we're going to launch you into this first video take a look at this and um we're going to make sure that we're and we'll catch you on the flip side. Enjoy the fact that you guys have helped us make this happen and you've been a part of this tree's growth as much as any one of us. Hope you like it. Okay, go ahead and rotate it in. There you go. Yep, now push in. Excellent. I want to roll this around real quick to the front or proposed front, right? Okay, here we are. We started this tree three weeks ago. You saw us set the structure on it. Over the past three weeks, we've been chipping away at this kind of massive chunk of work. Obviously, what you see in front of you is far advanced beyond what we started with. But for now, I feel really, really good. I feel really good about where this has finished. This has been a huge amount of work. It will most definitely be a very powerful, prominent tree at Mirai. And I'm super excited to get to share this with you guys. Thanks for tuning in. As always, lots of love from the Mirai family to all of you guys that are helping us build this thing. We'll see you next time. Bye-bye. I don't know. These silly stacked things versus a good, solid, beautiful piece, and then what I'd like to do is take this piece off eventually, which means I've got to bolt each one of these in. There we go. See some dead tips like this just disconnected or damaged during the wiring process. So we come back in, clean that up, take those away. I don't want to fool with it too much right now. Any branches that have gotten damaged? Bumped or are sitting down below or there's branches stacked on top, we kind of restructure that because the tree has given us a lot of growth and a lot of new photosynthetic spaces to keep in mind. So when I'm looking here and I see these bigger, stronger branches, I can move those up into space away from these lower ones. Just keep everything photosynthesizing really efficiently. That's the goal. That's where we come back in and retweak. Okay. So we're talking, let's see, six, seven, actually eight months after the work that we did on this Utah juniper. And this tree, this really old, ancient juniper is responding better than we could have expected. Interestingly enough, after that work, it took it a while to get going in the springtime. I think a lot of that sort of slow start was due to the lighting. I think a lot of that sort of slow start was due to the lighting. I think a lot of that sort of slow start was due to the lighting. I think a lot of that sort of slow start was due to the lighting. We had a lot of live vein work that we had to do, and this tree having a lot of reverse flow of resources, which I've never seen in a juniper before, and was a little bit cumbersome to deal with. But now that it's starting to really pump and it's building up its photosynthetic system, I don't want to come in here and try to overly maintain or hold that original structure or shape. I want to let this tree do what it's going to do. I want stronger areas to get extremely strong because they're going to be contributing to water movement out of the container. They're going to be contributing to sugar. They're going to be contributing to sugar and storage out of the container. production that is going to feed and drive the growth of other branches. Everything about the work and everything about the the aftercare of the work is what allowed this tree to be successful and I think this tree has a tremendously bright future maybe a monumental Utah juniper in the scope of bonsai in the United States and I can't wait for next season for it to put on a lot more foliar mass and for us to be able to go in and really fine-tune this, refine it, get into that second, third phase of working and watch this tree absolutely explode into what it has the potential to become an unbelievable iconic piece of American bonsai history. you you you you you you you you you you you you you So for those of you that haven't seen the Utah juniper part one and part two that was that was like the that was the realization of Mirai Live as we had as I had conceptualized this thing back in late 2010 early 2011 and it was to take big bold work and bring it into this studio and and interact share teach educate and be able to reach a really large audience if you guys haven't seen that stream I would encourage you guys to go back and watch two of those because there's a lot of beauty in how raw that first when we were still figuring this out and didn't know what to do what we were doing is a lot of beauty in how raw that was and over the course of this year that we've been working on refining the system that Utah juniper has continued to kind of gain health and recover from that really you know what could be considered a rough start but also very monumental both in that piece in the way that Mirai Live got started and so that that's a tree that's near and dear to all of our hearts and and and a very inspirational piece in the garden as well now what we want to do tonight before we get to the tree work we're going to go through a few of these videos and evolutions we want you guys to understand how the new website links with Mirai Live so if you look below the screen that you're watching on the Mirai Live you'll see a lot of related content that's always been there as you guys are streaming but it's always been product and whatnot now you'll see the podcast the initial podcast asymmetry you'll see a post on the beach forest you'll see a post on the regional study of the Rocky Mountains and you'll see a post on the limber pine tree evolution and anytime that we stream moving forward there will be content there for you guys to be able to digest draw inspiration from learn more about whether it's region species evolution etc and this is how this whole thing comes together to be able to understand the system that is influencing our work as bonsai practitioners Kendall you have anything about that I mean the Utah juniper is just so special special that was one of the first beta strains we had so it's just really amazing to see it growing yeah I love revisiting these trees yeah yeah Arthur is gonna stay silent tonight okay so the Utah juniper super pivotal and also a species that hasn't been utilized a lot and so we're gonna be learning from that tree on this stream the developing the techniques and the aesthetic that we approach Utah with I want to take you guys into an evolution of another tree that was realized on Mirai live and is a lot closer kind of to where you know my heart lies in exists a tree that originates from the Rockies and I really encourage you to read read that that regional study on the Rockies that Kendall wrote is beautifully written incredibly factual and full of information and and really rich with images that I think will help paint a broader picture of this very special backbone of North America that we all whether we think it or know it or not are influenced by weather wise or culture wise or plant material wise if we're bonsai practitioners enjoy this kind of summary of this ponderosa pine development styling and evolution and what we're doing with it now and this will lead you kind of into some insight as to how these trees become what they become in that finished product sit back and enjoy you know whenever you do a system like this you're going to have a lot of things happening like you're watching a series of events unfold but ultimately what happens is you're watching force and a lot of force in this case it's going to be a whole lot of force on your forehead start to get tired they stop gripping the wire now all of a sudden all of that's been pulled back we're starting to get there as far as I'm concerned for a singular piece of work on a tree of this caliber this was about as successful as I could have expected and I am I am super super pumped to have that flow to have that closed down to have that apex and just that total composition is really really beautiful and really really special you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you you Thank you. Thank you. A number of the buds on this tree have aborted as they were growing. And this is a pretty common thing to have happen on a ponderosa pine when you've got a pine shoot tipmoth laying its larva in the base of this. And although I couldn't find the entry point, and I also couldn't find the larva because they'd be long gone by now, it was a surprise to get in here and see three or four of these. And if I find another one, I'll show you as I'm working through this. But right now, as this growth is elongating, I don't want to be trying to prune or fuss too much with the shape of the tree. The only goal for this work at the moment is to pull a few pieces that have grown outside of the canopy back in and just kind of redirect some of the really strong areas so that for the rest of the season, this tree has a little bit of guidance in terms of where it focuses its energy. So I don't want to be removing fuller mass. I don't want to be doing much at all. And you can see the length of the needles is directly associated with the fact that we've created this structure around the root system to be able to water it at this angle. Because we've taken that box and we've tilted that box up, there's actually a lot more water moving through that root system than ever before. So we're having to water more based on sort of that height, that gravity column, pulling water out of it, giving more water to it, and you're seeing that in what I would consider to be an abundant push of healthy growth. And when we first style a ponderosa, the focus on the needle length is not where our priority exists. The focus for the ponderosa is getting it as strong as it can physically be so that it can move through this work, hopefully back bud, and start to establish some interior growth that's going to help us reduce the needle mass and needle length in the future. You want to go first? You want me to go first? I really appreciate that. So, goal for tonight, focus for tonight. How do we handle longer needled single flush pines in the design process? Because we don't have these really small proportional needles that give the appearance of this big tree. So, if any of you guys... If we've ever had personal experiences together, then you guys would understand the ponderosa as nearest and dearest to my heart. And there was like this massive, massive motivation coming back from studying in Japan and proving that ponderosa could be a really worthy subject for bonsai. Not just for people that had regional loyalty to the species in the Rockies and the Rocky Mountain Bonsai Society in Denver, Colorado, but as a species that iconically does represent a very, I think, indicative spirit and nature to the western United States and the people that live there. And that tree for me is like maybe a once in a lifetime piece of material that Randy and I collected. And it's been really amazing to see that tree's durability and being able to endure that work and continue moving forward. And for all of you that want to maybe go back and revisit that video if you haven't seen it, it's called Pine Innovation. Pine Innovation would be the archive video stream. And I think Kendall's getting a lot of questions like where is the related content? Is that tier three? No. Bonsaimari.com is the mother site for everything that we do now. And it's just taken us almost a year to get that to where it is now and where we wanted it to be. The live stream is now just a piece of the bigger ecosystem that you guys are looking at, which is Bonsaimari.com and the gallery of the trees with their details and all the information and the content that's connected to those trees inside of the gallery. And the blog that holds all of the regional studies and the species studies, which will be continuing to be added to as well as holds the new podcast, Asymmetry. So you guys are in, you're in the ecosystem when you're on Bonsaimari.com. When you go to Mirai Live, all of those little connections are just components that take you to pieces that you guys can engage with and further gain inspiration and knowledge and understanding. And all of that is free to you guys to be able to enjoy, expand your approach to bonsai, expand your awareness of this sort of culture and environment that is really connecting us and influencing us. And get a great look into the inspiration that we all get working here and seeing the trees. This team that's created this are not bonsai practitioners. They're people that are talented in their endeavors and are bringing that to bonsai and to the Bonsai Mirai website and community and sharing those with us. If you knew the credentials of the people that were working on this, I mean they are very, very we're very fortunate to have them contributing to this project and it's elevating everything that we're doing. You know, I'm here making trees, that's what I do, but the added inspiration that I get from this team and from the community, you guys that we've built is it's what's creating this whole thing and it really is very special. So we're gonna finish off the tree evolutions with one more very special piece. We use this piece I would say this piece kind of carried the load of showing people what Mirai Live could do to teach, to help, understand, to be able to interact as we create a composition. The beach forest was something that in 2010 when I saw these captured seedlings at a propagation nursery down in the Willamette Valley while Randy Knight and I were down there scavenging for material, we pulled these pieces out, they were free, the nursery said take them and they always needed to be something. And once Tom Benda sent us that big long green container and I had just come back from the east coast and was driving through sort of the hilly portion of New York where you see this rock and you see these trees and the rock just pokes out in this mossy, really beautiful green environment and it was like this has to, we have to use the beach to create this environment that is so iconic of the eastern United States. Let's take a look at this. You guys haven't necessarily gotten to enjoy this tree in its full splendor which is in leaf and see the work that's been done to refine it. We want to share this with you, share this evolution with you and we hope that you approve beings that were in this together, we hope you approve of the progress of this particular piece. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . The big thing to make this feel really tall and upright though is to keep these canopies fairly narrow. You know, a lot of these big pieces on these portions have these big, long, strong sections of growth and that's not really how a beech would be growing if we wanted to be illustrating that abundant amount of verticality that this composition is really trying to kind of embody. So coming back in and taking some of that size out and getting back to that real, you know, delicate, fragile nature of the species is kind of a big part of this pruning work. See if we can't capture some of that delicacy again. We were starting to feel like we may have been overly aggressive and there was some concern about whether or not... The tree was going to be able to take the kind of work that we had done to it and continue moving forward. Most of those really, really significant pieces of root work, for example, on these front two trees where there was a real minimal amount of root left when we were done to fit them in this space, they were not phased by that work and that was really impressive to see and it also opens up a lot more possibilities of where we could head and how we could treat these trees in the future to potentially pull on those mechanisms for strength. To even do something more significant. So I'm sure there's a threshold somewhere. We didn't find it this time, thankfully, because I really have a lot of affection for this composition. But I'm sure that we'll continue to search for that threshold as we do at Mirai. We're going to end up probably creating two separate elevations in terms of these two different patches of trees. The one on the left with that secondary trunk is going to be a little bit shorter. We'll pull this down a little bit and we're going to probably level off right here. You guys didn't know I could disappear. That's something I haven't shared with you yet. We'll get to that. That's the third year of Mirai Live, right? So if you guys want to come back and see that full archive video, that was Beach Forest Creation is the archive video name. Also an early beta stream. Also very early, Questionable Audio, our master Jedi audio engineer, Lime, is going to be working on improving those now that we've gotten to this point. But yeah, seeing these trees come to life has been magical. And appreciate all the love that we're getting on the comments section. Now it's very hard to talk about where we're at now without coming back to sort of that climactic situation that caused this major transition and movement in this direction. And I think I had ideas that bonsai needed to be made more available and that education needed to be more wide open because of all of the tightly held secrets. And it took a lot of grooming, right? A lot of... I have a whole archive of videos. I have a whole archive of videos. I have a whole archive of videos that I've made, really long, arduous videos that are edited and you guys will never see them ever to be able to... From the first round of Mirai Live? I'm talking about, no, I'm talking about the original Mirai videos that were made and produced. There's a whole... I've never heard about these. That's right. There's a whole string of educational videos that are out there. Not like available. Oh, I was like, where? Arthur actually might hold the key to those in the thumb drives that they exist in. Yeah. A student at Merai in Louisiana, a student at Mirai and myself made a whole bunch of videos. They're terrible. They're terrible. Steve did an amazing job. Steve was great. The camera work was great. All of that. I sucked, right? And so it took a lot of that experience to get to this point and to refine the knowledge to be able to say, hey, listen, I'm willing to say this and feel okay about it. And also, we're gonna keep building and this is such a fluid system to be able to go back and update and upgrade and improve that it worked. That it worked. I felt comfortable with this, but the moment where I really made the shift or started to understand that bonsai is a connection, it's a vehicle to help people understand how culture, nature, and the individual influences our approach and perspective and connection to our environment, and I recognize that, you know, the tree that I make in Europe versus the tree that I make in Japan versus the tree that I make here at Mirai are going to be very different trees because they're influenced by that environment and that culture that I'm existing in, and also my impression of that as the individual, and so you'll see in the blog that we have a filtration system that's based on culture, nature, and the individual, focusing on the people and the places and the cultures that create the inspiration that help us build, and, you know, bonsai being a mirror to us as individuals, it's hard to hide yourself when you create a bonsai. It becomes ultimately transparent, and we defend that, and we are proud of that, and we value that, and we value the relationship that we have with our trees, and I think it's time that we start understanding that more and exploring the components that contribute to who we are and how that's reflected in the work that we create, and that is, you know, driving across the United States in 2012, driving the truck to the national show. I had Zach Scheinman sitting next to me in a camping chair in between the two seats in the Penske, and I had Peter Warren, you know, in the co-pilot chair, and it smelled like gin in a tight environment, and, you know, all of a sudden, you started to recognize, like, this is very much a part of being who we are, and Zach collecting redwoods, I said, man, that species is unique to the United States, and we should do something about that, and that was really the beginning, kind of, of thinking about how all of this intertwines and creates what it is, and to cap off that idea, we just wanted to take you guys on a really special journey of something that is iconically American in spirit and form, and also something that has influenced the world in terms of its presence and its capacity and its strength as a living organism that defies all odds and physical limitation, and Arthur and Ricardo went and walked through the old growth forests of California, and Ricardo has just made magic with this clip, but take a walk through the redwoods with us and experience that place that really started to create this ethos that is driving and propelling a lot of us to continue doing what we're doing. I encourage you to just take a quiet moment and enjoy. . . . . . . . . © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon © transcript Emily Beynon or what this tree is doing and how we take those clues of what that tree is doing or what this, excuse me, this tree is doing and how we start to utilize those. And so this is gonna be an ongoing process this year. I'm gonna be pruning redwoods every few weeks and I wanna see how they respond and how well they respond. And when that moment happens where pruning them gives us what we want and when that moment happens where pruning them is too early or too late. And you may be saying, oh, you're gonna start off on that tree? Yes, yes, because I'm confident. I'm confident that I've seen something about this that's informing my decision. I'm trying to base this knowledge on what the tree is telling me, okay? So if you don't roll the dice and you don't take those risks to challenge your thought process and you go take a crappy tree and hack it up, that tree might behave differently than this highly refined tree. And this is about evolving our technique, okay? So one thing that I wanna draw your attention to if we can come in close here with Ricardo, I wanna show you guys what's happening at the tips of these redwoods. If you'll notice, all of these buds are just starting to set themselves up, okay? Now, this is a process that's beginning right now and we talked about this in the redwood stream. If you haven't seen it, as redwoods enter the fall and particular the early winter portion of the year, they start to become more active because as a Mediterranean species are on the northern region of a Mediterranean species, they largely are dormant during the summertime due to a lack of moisture, lack of summer rainfall. It's a commonality. In California or the Mediterranean regions is a lack of summer moisture. So they just start getting moisture in the fall when the fall rains start and into the winter. This is when they start setting their tissue up for development. And we can see this in a multitude of ways. For example, if you guys look at the base here, you can see that it's just starting to produce advantageous growth from the base and from the trunk of the tree, which is a common, very common characteristic of redwoods. Now, we'll clean this off. We don't necessarily want to allow this to grow, but this, this piece, this is an indicator of when a redwood is doing things that we may be able to harness and take advantage of, okay? And I've got one more piece that I wanted to show you that I was observing just as that redwood video was winding down. And this is the formation of a very small dormant buds in the axles or that joining component of the foliage mass where it touches that vascular tissue. And we're starting to see these buds swell and come to life where we already have that tissue present. Now we know if we wait a little bit longer, we can kind of prune indiscriminately and we have a higher likelihood that we'll get a bud at that location of pruning. This tree is almost beyond that point. And I want to show you guys tonight how to handle your redwoods and prune a refined redwood to continue to move it forward and maintain its shape. And so I'm going to start at the bottom here and I'm going to work my way up. We'll get through a few branches is all, but it's the technique, it's the concept, and it's reading the tree. That I want you guys to take home. This is your evolution as bonsai practitioners, learning how to speak bonsai, learning how to read the tree as it's starting to perform. And we're seeing these indications in the redwood. These are saying, hey, I'm kind of ready. Like, let's give it a shot, okay? All right, so first and foremost, one of the things we need to understand about redwoods is they're always looking to take advantage of the most advantageous situation. What that means is we may have older, more developed pieces of redwoods, and we may have older, more developed pieces of redwoods, and we may have older, more developed pieces of redwoods, of growth on this tree, but when one of these young guns takes off and starts evolving and developing, a lot of times what happens is they take all the strength. So you can see the strength that's in this upper growing portion. You can see how much weaker this bottom growing portion is. Now you guys may be saying, well then why don't you save the stronger portion, right? But when we start to look at the quality of branching, notice how long from scissor tip to scissor tip, notice how long that inner node is. Okay, and I'm going to let you guys just take a look at that for a moment. I'm going to lift this up, and I'm going to come back to my original inner node, and notice that it's virtually half the size to get to this first piece of ramification, and within the same length, I've got two pieces of ramification. That equals a more compact bonsai. So I'm going to come in here, and I'm going to be removing that upper piece of growth that's taking that strength away, and then I'm going to come back to this smaller piece here, and I'm going to eliminate that very elongated tip so that I start to get that reduction in the foliage mass. Now, here's the beautiful thing about redwoods. I don't necessarily need to stop there. I do have two pieces here. Neither one of them has a very strong, well-formed terminal bud, nor do these. You can see this one is just, you can see it's just starting to swell there at the tip. I have a lot of confidence that if we choose to reduce this further to allow light to penetrate to these lower branches, that we're going to be generating a lot of buds and advantageous tissue inside of this, so I'm going to go ahead, and I'm going to take this all the way back to here to pull back that length and give light and the opportunity for these pieces below it to be able to experience the fruits of their position in the tree and photosynthesize accordingly, okay? So here again, I have two finer pieces of ramification here. I've got this very long, vigorous piece that's taken a lot of strength. I'm going to go ahead and take that out, and the goal is to pull these top branches back so that we maintain our hierarchy of branches that create the silhouette here, and then branches that come in and create the body and give us that density, and this is how we need to treat redwoods as a species to be able to utilize them as a bonsai because they are so vigorous that we can lose the shape in a very, very short order of time, okay? So as I move through this, any of these big, strong pieces, notice how strong this tip is. We have these smaller pieces of ramification below them. I'm going to pull some of these back to be able to regain some of that density. Notice that compactness that we had at once achieved and maybe have lost. Now, notice here what's happening. We've got this actual shoot that started to form at an intermediate point in the elongation of this. I'm going to go ahead and prune that back because that's ramification, right? Now, I'm not super concerned at this point in time of coming back to two in this location, and you'll notice that I've got one, two, three, four, and even a weaker five, and I'm going to take that weaker five out. Fifth branch here. Now we're down to four. I will come down to two when I know what the fruits of this pruning process is, and that's probably going to be as the new growth hardens off next spring, which would be the second time that would be advantageous to be pruning a redwood, okay? So I'm building in mechanisms for myself to be able to continue to manage this system, all right? Now, just coming back to this again, though, I've got, again, this very strong, long piece. I've got this strong, long piece. I'm going to take this guy out. I'm going to take this guy out. And then this would be an opportunity, if we're coming back in with wire, to be wiring these two pieces, and I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to do that now just so that we can dial as we work, and you guys can see kind of how the management process of reworking, or not reworking, but managing growth and addressing the tree as a redwood in terms of its evolution needs to be handled to be managed as a bonsai. Such an interesting, interesting species. There's basically nothing here to bring into this. And so, what we can do is just lay these down on top of this tree trunk, and we can kind of just lay these down down at the center of the tree trunk, and we can just kind of do that. Okay, and I'm just going to lay these down not necessarily perfectly flat because we can see that the rest of the branches on this tree are starting to take that beautiful, nuanced curve towards the light, so we can give that to them. Now, I want you guys to watch how I do this. So I always end the last turn my wire across the bottom, right? And a lot of people have said, why across the bottom? And notice how clean that is. Notice how flat that is. I create a little pad and I even leave a little bit of a tail there because I don't want to dislodge this branch from that wire. Now, when I do this, and I'm going to rotate this so Ricardo can get a nice clean shot. When I do this, this is all about the way that your hand works and the way that your dexterity and your fingers exist. I'm going to push down on the top of this wire as I push up and roll forward on the bottom of this wire. And that creates this beautiful soft curve towards the tip of the branch. Now, this is very characteristic for pines in terms of taking those needles and bringing all of those up. And when you guys see the web store sale launch on Thursday, you're going to see a lot of ponderosa pine that are really well executed from that perspective. Those needles are super perky and beautifully placed. This is how we create wonderful pine nuanced work. But inside of that, when we start looking at other species like a redwood, the age on a branch and that patina is created and gives us that curvature upwards. And so we never want to go back to this, to that flat, really underdeveloped raw original styling. And I think in bonsai across the Western world, whether it's Europe, whether it's Australia, whether it's South Africa, whether it's Canada, whether it's United States, we tend to take two steps forward and then two steps back because we'll get that tree to a point where those tips are growing up and we don't know how to handle that growth or how to manage it or how to prune it or how to wire it. And we'll lay it all back down and take it back to that first styling. And we've got to evolve beyond that. Okay. And so that's a big part of what we're continuing to try and evolve and work towards here with what we're doing. Okay. So I noticed that if this, and from my front, when you guys are looking here at the tree and this foot, this foot is your front. Okay. So when you guys are looking here from that front, you notice that that starts to this front just interferes with this portion of the tree. Now I'm going to pull this back and I'm going to show you why that's important. Okay. When I pull this back and notice how we have a very straight line right here in this portion of the trunk, we have a few pieces of deadwood, but ultimately that line is very vertical and linear. Okay. Now, when I hide that, your eye is automatically drawn to the movement of the deadwood here. And then that other portion of the base, which has that rounded shape and gives us a lot of brilliant movement moving up out of that base. This is important. This is how we use foliage to somewhat cut or disguise to a degree the pieces of the trunk that may not be as attractive. And this is also how we push the attention towards the areas that we want to frame. Okay. Kendall, we got any questions? Are we doing okay? We're doing good. Yeah? Sweet. Okay. So I'm going to come in here and I'm going to continue to try and compact as much as I can because redwoods, the goal with redwoods, once we start to get ramification is to keep it tight. If we let it run, for example, now I've got this big, long piece out here. Now, as long as I don't want that length and I may want that length. No, I do want that length. We're going to keep this out here. This is generating flow. But once we start to get pieces that are more highly ramified that are still filling in the trunk, we're going to be cutting back to really highly ramified, improved interior pieces. Okay. Now, if you guys pinch and you pinch and you pinch and you pinch, this is the situation that's going to become very common for you guys. Right. And this is a very tight, compact situation here where we have a lot of branching. And we've got to come in here and we've got to make some decisions. So we see that we've got a lot of height here. We're going to come in. We're going to reduce the length. We're going to reduce that height back down to some smaller, smaller pieces down below. And then we're going to come back into this and we're going to start reducing the longer pieces back to more interior tight, compact sections of the growth. Are you using wire right now? So I wired a little piece while you were. What size was that? It was 18. Okay. 18. Yeah. It's fairly minimal. It's innocent. It's an innocent little wire. It's nothing serious. Nothing too, nothing too dramatic. If you guys have questions, let them rip. Otherwise, I'm going to sit here and I'm going to get this branch dialed so that I can show you exactly what the goal is in terms of creating this more refinable piece of growth for a Redwood. Kendall, how do you feel about the website being launched? I feel relieved and terrified and tired. That's complex. But excited. Yeah. Yeah. It's just amazing to see something come to life that we've all had knowledge of. And just to see all the pieces fall into place that we've been able to, like, we all know it and we've been talking about it so long and kind of hinting at it, but just for everybody else to sort of experience the connection points that we've all been discussing in real life is really cool. I'm just excited to see it grow. You're excited to share then? Yeah. Yeah. So, you know, Kendall's kind of the voice behind Mirai and you guys get to hear from her a lot. But I was really excited for you guys to get to, just like I was excited for you to get to see kind of Ricardo literally unfiltered, right? And see what Ricardo's capable of, which is still, you haven't even scratched the surface. Just wait, there's more. You know, and you're seeing the product of Lime and all of his efforts with the audio and it's getting better and better. Kindle, her job isn't actually managing the chat, right? That was like an afterthought. Her job is to be writing some of the freshest, most on point, beautifully conveyed content that anybody's ever produced about Bonsai. And all of us here know what her capacity is as a writer. And I think becoming, you know, a really, really savvy, creative in general. But now you guys get to see it in its full glory so that's really cool because you've seen Arthur's photography you've seen Ricardo's videography you've heard Lime's audio engineering you've experienced Brian Swarthout's design and now you finally get to kind of read all of the the words sort of behind the voice that that Kendall's putting into place so for me uh that that's a pretty monumental aspect of the of the the new website we've had some requests from the people in the chat to get the whole team on camera ah and and I think we've decided as a team that Halloween will be the stream that we all get on camera so stay tuned no tonight they said no they said they wouldn't do it I asked I asked for you guys but Halloween we will all get on camera I asked for you guys I just said it Lime's like no there you go Lime you don't have a choice it's not an option we got some questions from people what do you got redwood questions what do you got Luke's wondering if additional fertilizer will be added this year to this tree you know um so in order to get a redwood to grow this sort of in control and I and and you know you may be looking at it and saying if that's in control what way what uh for a redwood this is extremely in control and docile compared to what they're capable of and in order to cultivate a redwood this you know quote unquote in control it means that we are very conservative not not um entirely um abstaining from fertilizing but we're definitely very consciously and strategically fertilizing when it's appropriate and that means not building up a ton of resources in the fall so that it has a ton of energy next spring so there's a real sweet spot with redwoods you get past that vigorous spring growth you get into the slower more refinable growth of the summer and then you you enter that fall season and you start to to pull back a little bit or give them a light dose at the beginning and then taper off so that they can't accumulate a ton of energy. Now, one of the things we've been talking about a lot at Mariah in general is the fact that foliar mass is a gas pedal, right? Just like fertilizer quantity and fertilizer timing. If you guys watch the BSOP streams on sort of the seasonally specific work and the fundamentals of physiology and whatnot, we don't often talk about foliar mass as a gas pedal. We think we fertilize, we fertilize, we fertilize, and that's it, right? And I think and hope what you guys are getting from Mariah Live is that the foliar mass is maybe the most important, right? Once we get that balance of water and oxygen in the roots to support the foliage mass, the foliage mass is actually the most important component because it's what's creating the food that feeds the tree. We tend to think about fertilizer as a food. Fertilizer is a supplemental resource. It's like a vitamin. It's like a multivitamin for us. It improves our performance, right? But it doesn't necessarily sustain us and it's not necessarily what we need in our entirety. We need to have nutrients. Nutrition, not just vitamins, right? We need to have actual food. Sugars and starches created by the foliar mass is the food for the tree. And so if we manage that appropriately and we don't encourage too much of it and we don't build it up too strong in a redwood, we have a lot more of a capacity to refine this tree by allowing it to have a little bit of its energy diluted and minimized by the way that we handle that foliage mass. Andy would love some clarification as to whether this is a good idea or not. I think it's a good idea. I think it's a good idea. I think it's a good idea. This is a coastal redwood. This is a coastal redwood. And then if we could talk about the difference between a coastal redwood and a dawn redwood. Yeah. Yeah. That's a good question, Andy. I'm glad you asked that. So this is Sequoia sempervirens. This is a coastal redwood, non-deciduous, always evergreen, which is a very major difference for sure. Okay. And then as far as differences, everything is different about a coastal redwood and a dawn redwood. Dawn redwoods are a deciduous conifer. Dawn redwoods grow in a mountain. region in China. Dawn redwoods have a very specific time of year that they're pruned as well, which would be right around the same time that we decandle our black pine in the late spring, early summer when they're in that energy positive state. And we only can get two flushes of ramification on a dawn redwood per year, whereas on a coastal redwood, we can get multiple flushes based on pinching and pruning if we do it at the correct times of the year. Okay. So there's a lot of different theories behind that. Now, I just want you guys to take a look at this branch now that we've pruned it and we've properly managed the foliage mass. It does, they do, they do get very, very tight, very, very compact, very, very ramified, and we can create a tremendous amount of definition. Now, at this time of year, and Ricardo, if you can come in tight here, at this time of year, where we have these longer pieces that are kind of growing outside of the silhouette and maybe looking a little bit different, we can get a lot of different theories behind that. We don't have the ability to come back here and prune and get a bud where we want. I'm not seeing any indications of that budding having started. And so I need to read the tree and recognize that I've got buds delineating themselves along this branch. You can see there's a fresh bud here that I cut back to. There are several buds on the inside here that are making themselves known. And even if we hop over here, we can see these buds forming in the crotches and axis of the tree. And so I need to read the tree and recognize that I've got buds delineating themselves along this branch. You can see there's a fresh bud here that's making themselves known. can prune back to right now. If we want to come back in and we want to be pruning somewhere in this stem right here and hoping for a bud at that location, we still have another maybe four, six, maybe even eight weeks to do that. And what would tell us that it's time to do that is robust, vigorous presence of growth coming from the tips and more prolific budding occurring on the tree itself. And that's saying, Hey, I'm ready to produce adventitious tissue. I'm doing all of the things in terms of foliar or vascular expansion that allow me to accomplish that. Go ahead and prune. I'll make, I'll take care of it. I'll make it, I'll make it right. Okay. So we're looking at that mid to late November, possibly into early and through the middle portion of December. We did that pruning on the redwood last year, I believe in that happened in February. Was that February is when Arthur and I were just prior to going to Spain, January or February, January or February. And I have to admit it was lukewarm in terms of the product. It was a little bit too late. So we want to, we want to pull back a little bit and we have that similar experience. Okay. So I'm going to continue to prune this as we kind of work through this and just continue to try and compact and manage and get definition back into this tree. So again, I've got a lot of work to do. I've got a lot of work to do. I've got a lot of work to do. I've got this big rambunctious strong tip. I've got a finer interior piece here. I've actually got two areas that I could prune back to. If I prune back to here, I could lose this interior section that will give me value. So I'm going to start here. Okay. Notice how nice and tight and compact those are. I love that. Now I've got this vertically growing piece here. I'm going to take that vertical off because that vertical one, it's going to be interfering with the branch above it. Two, it's going to continue to get strong and suck energy from these really nice tight pieces of ramification that I have behind this. And then I've got buds opening up behind this. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to shorten that back to there and just continue to further compact and refine. And you guys will see these dead needles on the interior here. Now is the perfect time to come in and take these away. And if you ever wonder, when is my redwood going to show lignified branching that looks beautiful and has some sort of visible line as opposed to this frond-like distribution? Now, reaching this level of maturity, notice that we're taking off all of the needles that are originating from that, creating that beautiful line and delineating our ramification outside of those fronds. We just clean those off once we get to this level of ramification and we start to see those pieces degrading and you get these beautiful established branches. This is what you've been working for for the past two or three years, to get it to this point where you get to clean all of those off and really create a beautiful branch. Okay. Danny and Raphael are wondering if you deal with, wire bite significantly on redwoods? And then also if you would remove wire that's significantly biting in right now? Ah, so I do deal with wire biting in on redwoods if we get them really ramped up and allow them to grow. And, you know, for redwoods, which are very phototropic, right? Again, these verticals will take off going straight up because this tree really wants to be like the tree you see in the films. And it looks at this container like, dude, you don't stand a chance. If I get one single branch, I'm going to get rid of it. I'm going to get rid of it. I'm going to get rid of it. I'm going to get rid of it. I'm going to get rid of it. I'm going to get rid of it. I'm going to get rid of it. I'm going to go find root into actual ground, actual soil. I'm going to blow this up, right? And we know they can take over the containerized environment. And so when they do start to have wire bite in, you know, like a lot of our other species, I will allow redwood to bite a little bit so that we can start to get, okay, and I'm just going to point this out real quick. Notice how long and kind of coarse these two are. And we get out to the tip before we get ramification. I've got this smaller guy here that's got tighter ramification. And beautiful buds. I'm going to take out that big, long, strong one that has really poor ramification in comparison to, okay? So if we get wire biting in right now, okay time to be unwiring. You'd be even a little bit better off waiting a little bit longer because they do tend to hiccup a little bit in the fall. And the question is, where is that range? It tends to be an early fall coming out of summer where they're not yet active. Once the rains start, temperatures cool, redwoods start producing that advantageous growth. We can be unwiring and rewiring and not necessarily worry about dieback or a poor response, okay? Here's one of those verticals again. Okay, so we've got this big, massive branch growing up. We've got these really beautiful, fine pieces at the base. We take off that vertical growing piece. We've got all of these fine pieces. Now notice this one too is saying, hey, how about me? Yeah, how about you? You're gone, right? And all of a sudden, we start to get these more tight, compact pieces. And even in these elongating pieces, notice this bud at the tip here. I'm going to come back in and I'm going to take that back to that bud. And that bud is what's going to give me that next round of ramification. So when this grows and we get that elongating soft tip, we'll just pinch that and stop it after a few fronds form. And that will begin the process of forming ramification, okay? Again, I've got this big, strong, long piece. I've got these finer guys at the base. I'm going to take that out. I've got this big, long, strong piece. I've got these finer guys at the base. I'm going to take that out. I'm going to clean off these older needles here. Clean off anything coming off the bottom. And you guys are seeing how this branch is just turning into a much more mature representation of a beautiful branch that we would prize on any bonsai, right? And for the longest time, it was said that redwoods, you couldn't refine them, you couldn't refine them, you couldn't refine them. And I just said, I don't buy that. I don't buy that at all, right? It's an elongating species, which means it pushes its energy into singular, massive flushes, extending flushes of growth. There are ways to manage any elongating species. What is the secret to redwood? And it turns out the secret to redwood is timing. It's timing. And the fact that a lot of our knowledge is derived from Japanese bonsai, which is a temperate, very, very temperate climate, right? We don't have Mediterranean varieties being cultivated in Japan because they don't have a Mediterranean region that they're cultivating or that they're cultivating in Japan. So, we don't have a Mediterranean region that they're that those trees are naturally occurring in. We have to make adaptations to that. So, when you look at Australia, the southern tip of Australia, the southern tip of South Africa, you look at the Mediterranean basin, Spain, Italy, France, Greece, those areas there. You look at, I believe it's the central coast of Chile. And then you look at the central, you know, Los Angeles, southern central coast, up to the Bay Area, even slightly past to the base of the redwoods. These are the five Mediterranean regions of the world, and they hold the most of the redwoods. And so, we have to more plant material in that landmass than all of the other regions combined, right? Three percent of the world is Mediterranean climate, and they hold more plant species than the rest of the world combined. This is amazing. Whoa. Did you know that? No. So, when I was in South Africa, I hiked a... I think you've, I think I've heard this before, but... Hiking Table Mountain? Yeah. Yeah, Table Mountain has more species in, I mean, it's some ridiculously small, that Table Mountain occupies in Cape Town. It's a UNESCO World Heritage Site, and for good reason. There are more plant species on Table Mountain, which is like a few square miles, or maybe less than 10 square kilometers. Don't quote me on that, it could be bigger, but it didn't seem that big to me. Than all of the UK. That is England, Scotland, and Ireland combined. All of those countries combined, just on Table Mountain. I guess from my memory, I don't remember it being super lush, but I could be totally wrong. Table Mountain? It's been a few years. Just because there's plant species there, doesn't mean they're lush, because you're in the Mediterranean environment. I see. And the Mediterranean environment is not a... The variety is lush. It's not a jungle, that's right. It's very dry, arid, geared towards low moisture, moisture reduction, moisture loss reduction, etc. I love how Redwood's refined. It gets so... So, so, so, so beautiful. Paul says, my Redwoods have had adventitious growth all year. Why is this? Potentially too much fertilizer, Paul. Potentially not enough time in a bonsai container. One or the other, right? The longer... This tree's been in this container for... I want to say this is the fourth year. And when you look at the size of the trunk in this container, you'd say, boy, you got to repot. It's getting super compact. Yes. And this is how you control a Redwood, right? So, will we repot some of these next year? Yeah, we'll probably try one. And we'll see what it looks like to carry one continuing forward with a really significantly root-bound situation and see what happens. But Redwood are long-lived. Redwood are still a part of the ecosystem that they contribute to for a reason. And that is they are durable and adaptive. And we assume that Redwood are some sort of fragile because they only exist in a very small... in a very small portion of the coastal region of California. Now, Redwood used to occupy all of the Western United States up to the Mississippi River, right? Up to the Mississippi, there were Redwoods. Now, this is long, long ago, right? I don't know the exact dates that that was an occurrence, but they've found those remnants of Redwoods in terms of fossilized fronds and carbon-dated wood and stuff like that, very, very fascinating to look at the Redwoods. And they are super iconic. You know, people come from all over the world to see the Redwoods. It's amazing how many people in the United States have never seen them. I mean, just like in your backyard, you don't go, right? Okay, so now I've got these two really significantly ramified pieces here. I'm going to keep both of them because this branch that I've wired and is starting to get lignified has a very minimal amount of budding compared to these two strong pieces. So I'm going to wire these guys out, and I'm going to use them while I got them. We'll eventually have to decide whether we want to keep one or the other or get rid of this lignified piece, depending on how they develop. Luke's curious if they prune and rewire this fall, is it safe to repot in the following spring? That all hinges on how good at wiring you are because Redwood are sensitive to being wired. And so if we're rough with the Redwood, we could lose a lot of foliage. And that double whammy, even for a species as strong as coastal Redwood, that double whammy, that double whammy of losing a lot of foliage and then having the roots worked on, that I have, you know, and I speak from experience in this, not necessarily at Mirai, but prior to going to Japan when I was in college, you know, somebody said, oh, you can't hardly kill a Redwood. And I was like, oh, really? Watch this. I was in college. I wired it. I pruned it. I, you know, repotted it. And I did, in fact, kill it. It died. It died dead as a stick. And so you've got to be careful, okay? If your wiring technique is on point, not a problem. Not at all a problem. Raphael is curious if this tree was a larger tree that was then cut flush and it massively back-budded. So most of the Redwoods that, you know, and when we talk about collectors and prominent figures in North American bonsai, Zach Scheiman and Bob Scheiman of Mendocino Coast Bonsai have to be, excuse me, I had a little something there. Those guys have to be in that conversation of people that have really brought about a wonderful species for our access. And they've not only done it with Redwoods. They've done it with coastal oaks, Quercus agrifolia. We did the Gold Cup oak. And as a correction, we did a Gold Cup oak stream in the early spring that was collected by the Scheimans. I believe Zach collected that. And, you know, then the Pygmy Cypress, which we will have a Pygmy Cypress spring or stream coming this late, late winter. These are species that Bob and Zach have pioneered together. And it's amazing to see what they've accomplished as a father-son duo and, you know, in their own respective ways as well because they very much do function independently as well as as a collaborative unit. Pretty, pretty amazing two individuals there that have contributed a lot. Okay. And getting through this, we're starting to get some of that refinement dialed in. I'm going to take off from these really long guys and just try to, I want to keep it compact. Notice how the goal is always what branch is giving me the most compact, the most desirable possible aesthetic. Now notice here, this is an interesting little piece here. I've got this big, strong, long shoot. But notice the interior ramification. And then look at what this branch is giving me. Nothing on the interior here. This is a perfect opportunity. And if you guys are in the phase of managing growth, a lot of times we'll leave it because we don't want to rewire it. Well, watch what I'm going to do here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to unwire this. And I'm going to use this same wire to come back and wire this other piece that's grown advantageously in the same vicinity. Okay. I'm going to take off this piece. And notice how low of a quality of a branch that actually is on the interior portion of the tree. You have no interior. You have no interior ramification. There's no buds getting activated there via sunlight. It's on the lowest portion. But yet, we have this wonderful, wonderful strong. And I'll lift the foliage off of the top of this so that you guys can see this piece when we're done. We're going to replace it with a branch that's almost of equal diameter, but advantageously shot out and developed an intense amount of interior ramification to be taking the place of that piece. And this is the process of redwoods. Right? Right? They're so strong because even if we pinch them accurately, at some point, we're going to miss something. And it's going to become super long and strong. We've got to come back. And we've always got to be looking to replace. Okay? So now notice how much more ramification, if we compare the two, and I set this one next to it, now look at the quality that we've just exchanged for. Really, really dramatic shift in quality. Okay? And so now when you guys are looking, and I know Ricardo's got you guys dialed in, now when you're looking at this, although it still looks, it's never going to look as refined as a juniper branch unless you wired every single one of these. But for a tree of this size to do that, it's such a short lasting thing. We're going to be controlling that density and that shape and having a little bit of a looser aesthetic to really allow a redwood to be a redwood and still be a bonsai. Right? We're going to come back in, we're going to pinch and control the strength. We're going to push it back into the interior. We're going to stop that elongation. We're going to increase that ramification. And these are just going to get denser and denser and denser and finer and finer and finer. And the foliage is going to get smaller and smaller. And this is that evolution that we talk about. Right? So you guys getting to see that raw redwood style in the late winter, early spring. I think it was in February or March when we were in Spain. And now coming back and seeing a redwood that's far more developed. And understanding how to handle this. This is the diversity of technique and that constant flux and shift of knowledge that we've got to be applying to the nuanced work that we're engaging in. What time we got, guys? It's about 20 after 7. 20 after 7? Cool. David's wondering if one could grow redwood in a redwood form. So I'm thinking that means very tall. Absolutely. That's our favorite form. There's a couple here that I know. That's our favorite, very, very favorite form. David says it seems like I never see this. Ah, cool. Go on Instagram. And our post for today is probably the most famous redwood. Or Facebook or Twitter. Or Facebook or Twitter. And that's an upright redwood. And interestingly enough, and this is another thing to touch on when we start talking about creating more natural shapes and sort of reflective shapes. We talk about the roots of the environment. When we start to form bonsai, when we create this bonsai form, we talk about asymmetry as being a reflection of age. And we talk about how we're trying to create that asymmetry. But when you look at symmetry, or a young tree as it's first growing up and you've got this perfect sort of triangular shape, this is the most photosynthetically efficient form. For a tree to be growing, lateral branching, growing lateral branching, growing lateral branching, that triangular shape is the most photosynthetically efficient form. That a plant can achieve. And so when we start to style trees as asymmetrical bonsai, if we just leave them to their own devices, because we're giving them water and resources, they're literally reborn. This tree may have been this, oh and that's where that came from. This tree may have been a piece of logging slash that was run over by a bulldozer when they cut the road in or when they went in and they, they logged the redwoods. And that's what I was going to say. A lot of these redwoods are left over, but they're usually underground. These are usually the underground portions of the redwoods that you're seeing to get this kind of contortion. Okay? Anyways. Lost it. Where was I? What was I talking about? Uprights. Ah! Okay? But if we start to give it all the resources that it needs, no matter how asymmetrical we create it, it will fall back into that photosynthetic, that photosynthetically efficient form. Right? So when you look at that upright redwood that's on our social media channels right now, that tree is slowly kind of falling back into that very symmetrical form because of the fact that we've used branches growing up as multiple apices on that redwood. Right? That's a really strong, strong gesture towards redwoods as a growth habit. And even so, there's another degree, but also the act of bonsai is bringing it back towards symmetry, which is such an interesting characteristic. Plants really do take care of themselves. Smart, smart boogers. Okay, and so this process, now that you guys kind of have a little bit of an idea as I'm pruning, being aware of the process and kind of predicting what branches are going to be pruned, this starts to become your scope of work to be able to evolve. Some of your techniques and practices, because if you guys are ahead of me in terms of what should be being pruned and what shouldn't be being pruned, you're already a step ahead in terms of being able to do this on your own tree. And, you know, I continue to say this. I'm sure there's some pain in watching pruning happen as a scope of work. And also, one of the things that I see at the pillar of not being able to really tease out the maximum amount of quality and opportunity in styling is a lack of focus on how to prune. How to prune to obtain shape, how to prune to maintain shape, how to allow a tree to grow and regain shape, how to branch select to be able to maximize shape. These are all the ways that I feel like, you know, and I've said this to you guys time and time again, Mr. Kimura, as a bonsai practitioner, we value Mr. Kimura for his ability to bend things. But his ability to bend things, one, is nowhere near as amazing as his ability to prune. And two, all of his ability to bend was set up by his ability to prune. So he established the ability to accomplish that bend via the pruning process. That is the true genius of Mr. Kimura's work, was his pruning, right? And also, if you guys can't wire but you can prune, you can still make a great tree. But if you can wire and you can't prune, you'll never be able to make a great tree. All incentives for you guys to focus more on this, this technique of how we prune, how we look at pruning, how we look at branch growth, when we prune, why we prune, what species we prune then, what indicators are giving us the clue that it's time to prune. These are all the pieces of the puzzle. And pruning for me in my apprenticeship was the last thing that I was taught. But it was the thing that I started watching on day one. It was really interesting the way that he went about that process. Because he knew that the quality of the tree that his apprentices create comes down to pruning. He started us young, but he wouldn't hand over, he wouldn't relinquish that control of the design until you were extremely established as his apprentice. And for me, that was in the fifth year, right? I stayed a sixth year, so I got to prune a lot of trees. I got to prune a lot of kokufu trees and establish design. I got to regain design and do a lot of that stuff. That is a real privilege to be able to have that opportunity. Kim wants to know if you wire brush the bark for showing a redwood. You know, Kim, I don't. Because I think the bark of redwood, that really thick, spongy bark, is a major characteristic that contributes to their value. That bark is fireproof, which is what allows redwoods in the Mediterranean or the northern border of Mediterranean regions to endure the standard seasonal fires that they typically experience there. You're seeing those seasonal fires ravage Sonoma right now. Our thoughts go out to everybody in Sonoma. Really unfortunate what's happening there, right? What's happening there right now. But that is the Mediterranean region. That is the Mediterranean environment working its will at this point in time. It's an amazingly aggressive, beautifully destructive place to exist. And going to school in the Mediterranean region, the Central Coast, was quite the experience. But no, I don't typically brush the bark. I will say that I do find this work, you know, I find this pruning on redwoods, like, I have to be in the right mindset to be able to prune redwoods because it is involved. This is, you know, it's not like you just willy-nilly sit down and say, I'm going to go prune my redwood today. You can take a tree all the way back to the beginning if you prune it in properly. And that's not, like, to freak you guys out. But it is to say, listen, when you work on these trees, if you get trees to this, to kind of this level of refinement, and that's very easy to do because the pinching process alone after the initial design will get you to this point. But you've got to be able to bring order to this kind of chaos and aggression that is this robust, vigorous species that we're using. Then you've got to be able to come back in and continue to dictate the shape. And that takes a lot of focus and concentration that you guys need to kind of gear up for and bring to the table when you, when you put your scissors on a redwood. And you see me just substituting these wires. I get weaker branches. I get dead branches. All part of cultivating redwood, right? They're not necessarily the most wire-happy species. They can, they can suffer. They can suffer to a degree. And also, you know, just based on the fineness and the sensitivity of the growth and their moisture requirements, they have branch dieback. This is a part of redwoods. And so coming in and being able to sub in, sub out, replace, et cetera, reconceptualize the shape of the branch. That's a big part of this work. Chris is wondering what your thoughts are on wintering a coastal redwood in a very cold region, for example, upstate New York, without a greenhouse. You know, Chris, I will, I will tell you this. I have, I have pretty much put redwoods through the wringer because I wanted to know what their tolerance was. And I've overwintered redwoods outside in the Pacific Northwest. And I've had a redwood that has been outside unprotected in two degrees Fahrenheit and never gotten above, never got it, didn't get above 17 degrees for up to, for a week. And that tree survived, didn't lose a single branch. I've also had redwoods that I've left out in 28 degrees and I've lost three quarters of the tree. Okay. So when you are dealing with redwoods, a lot of their cold tolerance hinges on how much foliage do they have, how much soil around their root mass do they have. The more soil, the more tolerant they're going to be because that soil will hold more heat. I doubt that you're going to have a lot of success without a greenhouse in upstate New York, though. I think that's going to be extremely challenging for you. And it's not a matter of if it will die. It's more a matter of when it will die. Yeah, Chris commented that they have a few redwoods, but they seem to be weakening. Yeah, they definitely are compromised by that degree of cold. You guys get real cold up there. And Kim was wondering, do you know anything about borers on these trees? You know, Kim, I haven't experienced borers. Now, redwoods are an interesting species, particularly if you're dealing with a young redwood, then borers, I would imagine, could be an issue. But when you're dealing with older trees, you don't or very rarely see it. And there's a reason for that. So when we talk about redwood, and I don't know if redwood is named for the cinnamon color of the bark or if redwood is named for the color of the heartwood, but the heartwood of redwood is that real rot-resistant deep purpley red tissue. And it's very red for a reason. And that is because they've injected a lot of sap and a lot of vascular content into the core of the tree. And that is a preservative. It's a deposit site. It locks in toxins in the core as a dump site. And it makes that basically non-functional as a vascular piece. So water movement stops in the core of older trees as it gets loaded with sap. But it stops it from rotting, which is why we use that lumber, old-growth redwood, very rot-resistant. And it also becomes very difficult, if not impossible, for insects feeding on plant tissue to be invading that tree and consuming it. And so in the exterior portion, that's fresher wood, right? Or the living tissue, I'm assuming you could see a borer. But there are still components that are contributing in concentration to making that core inedible. And to a large degree, that tissue isn't as favorable. And again, I just want to say, quantifiably, although it's not common, I'm not saying that it's not possible and borers could be a possibility. So again, I'm coming in here. Now this is an interesting situation here because I have a lot of this beautiful ramification. Now I'm going to cut that coarse tip back to these finer guys. But then I've got these upper growing pieces. See these guys? They're growing straight up. It's going to be very difficult, if not impossible, to be able to ever utilize those guys. So I'm going to take those off. And then if I've got, notice that I have this wonderful, beautiful piece of lignified branching here. And I've got this kind of fleshy piece here. I'm going to cut. I'm going to actually, let me check myself before I wreck myself here. These are on different nodes. I'm going to keep this now, actually. There you go. Stay on point, stay on point. Look at this, look at this, look at this, look at this. This is the indicator that I'm talking about. If you guys look in here and you can see, there's a bud right here in the axle. There's a bud right here in the axle. And there's a bud right here in the axle of that leaf. These are the indicators that are saying, hey, good time to be working on a redwood. I'm going to cut back, boom, right there, knowing I have a bud set up for me. And then I'm kind of continuing to work at that branch, those dead needles and exposing that lignified branch line. This is an important component of developing redwood as bonsai. All right, I'm going to do this last lower branch and define this section. That will be one wrap around the tree. We'll do one rotation so that you guys can see the pruning, and then I'm going to turn you guys loose for the night. And as a team, we're just going to kind of, you know, I don't know, maybe high-five and then everybody will go home. But I would like to say celebrate the launch of bonsaimarai.com. We'll see how that goes. Everybody's pretty tired. Pretty tired. Arthur, you got any questions while Kendall's away? Not at the moment. Not at the moment? . . . . . . . . Okay, here again. Come on and bring me in tight here. Okay, I've got this very, very coarse, long inner node here. I've got this finer guy here. But even beyond that, I've got this adventitious bud right here at the tip of my scissors right there. That alone is enough to lead me to do this. But I also have this finer piece here. And this allows me to take that big, long, thick, coarse piece out that had no ramification and start to replace it. Okay, always, always, always, and I can't urge this enough. I continue to come back to this, and I hope it's not boring the living crap out of you guys. But in order to prune a redwood well, you've got to take advantage of every single opportunity to reduce the length of these branches in order to get that compact and maintain that compact shape. And like I said, this tree was diligently pinched. It was diligently maintained this year. And yet still somehow, right, like maybe we were, you know, when we went to sleep at night, or when you were looking or working on or wiring another tree, they all of a sudden elongate, and you're like, ah, dang it, it happened again. I thought I had it managed. I thought I had it dialed, and yet the redwood foiled me again, right? And this is just that vigor that they have. They really possess a tremendous force to be able to grow and push forward with that vascular strength. Cutting back to, again, adventitious bud right there at my finger. Yeah, I got this guy coming off the top. I'm going to go ahead and take off, and then I've got this big, long, strong crotch here. Boom. Just taking all those pieces off. And then, you know, again, I've got this coming over the top here. Now, this seems like we would want it. This really seems like we would want it. I mean, I don't want to cut this off, but look at how long the inner node is. We've got that big of an inner node and that big of an inner node. And this is an interior branch that's being used to build body, not necessarily being. It's being used at the silhouette. We've got to hold this guy back. I've got adventitious buds at the base. I'm going to take that whole piece off and come back to those really fine pieces of ramification. Now, this is interesting, too, because notice I've got these kind of coarse prune pieces right here, and then I've got these finer guys. I'm even going to come back into the finer guys, and I'm going to start over building that so that I can get ahead of the pinching this coming season and really compact that branch. And this is just a process, because when you start, they're just big, long, singular fronds. And you prune at the right time. You wire at the right time. And then you start pinching at the right time. And that pinching is what gives you these buds. And that adventitious growth as you build this foliage mass gives you those buds. And that's a really beautiful part of redwoods, okay? I'm going to rotate and show you guys the front. And I want to look at this branch together, because I think that there's significance in the design. I'm going to bring that foot up towards you guys. I'm going to come around to this side. The length here, when we're looking at this now, because this is more bonsai in form, it's very difficult. You see how much more reduced? That bottom branch is on the bottom left. But that is the length of our branch. That is dictating our movement, right? And so when I look at this side, it's tough, because we have to understand all of these branches are going to be coming back and being more compacted and reduced. You have this big mass of foliage mass. But if you take out all of these big, long pieces, it's going to be rather tight, much like we've accomplished down here. When we look over here, and you've got these pieces that are sticking out, to maintain the integrity of our design, if we're running out that way, we've got to push in this way. And so that concept and that clarity of design, and we talk about this a lot, constantly. I've got to come back in here, and I'm going to go ahead, and I'm going to take this back. And I might even take it back just a bit farther, so that we start to see that commitment to the design and that direction, where we push in here. And again, I've got to do this kind of across the board with these branches in this area and location. . . Cutting back to buds here. And I know I'm not in Ricardo's view, but I want you guys to just kind of watch as this section of the tree gets pushed in and reduced. Buds back in there, got some interior buds in here. I'm just going to shorten that slightly, got some interior buds there, I got some interior buds here. Okay, and then I've got this piece sticking up, I'm going to go ahead, I'm going to take that out of the crotch. Those are valuable, I'm going to clean out this older needles. Okay, I'm going to take this back in to tighter stuff, and I've got buds on the interior there. This then becomes a question, doesn't it, and that one's got to come off, it's just too far out there. I've got buds at the base to replace that. Troy Cardoza wired this tree the last time, and he did a tremendous job, his wire is still holding strong. You know that there's good wire on the tree when you come back to rework the tree, and it still is manageable. It still holds its position, et cetera, particularly for a very vigorous redwood. The biggest problem people have a lot of times is they underwire a redwood. They wire it for the thickness that it is, and within a few weeks or maybe, you know, at best a few months, it holds that shape, and then it gets strong, and it rockets off, and you're now lost again and looking to rewire. That's the biggest problem. What's your most common question? Linda says, are redwoods in Tampa Bay, area of Florida? Is that true? Linda, I have seen redwoods successfully cultivated in Tampa. I don't know how friendly that is, right? My . Who's the first? Arthur on the cell. Arthur on the cell. I got business. Oh, was it? I was going to say, I got business going right now. Just hold up. My first teacher, or not my first teacher, Harold Sasaki is my first teacher, and I definitely don't want to short Harold on that love. Ted Madsen, my teacher, one of my teachers and very dear friends in college, used to tell me, I refuse to let bonsai drive the bus, which means to him at that moment in that conversation was, I refuse to choose species that are not capable of being cultivated in a manner that is sustainable in my area. I think if you try to cultivate redwoods in Tampa, Florida, you're probably going to be letting redwoods drive the bus because you're going to have to compensate for them. And this is, you know, there's a few people that are cultivating redwoods in Phoenix, Arizona, right? But they have misters set up on the thing, and it's this big ordeal with shade cloth and structures and all that. And that's cool. That's cool. That dedication is cool. I really appreciate that. But it is a labor of love when you start taking trees out of their native, you know, kind of habitat and regions where they thrive and trying to grow them. So just beware, Linda. And then Raphael's curious about if you have trouble with percolation because the soil line seems so high. You know, this is an interesting thing. With, you know, the practice of watering, Raphael, because, yeah, technically this tree violates every single thing that we establish in watering. And loss of percolation would be something that is very common. But we can get away with this soil situation based on one very important concept that we're aware of. And that very important concept is as long as you don't allow this tree to dry out, as long as you don't allow the soil to dry out, you're going to have soil to become hydrophobic or you allow the soil to shrink and the pore size that takes in water to reduce so that it actually physically repels water as opposed to taking it in. This will stay hydrated, but we water it every time we water. Every time. Every single time that we water. We water every other tree in the garden once on a really hot day or when they're vigorously growing in the spring, maybe twice morning. We skip the lunch time and then we might hit them again in the afternoon. This is redwood. Every time. Every time. Every time. It's raining out. If there's a few things that are dry, sun pokes out. We're watering it at this point in time. This is the level that we're going to to see how much can we reduce and control the growth of redwood with a containerized environment. This is the spirit of bonsai. I don't necessarily recommend it. You'll have an easier time if you live in an area where they need a lot of water, heat, etc. But this is kind of where we're pursuing and pushing that and violating some of our own principles. Okay. Take a look. Wow. Not bad, huh? Cleaned up a lot. Not bad, huh? It gets compact. It gets really defined. Now, bear in mind, this area is not quite finished, right? We sort of started on it and then it was like, oh, man, in order to be able to see this, we need to kind of take one loop around. So I'm just going to rotate this really quick. We see over there. We see here. And you guys see these places and pieces. Let me just fix that. I can't have that overlapping. I can't have that overlapping. That won't work. Okay. We've got this area here nice and dialed. And you can start to see the spaces forming in that growth. We're getting back to tighter and tighter, more highly ramified, back to better quality branches, taking out those leggy ones, exposing that woody structure. This is the evolution of a redwood as a really high-level bonsai, world-class piece of material. This is how we can handle them and continue to evolve them as a specimen for bonsai. And, you know, this tree, for me, again, driving across the United States in 2012, North America is a special place for me. I'm not going to lie. I'm not going to lie. I'm not going to lie. I'm not going to lie. I'm not going to lie. I'm not going to lie. I'm not going to lie. I'm not going to lie. I'm not going to lie. I'm not going to lie. I'm not going to lie. I'm not going to lie. I'm not going to lie. It's a special place. It's all I could think. What is an iconically American species? The redwood. But if you live in Florida, it may be a buttonwood. It may be a bald cypress. If you live in the, you know, northeastern United States, it may be beech. It may be hornbeam. It may be, you know, elm. It may be hemlock. If you live in the Great Lakes, it may be, you know, eastern white cedar. It may be jack pine. It may be tamarisk. You know, if you live in the Rockies, it could be a scopulorum, a Rocky Mountain juniper, a ponderosa pine, or a limber pine, or a bristlecone pine. Every single place in this country has iconic trees. If you live in Europe, it might be a sylvestris. It might be a mugo. It might be a sabina. It might be a baccata. Right? If you live in South Africa, it might be a... That might be pulling a little bit. It might be an olive. It might be a baobab. It might be, you know, something else. If you live in Australia, it might be a eucalyptus. It might be a leptospermum. It might be... I mean, every single place has these very special things, right? There is a unifying characteristic of bonsai, and that is it connects you. It connects you to the environment. It connects you to your culture. It connects you to yourself, right? I think I'm done. Looks really good. We're going to continue to add to bonsaimariah.com. We're not going to stop. Doing what we're doing on Mirai Live, it only gets better from here, you guys. Thank you so very much for being a part of it. Thank you for helping us be better at what we do. Thank you for helping us to connect and further be inspired. And we look very much forward to the Mirai, to the future. That's yet to be realized, the unobtainable and the ever out of reach. We will continue to work hard for you guys, and we look forward to growing together and evolving. Have a good night. Have a good week. We'll see you next Tuesday. We'll see you next Tuesday. Have a good week. Have a good week. Have a good week. Have a good week. Have a good week. 
