Fertilization and supplemental nutrition inside the container has become a much bigger conversation as of late at Mirai. And via the podcast Asymmetry, we've been diving in deep with soil biologist Ian Hunter and exploring a lot of ways that we might potentially increase and enhance the tree's strength and immunity via the methodology we use to apply supplemental resources and biological material to the containerized environment. Now obviously this experiment is ongoing, but we were lucky enough to have Ian, Keisha, and Casey all up at the garden at Mirai to work on our very first creation of an extract from a really beautiful compost that was created by Keisha and Casey down in Nevada City, California. This creation of an extract, although unproven for us in bonsai culture, is something that we committed to showing you guys and sharing with you as we explore this process of the application of different supplemental nutritions to the containerized environment. This is our first experiment. We have no idea if it's actually going to work, but why don't you join us on the journey as we make that first extract and apply it to the garden at Mirai. So when we create an extract, we've got different steps that we've got to take to really maximize the impact of the extract. And step one is to start with a fairly coarse mesh bag and fill it with that quality compost that we've sourced to be able to be that epicenter of nutrition and biological life. From that bag, we're going to seal both ends and we're going to submerge that bag in the water that's going to become the actual applicable liquid element for the containerized environment. to our trees. We're going to massage that bag over the course of five minutes while we're adding oxygen or in smaller batches. Just simply the agitation of the water should suffice to tease out all of the ingredients and all of the living beings from that compost into the water. So we inoculate that extract. Step number two is to add a little bit of oxygen to the bag. Step number two is to add a little bit of oxygen to the bag. We're agitating the water and keeping it in an oxygen rich system so that those living organisms can survive over the course of application. Now if we're applying a small batch of extract, a five gallon bucket and just the agitation that we create in the massaging process is enough to keep the biological living organisms alive until they're applied. But when we go with a larger batch, we need to have an aerator that's pumping oxygen into the system to keep it from going anaerobic or depleted of oxygen. All of those organisms stay alive. And as they're applied to the tree, they have the ability to now positively impact the system. And as they're applied to the tree, they have the ability to now positively impact the system. And during application, step number three, we want to be working very hard to get a thorough coverage of the surface as well as thorough saturation through the container with the extract. To think about a microscopic organism traveling even a few centimeters inside of that container is like a huge experiment. To think about a microscopic organism traveling even a few centimeters inside of that container is like a huge experiment. To think about a microscopic organism traveling even a few centimeters inside of that container is like a huge experiment. To think about a microscopic organism traveling even a few centimeters inside of that container is like a huge experiment. To think about a microscopic organism traveling even a few centimeters inside of that container is like a huge experiment. To think about a microscopic organism traveling even a few centimeters inside of that container is like a huge experiment. To think about a microscopic organism traveling even a few centimeters inside of that container is like a huge experiment. To think about a microscopic organism traveling even a few centimeters inside of that container is like a huge experiment. To think about a microscopic organism traveling even a few centimeters inside of that container is like a huge experiment. To think about a microscopic organism traveling even a few centimeters inside of that container is like a huge experiment. to give all portions of our container not only the nutrition but also the fungal bacterial content the protozoa and nematode action that's going to benefit that system and really help our trees take off with expanded health as you can see creating a compost extract not that hard ultimately it comes down to do we have a quality compost source that has living biologicals and all of the available nutrition we would want to be applying as a backbone for soil health if we use low water pressure we take great care to massage and work with that compost as if it were a delicate living organism itself we should be able to maximize everything that those compost pillars can give us to enhance the health of our soil system in a bonsai container the results are not necessarily proven yet but we do have confidence that we're going to be able to make the most out of the compost that we're going to be using that this will at least help encourage and increase the soil health in our bonsai containers if you want to hear more details about all of the science that's led us to this point be sure to check out our asymmetry podcast where we've dialogued with ian hunter twice now keisha and casey in terms of the compost creation and it will break down a lot of the theories that we're putting into practice but we wanted you guys to see it visually and watch and take part in this experiment that mirai's engaging with happy healthy soil good luck we'll share the results with you as this continues to move forward and we look forward to healthier bonsai as a result of a really solid ecological system in our container so thank you very much for watching and we will see you guys in the next video i hope you enjoyed that and i'll see you guys in the next video bye 
