What's going on, everybody? Super Tuesday. We've got a very special experience for you guys this evening in the studio with Pacific Bonsai Museum curator Aaron Packard. Hey, everybody. And we had a really epic experience at the Pacific Bonsai Museum's Natives Exhibition. We wanted to make sure you guys got exposure to this cutting-edge show that Aaron curated and put on and then give you the opportunity to pick his brain about how to innovate. So without further ado, we're going to jump into this thing. Enjoy, and we'll come back and have a chat with you guys after this first clip. Enjoy. So why did you choose natives? Yeah, so natives, you know, in the plant world, is... what we refer to as native plants, right? The idea of a plant, I've always sort of, like, well, is it a native, is it a non-native? So when we're talking about plants, natives is just the term for indigenous plants. And so I like the concept of not only talking about... when we think of natives, we might think of people's groups, whereas for people who deal with plants, it's whether the plants themselves are indigenous to our environment where we live. Right. So I really just wanted to highlight the, you know, talk about celebrating the diversity of North American trees and the landscapes that we have that sort of influence the shapes of them. And then why that shape? Is that a mountain? Yeah, so Corey designed the logo, so she's also a graphic designer. And so she originally had come up with just the single kind of, you know, a chevron, and I was looking at it and I'm like, well, let's put three of them together and it have that kind of look of a mountain range. And it also kind of playing off of, you know, American Indian color palettes and also the terminology. But, you know, if you see in some of the trade blankets, this sort of, this is actually the symbol for mountains in the... What's the blanket called? What's the, what's the, what's the, what's the, what's the, what's the, what's the, what's the, what's the, what's the, what's the, what's the, what's the, what's the, blanket manufacturer down and... Pendleton. Pendleton blankets, yeah. So if you look at, I found this old Pendleton blanket catalog from, like, 1920. And they have a breakdown of all the syst... all the patterns that they use. And the symbol for mountain is this contiguous up and down zigzag. And so when you see it, it's kind of like we have the negative space of a mountain shown and these sort of different, almost colorations of it as if you were, if you've ever been up into the, you know, cascades and you sort of, like, I think of the Three Sisters. That ship. we sort of see these three mountains kind of in the distance and each one's a slight different color as the sun's setting and you almost have this extended mountain range kind of going out into not just the seasons but the light and so corey's work is really um you know she's just a master of capturing light and shadow in her works um and so i thought that was really representative of her and the and the exhibit as we're looking at all these different landscapes in in the united states so that's a little bit behind the logo and where it came from so mount rainier i mean uh when i moved here i was just blown away by how prominent it is in the topography of of washington i mean you just when it's out you just can't not look at it and it really kind of grounded the exhibit the mount rainier has been the the icon for this exhibit we've been using it in all of our promotional material and i think thought when people came around this corner the first thing i wanted them to see was something they could immediately recognize with and set the tone for the exhibit that they knew that they were going to be seeing these landscapes with the bonsai um and just be immediately something that they could latch on to and so when i was thinking about which trees would go with which paintings you know um having seen this tree at the rochester show last september um i really had a i i'd seen it before but it was on the ground in my in michael's yard and so when it was up on the table and how much it's developed i mean it was you know it was just so stunning and so i thought by putting these two together to really try to evoke that pacific northwest forest that are just so iconic and the mountain hemlock and mount rainier um and just how you're kind of always trying to see the mountain through the trees you know yeah as you're when i'm driving i'm trying to like looking around where's it at oh i can still find the one mountain layer under there can see it from this angle from that angle yeah it's it's amazing how the how the clouds to and again you know we kind of have that Mount Rainier is still mysterious right the clouds are still kind of in developing the the foothills and so as prominent as it is it's like when it's when it's clouded I you can almost forget it's there but it's still there and then when it kind of the clouds come out and reveal itself it's like it's like you're reminded of you're like seen it for the first time at least for me I'm just always seen it for the first time yeah yeah it's it makes your day I mean it makes my day when I see Mount Rainier so this this having been the sort of the the display that's gonna ground everybody when they come in to kind of get them prepared for what they're about to experience and then you know the supporting trees are also paired with the main display this vine maple from Michael Hagedorn's garden again another iconic Northwest species that so when you stand here you you're trying to get this idea of being looking at Mount Rainier through the trees as if you were actually there you know seeing that in real life but having it be this sort of artistic version of of it through through the eyes of sort of the bonsai and through Corey's artwork it's it's pretty pretty cool I like it one is kind of generated I think the most uh visceral response and by visceral I mean just an automatic kind of like whoa um you kind of you know get a sense of it with Rainier but then you're kind of encountering this uh this very um minimalistic uh picture but it's capturing so much that it kind of makes you kind of wonder where what you're seeing but also making something I think seem a little bit more um familiar um and so the way that this one came about um the originally we were going to have a a different painting and it was changed out um about a month and a half ago because because Corey didn't like it yeah she was having some trouble with it uh just it just wasn't up to her standards she was trying to work on it and and she just wasn't happy with it and so she decided to change it um and then also the tree from Dan Robinson's uh an Alaskan yellow cedar and he ended up changing the tree that we had first paired so the first pairing was totally changed um and then the container that Vicky made we had gotten those in um and so all I had was the container and then I saw the image of the the artwork and then the tree finally I got an image of that and I could tell that it was really cool how they they all had the same uh color palettes with the white Deadwood um the gray volcanic uh rock that's going on the hens and chicks as well as in in Vicky's container which I think is so cool um because she used volcanic ash from Alaska in her glaze she has a uh a chemist friend who who is able like to collects these different uh minerals to include in in their ceramics a ceramic chemist so the her forms were super organic uh and I started talking to her about it and when we talked she started talking about how she uh draws her inspiration from the geology of of these different landscapes and how she tries to incorporate incorporate um you know cues that you would see from the rocks and from the the textures of the moss and the lichen and I was just like oh my gosh this this has to be in in natives so like so would you like to join this was kind of like after we had established the show uh this was uh you know added on and then once once I knew we were going to do a kusumono element I was sort of not sure you know do we do kusumono do we not you know how well would that be able to uh tie in um but once I sort of saw the containers and knew what she could do and her sort of approach and then I also knew then that young Cho had to do the kusumono so um so then we made the kusumono just as much a component of the display not so much as a subset but which it is it's a supporting character but it's a very well cast you know support supporting character so that everyone comes together in this one um so even the glaze too if you get kind of close down here there's this maroon at the very bottom it's that same maroon that you're seeing in the hens and chicks and kind of yeah and then maroon there and the gray and the blues yeah the white I mean it's just it's pretty amazing once we had installed the show once we started hanging up the work and putting trees in front of it and the scene though and once once we actually put everything together um it was pretty too we did a mock-up we had a a Mount Rainier done and we just put it with one of our trees a hemlock and just for a second kind of stood back and you just kind of got this sort of clarity as to like what this is going to look like um yeah the the first night we started putting things up we hadn't finished I had trouble sleeping that night because I was so excited about coming in the next day to finish installation of it um this was there was so the way that the the displays worked out was you know we have a collection of trees predominantly west coast in origin and so I came up with a list of environments that I thought we could support a display with based on what we had of trees and I sort of gave Corey a list and said okay here are you know 14 environments that I would like to see you do a landscape from yeah and I try to really let artists work within their own sphere of creativity give them a little bit of a parameter but I also don't want to be so overbearing saying that you have to basically like it's not a commission I'm not commissioning you to do it how I want you to do it but I am wanting you to do it within a framework but the whole point of it is for you to express yourself as an artist so I said to her you know have free reign pick whatever mountain range in Alaska you want whatever you know mountain range is in the Rockies you know I want to from this area so but this was one of the only ones besides Mount Rainier that I was very specific on saying like I want Half Dome like I want Yosemite Valley and so I think part of that is you know being originally from California I have such a love for California in general just the the landscape of California is so diverse and I went to John Muir Elementary School as a kid. Nice. So growing up. your elementary school was you know you learned about who John Muir was and so John Muir has kind of always had a special meaning for me and so Yosemite as well in turn and so I just wanted to see what she would do with some something as iconic as as Half Dome. This is a mossy mizumi tree so this tree was the very last tree that he collected I think it was collected in 1991 he retired a few years after that from bonsai so this was collected near Lake Tahoe and was collected out of a granite boulder massive granite boulder Jim Grimmel apparently was there and was telling me about the collecting trip he remembers this tree when it was collected and so it was since restyled though a little bit by myself a few years ago the top was reduced the front was switched uh put it in a Sarah Rainer pot which I think really just made the tree uh you know a lot more powerful you know in bonsai display we kind of we're trying to create a a scene you know we are trying to evoke a setting but my goal was to actually try to be geospecific where I was actually saying you know this is where this is at these are the plants you actually find this plant there you would find so all the kusumono you know are native to these environments so you the only plants that are in there only grow in for this example the Cascades right but the other sort of undertone I put is I also wanted some of the plants because I didn't want to make it too daunting but I also wanted to have some of the plants have an ethno botanical use so a lot of these plants were utilized by uh American Indians in some form or fashion you know regionally not just in the Pacific Northwest but all throughout so at least one plant in each kusumono to have had an ethno botanical purpose yet another layer another layer whether it's the bonsai itself or the kusumono but yeah there's so the whole idea of you know the overarching theme of the exhibit being natives is that you know the trees are a reflection of an environment people are reflection of the environment and then the plants and the people are connected to each other as well in this sort of symbiotic relationship um we are both influencing each other and it's that sort of back and forth which is what we get with bonsai right yeah sure you always talk about the dialogue between the tree and and the artisan um you know it's that's what bonsai is so special is it's a it's a representation of that relationship and I was giving someone a tour recently and talking about it and they were talking about and I don't think they were bonsai you know steeped in bonsai but they were talking about it on your own scale normally when you're you know looking at a tree you're either looking at the trunk or you don't actually get to see the whole tree condensed down to your own size so you can actually look at a tree you know that's scaled proportionally to you as if it is a sort of person you know so um that was just really fascinating observation that they had made so then too yeah we you know included you put your Western Red Cedar um as well since being the the Northern Cascades and um what's really cool too I mean this was collected by Dan Robinson you know and so we have trees that like dance collected and you styled we have trees that Randy has collected and other people have stuff so this this also this microcosm of trees in in that have you know been interspersed and intermingled among everyone that's in the exhibit as well as is pretty interesting to think about hey guys Tuesday night yes I hope uh I hope you enjoyed that little walk through Aaron Packerton studio how you doing good man super glad to have you guys here um thanks for joining us let's just um let's dive in so give us a little bit of background about the Weyerhaeuser Pacific Rim now Pacific Bonsai Museum as an art facility yeah so um you know I'm sure you are aware of the Pacific Rim you know it's been around since 1989 um over 25 years the collection was originally established by the Weyerhaeuser company which is a timber company with strong trading ties to Japan and so they wanted to do something for the Washington State Centennial and they had this idea of doing this public bonsai collection um originally it was only supposed to be for one year so the entire facility was built for just one year's whoa no no yeah so the response from the community was so strong that they kept it and so um you know it was something that um so fast forwarding though up to 2014 and it was spun off as a non-profit now with the Pacific Bonsai Museum well wait what made them be like no we're going to extend this past a year I think it was just the the reaction people had when they started walking through and seeing the collection you know there wasn't there wasn't a long term from what I understand a long-term plan to keep that facility open because it was done for a very specific event uh you just got more attraction than they could have yeah but this is this is a consistent theme though right like uh I know Weyerhaeuser had a kind of a downtime and the museum was closed right and then it's my understanding they opened it up the public's response was so strong they had to keep it open yeah that's exactly what happened and so um that brought us up to uh 2014 and the company was still trying to figure out what to do with it um and so they were accepting bids for it to uh be turned into a non-profit um and the Greater Tacoma Community Foundation which is a non-profit in Tacoma right wanted to uh keep the collection where it was at cool and spin it off as a its own standalone Museum um and so uh David Grote continued on as curator up until uh my transition and so even though when you know talking about its history as an art yeah as an art yeah he's a classical he's wonderful yeah um you know his his book uh you know bonsai design principles um really approach it from an art standpoint but he would bring in artists from other disciplines ceramic artists and painters and sculptors and he would also pair them with trees and have them create uh stands you know um and uh sort of ceramic uh sculptures to pair with the bonsai interesting so there's really a long rich history of the museum um using bonsai and presenting it as actually an art form with even the display of it you know when you sort of walk through the museum right you guys saw every little um there's there's all these little alcoves kind of like if you were going through a gallery right you know it's got the feel where each tree has enough space to be appreciated and is that different than other bonsai museums yeah the idea of making it viewable as an art I think I think yeah how you present the trees uh is is reflected in our in our approach with giving them much more space around the tree presenting them um you know with not very many of them we have about six room for about 60 trees on yeah on display and so instead a lot of collections either have we'll have individual pedestals but they're usually incorporated in like a garden sort of bed or you know as sort of garden elements like a Japanese garden right or just on you know sort of long tables they're sort of lined up you know one after the other so this is I mean you're talking about the Pacific Bonsai Museum being a highly architecturally designed facility yeah yeah it was from the get-go and I think what what blew me away it was when I first came there to to see the collection was how you have this space that's so clearly um sort of laid out but it's situated in that Grove of trees yeah furs and yeah hemlocks is just it feels like you've sort of stumbled across this like I don't know this like little magical magic land bonsai in amongst this forest yeah but the design of it as you as you talked about I mean it was designed and I think it doesn't it doesn't look dated no very yeah contemporary solid um it's it's amazing we got if you guys want to see a picture of that Grove and the way the museum's situated there's a drone shot on uh on Bonsai Mirai and Pacific Bonsai Museum's Instagram from when we shot there you should check that out it's very very cool does anybody on the chat have any questions for us people are just commenting on um Iuna tinta's art oh yeah yeah yeah behind you so maybe you guys probably have seen uh Mirai's Ponderosa pine in the Ron Lane custom pot against this backdrop you want to tell us a little bit about Corey yeah yeah how you guys came came about yeah absolutely we should probably clarify Corey is the artist yeah Corey's the artist her artist name is is Una yeah she says it much more beautifully than I yeah I bet um we're all just totally butchering this amazing name so hang on just a second why is her name Corey and then Una I don't yeah I'd asked her about that so you know a lot of artists did ask her have a lot of artist names but she was hanging out with a group of like graffiti artists you know Street artists and they all had this sort of like four letter handle you know your tagger name right and so she needed like her own tagger name basically and that's what she was actually it's Una Tina so you she's Swiss she's Swiss yeah she's Swiss lives in Berlin at a skate shop or street art or no I yeah so I found her um so we did our last exhibit decked out last year and so I was doing research on just anything that had to do with uh street art and um I came across her she'd carved these skateboard decks that had a bonsai she actually like carved a deck um and it was a bonsai form into it and I said oh my gosh who is this who is this artist and I started looking at her her Instagram feed and saw these landscapes that I was just mesmerized they're amazing man um they are they're amazing so it's this you know she you go through and she's able to capture the the use of her use of color I think is just pretty amazing she can she can capture that can I show you a contrast yeah yeah the contrast of light and shadow in her work yeah she talked a lot about geology like informing her process the forces that like create landscapes and this is Maroon Bells in Colorado yeah Maroon Bells and then yeah this was one of the most interesting things about her perspective this is the Oregon coastline from a bird's eye view Scott Elser's um cascading Pacific fur is in front of this and I guess yeah no I guess it is correct yep um next level yeah yeah these are these on the Mirai live site right now yeah yeah they're in the related you can buy the prints you can buy the prints if you guys want the prints we had to we picked up the original I couldn't help myself I went pretty fast those are mine I did too we picked up the original of the Badlands because our ponderosa was in front of it and it just needed to happen well I think what's most interesting about her use of color when in displaying the trees is I've just never seen that combination of such color such a vibrant such a vibrant just artistic landscape in juxtaposition with the trees and complementing them and they both don't take away from each other it was like yeah I mean I think that you know and I think we've we're talking about that a little bit you know how do we use color with bonsai and you know the the goal of the exhibit was to really capsule encapsulate a specific environment but but we do have such bold colors in the landscape it it I think though it didn't in one hand you might look at it as lessening the impact of the tree but on the other hand it's maybe elevating the the sort of the image you're sort of displaying with the putting them more on the same level rather than having maybe that tree is the main focus, then your secondary and then your tertiary sort of putting the image and the tree kind of on that same level, which I think it turned out pretty amazing. Very, very, very interesting. Why don't we continue the walkthrough? What do you think? Sounds good. Arthur, you ready to go with that second clip? I am. Alright, so we're going to continue the walkthrough, take a look at these other pieces and then when we come back, we're going to talk a little bit more about curatorship and how you handle that process. Enjoy, we'll see you guys in a little bit. Group shows exist in all these other realms of art, but it's like, we think of a group show as kind of like a bonsai exhibit, but it's not a group show in the sense of a collective, it's a bunch of individuals showing their tree and their display, but when, you know, what would happen if you started to approach a bonsai exhibition, kind of like the Artisans' Cup, you know, where you actually are trying to create a holistic show by utilizing everyone's own individual contributions, I think you're going to get something much larger than if you try to just do the formal, you know, in between the bamboo, pieces of bamboo, this is my little section of the exhibit, to whereas the whole exhibit is a reflection of a sort of a group effort. I don't know. Yeah. I think there's a lot of room to try to figure out how bonsai shows are presented, whether it's by a club or by a, you know, region or something like that. It'd be interesting to, you know, have a, I mean, the Mid-Atlantic, I think, is going on right now. I mean, you could do something similar. They could embrace the environments of the Mid-Atlantic, and every club could take on a section, and they do a, you know, unified display, and whoever has the best accent, whoever has the best tree, whoever has the best, maybe they have some amazing painters or artisans, I don't know. But, yeah, what's the group effort like? And I think that's really something that's unique for the Pacific Northwest, is we have such an amazing group of people that are interested in working together and promoting each other. And pushing. Yeah, exactly. And, you know, inspiring each other as well. So, this tree, Subalpine Fir Forest, is from the late Bob Kataoka from Colorado, Denver area. And this, again, another Alaskan sort of surreal painting. But again, the placement of it, a lot of it is serendipitous. I mean, you know, the scale that these were blown up to, you know, to have the pink from the rising sun just breaking over the top of the trees, this sort of line of the volcano and the smoke sort of just right above the edge of this forest. I mean, you know, I wasn't out here with a ruler trying to measure it. I mean, this all just sort of happened on its own. But for me, that's really the magic, is when you get all of these things and it just sort of like, it creates itself. This was one of the earlier works that Corey had finished. I think it was probably the third piece she had done. Did she come up with the bird's eye view? She came up with the bird's eye view. You know, all I told her was Oregon rock. I was thinking like, you know, Cannon Beach, Haystack Rock, you know, the, and so she took that, but she totally did a totally different perspective, which I immediately loved. I mean, I think this is one of the, you know, the paint swirling. She said she was just dropping paint and sort of swirling it in the white and the blues to create the feel of a tide and, you know, just her studying of, you know, she said she was studying aerial, you know, topography maps so you actually could see how the currents were flowing around the various islands to capture that. And so I had this in mind and when I went to go see Scott's collection, looking through it, you know, I had in mind who was going to do what. And he had said he had a few trees that might work. And so when I saw the cascading coastal duck fur, and then I saw this vine maple, which this vine maple is just insane how fine, finely ramified it is. I've never seen a vine maple like that. On a lava rock, and I put those two together. And again, that sort of, you know, traditional organization where you have two medium trees having that sort of cascade juxtaposed with a smaller supporting tree and then followed by a kusumono. Again, it's that same sort of organization but just done in a very different way. The sort of the ability to bring attention and awareness to totally two or three different planes in one display, right? So, Vicki even talks about this being a bird's eye view, right? So we have the perspective of a bird. We have our own sort of human perspective here looking at the trees. And then we have a fish or, you know, a totally different animal's perspective kind of represented all of the same ecosystem, though. Yeah, the redwood. And again, just another change of perspective. And I think this one, too, really just came out. This was her, too? Yeah. I said, you know, the redwoods. Vicki's got the log. The log, yeah. And that was sort of the form that I first saw her having on her table. And I was like, those look like real nurse logs. I could see the ferns spilling out of them. But yeah, this change of perspective and, you know, you've been to the redwoods and that's what you do as you look up. You know, after you've seen these massive bases, you just look up and the trunks kind of just, they disappear into the infinity of the green and you just, you never see the top of the trees. But again, that change of perspective to where we're looking up, but also encapsulating the image of the whole tree in the same view, it's kind of you know, it kind of toys with you. It's like an optical illusion, almost, where you're looking at this. You kind of can't, you have to assimilate two different perspectives at the same time. What draws me into bonsai is not just the way that they connect me to nature, but the way that they connect me to people. So to think about the demodos, you know, and having taken care of that tree since 1915, right, there's some way I feel I can connect to those people who took care of that tree a hundred years ago that I'll never know, I'll never meet, but we're joined together by this tree that we both are contributing to caring for. We care for these trees. I care for the tree with the same affection that was cared for a hundred years ago. You know, and so that continuity of care, it really attracts me to bonsai. Sure, exactly. So there's a lot of continuity for me personally in this piece, which really speaks to me. Well, I think too, yeah, where the majority of these trees are coming from are the Rockies, you know, in general. So the ponderosa, some of the best ponderosa come out of the Rocky Mountains, and the Rocky Mountain juniper as, you know, arguably the oldest juniper species we have, right, in North America. Potentially, yeah. In terms of bonsai, you know, qualities as a bonsai. Without a doubt. So, and then just, you know, wanting to acknowledge Randy's contributions to, like you had said, to sourcing the material that allows you and others to work with them. So, you know, this is just as much about highlighting the species of North American trees as the, you know, the people who are really neck deep in using them, you know, in promoting native species as bonsai in the U.S., so yeah, we're really happy to have him involved. Yeah, it was really cool learning about maroon bells, you know, I hadn't known too much about it until you had suggested it as a potential location. And this is, again, after Vicki had already made the containers, they were already here, and so I was trying to figure out, well, what should I do about the maroon bells? What's kind of something interesting about them that I don't know? And so I was reading about them, and you know, the geology of them is very unique from the rest of the Rockies, which are mostly granite and limestone. And so these are this, you know, sedimentary, it's a metamorphic sedimentary mudstone, which is where they get their maroon color from. It's this unique geology. And actually, that iron-rich color was a major reason why the Native Americans in the region focused so heavily on the Roaring Fork Valley. They found a lot of you know, they found a lot of spiritual connection. There's a lot of springs and hot springs in particular that they use for healing and stuff, so that whole thing ties together to the land. Right, to the land, yeah. But the container, too, after I read it, and looking at this container, if you look, I was trying to look at some close-ups of this rock, and it looks almost like a temple to the container. It's this very fractured, fragmented type of stone. Yeah, striated, and it's prone to that sort of disintegration. And again, there's almost some brownish, you know, maroonish colors in there that I think just speak to that unique geology. So again, trying to draw out, not just the image of the mountain, but you know, pulling even that same texture into a container to reflect that, I thought was pretty amazing. Nice to have some ponderosas with them, too. Yeah, yeah. So again, the supporting trees, again, trying to tie in this whole display isn't just the one display here, but again, trying to give you a full flavor of walking into this alcove and getting a sense of where you might actually be and what trees you might be experiencing, you know, if you were actually to go to the Elk Mountains. I saw this painting, this was I think the second one she did. She did Mount Rainier first, she did the Gold Land second, and then she did the Oregon Coast. They were the first three that I saw as they came out. And when I saw this one, this was the first tree that came to mind, knowing the container that it was in, just I thought the color, the texture, and then just even the orientation of directionally with the mountains that she had painted. I hadn't told her what to do, I didn't give her any. This is what she came up with, but then just seeing that, I knew this tree was the tree for the display. So, you know, it was pretty stoked that you were cool with it coming into the show. If you take it and you crop that image down so that you take out any of the table, and you just have the container isolated on the picture, it almost blends in perfectly. There's no distinction. It's spooky. Super spooky. You couldn't tell it was a separate piece almost. But, you know, I had a little bit of concern with such bold colors coming and you're taught subtle, not having too bright colors. Blazed containers are only for deciduous. So to have an evergreen paired with such vivid colors, pinks and oranges and purples, that kind of flies in the face of what common aesthetics are. But I think, you know, you also needed a tree with enough oomph to counterbalance that visually. And I think again, this tree has that. It can hold that. If you just look up close, all of these different greens and browns in here, this glaze is a wood ash glaze. So it was glazed entirely using wood ash during the firing process. And so the wood ash that she acquired, though, was wood ash from trees that were grown in the Rockies. So we know about bonsai, our trees in general, when they're breaking down the minerals in the soil, converting those into lignin and other sort of things inside their cellular structure. Once those are burned, now those minerals have been released into ash, ash form. And then now those have been repurposed in a way as a container for trees again. So it's almost like this cycle, you know, where the minerals that once served trees have now been re-extracted from that tree, and now they're back sort of in a different form, if you will, sort of repurposed. The exhibit was talking about the trees, and that's why we're highlighting the native species of plants, but it's not just I talk about the trees, they don't we take them out of the mountains, we collect them, you know, the best trees, right? We collect out of the mountains. We remove them from their environment, from their native habitat. To put them in a pot, to cultivate them as works of art. And that connection to the tree, to where it's from, for me, I think is lost when we do that. Not for any sort of negative thing, but I also want to have that connection again, you know, when I do see trees in nature, just as Dan sort of was talking about with seeing them in the wild, you have to go see them where they grow, and so that's one way of doing it, but also how do we re-establish that connection between a tree and its environment, but also do it in a way that's within an art form of bonsai. 49er gold mining equipment. It's like crumpled metal. Right, it looks like crumpled metal, and so almost like it's you know, a gold miner is like a gold pan that someone had left that's been decaying into the earth for 150 years, and some natural plants have just made a new home out of it, right? And there's actually some gold mining in this transverse range during the gold rush, so Killing back the layers. Killing back the layers. Wow! Wow! Wow! Geeking out. Geeking out with Aaron Packard today, guys. Alright, well, it's like reliving All Day Saturday. Geeking out. Geeking out. So I think, you know, one of the things that I find absolutely fascinating about you is your background is not bonsai. Your background is museum curation. Right. Can you tell us a little bit about that and kind of tie that into, you know, curating a show of this nature? What that's like? What you're thinking? Yeah, so just briefly my background, so yeah, I've got a degree in museum studies, and so you know, I always wanted to be a curator. Working in a small museum or curating exhibits, and so I was able to get to the National Bonsai Museum and sort of stayed there for eight years. Sure. Got me the background of both, sort of, museum and bonsai. This is National Arboretum. Yeah, National Arboretum in Washington, D.C. And you worked with Jack Sustick? Yep, worked with Jack. The whole time? Jim Hughes was the curator who hired me and then he retired. Gotcha. So yeah, Jack came back. Cool. And so, but having that background of museums and bonsai, kind of a unique combo, and so yeah, when you're... Originally from Southern California. Originally from Southern California. You were doing bonsai then? I was. I was doing, I grew up, my dad had a small bonsai collection growing up as a kid. You know, Southern California, Orange County, kind of the place that bonsai, was really the epicenter of bonsai in the U.S. for a very long time. Yeah. And the nurseries and the clubs, and you know, I had really great access to that, so you know, there's a small bonsai nursery in Huntington Beach. I would go to all the time once I got into it in college, but just stuck with it and you know. So you combine, you got your Southern California bonsai love, you've got your museum studies, you go to the National Arboretum, why come out to the Pacific Northwest? Yeah, so for a lot of reasons, one of them is to be a part of the community that's going on out here. You know, I think talking about where the epicenter of bonsai is now I think it's shifted to the Pacific Northwest, so the things that are going on here, the people that are sort of devoting themselves to pursuing bonsai as a not only as a hobby, but as a lifestyle and as a career are pretty intense. Happening. It happens. Definitely happening. Definitely happening. And then the opportunity to do exhibits like Natives, right? So to be able to take a collection and to curate it in a way that I can then do things that you probably aren't or haven't ever seen before. Nice. Nice. So it's a matter of approaching bonsai with this curatorial sort of distinction where we're trying to you know, I like to explain what a curator is because a lot of people don't maybe know what a curator is. It's someone who basically interprets in a museum setting, it's interprets the collection and allows people to understand how those objects relate to them. Oh, interesting. Okay. Okay. So it's not only, you know, curator, but it's almost an interpreter. So it's that bridge, right? Between two different groups just as if you had someone interpreting the language. Right? You're sort of, you're conveying meaning. What did that person mean when they said that? Right. Right. So it might not be a 100% accurate representation verbatim, but the meaning of what they're trying to communicate, that's what the interpreter does. Yeah. So I get to take this collection and interpret it in different ways. And Native, I wanted to interpret the collection in a way that was trying to establish that connection to a specific environment for the trees. Probably, probably the first time I've ever seen it handled, I mean you see people put trees in front of photographs and do a very literal comparison. Sure. This is definitely that interpretation that you're talking about and probably the first time I've seen it done with this kind of continuity because you had several different artists. You had Corey who was providing that inspirational landscape and then you had Vicki Chamberlain who was taking pieces of those physical landscapes and putting them into the containers she was making. And Young Cho actually going to those physical landscapes. Right. Learning about the undercover of those environments and then coming and creating Kusumono that were all very plant specific to those environments. I mean like the level of depth and the depth of this project people don't I think fully comprehend. Yeah maybe not at first glance but when you start sort of peeling back the layers of it yeah it was pretty in depth because the goal was the whole sort of point of the exhibit was if you were out on a hike and you encountered this vista of Mount Rainier or you know the Badlands or you were in the Everglades or wherever. Sure. And you were sort of just admiring nature like we all do. Yeah. But then well what if we tried to translate that experience into sort of the bonsai sphere of display where we have a tree, we have an image, we have a Kusumono, we have stink bugs. We're in nature right now. We got them. Studio lights are on, stink bugs are out. But even the Kusumono right I mean I don't know if we go to the level of thought in our display where we are concerned about the plants. I mean a lot of people talk about like well you know does that grow there or there's that thought. Yeah. But are you going to go to the level of actually then sourcing the plants from where that tree actually grows? Yeah. Are you going to have a container that reflects the geology of that environment? Are you going to have a painting that has the geology as a part of that environment? Sure. Crazy. Right. So you know trying to create what I call a holistic display where it actually is like a representation of a complete environment not just sort of a loose sort of interpretation of one. Yeah and there's something so powerful about that like when we were talking I was asking you what was the meaning or experience you wanted people to take away from this exhibit? Yeah. And that was really it was one was that reminding us that trees at Bonsai they come from somewhere. Right. That there's a relationship that these trees actually have or had you know part of Bonsai is we collect them and then we take them out of that environment, put them in a container and put them in front of a neutral backdrop with no bright colors or no sort of reference to that place that they spent hundreds or you know spent a long long time. It's true. How do we sort of even just pay homage to where they came from right? As like we still value these environments we're not just after a tree to scoop up and put in a pot and put in front of a you know put a tokenoma or some sort of neutral background space but you know how do you preserve the connection to a tree and its environment once it's been taken out of it? Yeah. And also from like a Bonsai appreciator lens how can you allow people that don't practice Bonsai to put themselves into the trees and to really you know come upon a display and really they're like wow that landscape hits home for me that is home for me. Like for me when I look at maroon bells I'm like that's home for me and I can put myself in that even though I don't practice it. Sure. Well and I think too like you know it is a real mystery the aesthetic of a tree that isn't reflective but you know being able to connect place to tree and form to place and you know all of those factors really for this exhibition it was impressive. Yeah the depth of it was shocking. Is there any of our innovators that want to ask Aaron some questions or have any kind of feedback for curatorship? I think Brian wants to know what your favorite tree was Ryan and Aaron. Favorite tree so if you guys watch the panel discussion which will be a tertiary piece of content for this then I said the California oak but I do think I have to go back I've been seeing pictures of the redwoods and or the redwood and that transporting nature of that image with the tree centered on it for me was I think the most innovative piece in the show. I love that one talk about bringing you somewhere where you're always just looking up and it just captures that perspective that you're just there in the redwoods. What's yours? Yeah that's a tough one. Do you have to be neutral as the curator? No I mean I definitely think there were stronger ones I mean I think the one that just my heart's in the California oak the California hills. So beautiful. My heart's there. I think in terms of two impact was the Alaskan the Chigmet Mountains. Yeah. The first one with Dan Robinson. With Dan Robinson. Alaskan cedar and that very surreal image of the volcano and the container by Vicky I mean. The detail of that one. It was amazing. It was amazing. For you guys that are watching you're going to have an opportunity to take a significantly closer look at these trees and the tertiary content because we've got a lot of camera footage of this exhibition. We'd strongly strongly urge you guys to do that because you'll get unimpeded flow throughs of the show and then you'd get to see those trees and focus on these compositions but let's take you through the remaining part of the of the exhibition and and enjoy this last piece of it. There's some beautiful gems of information and we'll come back and Erin's going to tell us a little bit more about how we can continue to evolve bonsai as art and help Pacific Bonsai Museum thrive. Right on. Alright we'll check you guys in a minute. Oh man. So yeah Cory's this is her really her first she said her first you know exploration of watercolor. Okay. So the last one we saw the California hills was watercolor and the next couple are going to be watercolors but she hadn't really used this as a medium as an artist so she had a lot of fun you know exploring and progressing herself and you know obviously what better type of you know medium would you use to paint the everglades than watercolor and to capture you know the buttresses of the cypress there that cypress swamp and when I went to Elandan to look at the trees you know this just jumped out at me because not only is it a unique species of tree you don't see a lot of pond cypress as bonsai it was just such a you know it had the base it has the knee still sort of encased in the heart of the tree and the pot again you talked about you know sort of covering up the base I think you could almost do that and it looks like the tree is floating in and amongst the other ones. Was the colors based on the pot? Did you know the tree to suggest the painting or? Yeah I think I had picked the tree out the tree had already been chosen and so I didn't ask Corey if she had how much she had referenced but we had talked about the everglades and using the cypress swamps because I did know the tree that we had so but again kind of being in and amongst that really dense cypress swamps I thought was really you know quintessential representation of the everglades and then with the little air plant uh as well you know growing on the trunks of the trees with some driftwood I'm not trying to rocket through these I'm just getting really cold and we're running out of light This one uh this one I really wanted to talk to you about I mean this is the Great Lakes uh eastern white cedar and uh in the background to this I am wholly unfamiliar with what's happening here Yeah so these are the Apostle Islands they're a series of sandstone caves uh or islands sandstone islands within Lake Superior and so it's closest to Wisconsin and these have all been carved out uh you know by the lake and uh you can actually go kayaking like and get inside of these caves and there are these sort of sandstone arches and uh the striation of the sandstone um I've never heard of them until I was doing research for the exhibit but they just had such a beautiful you know way about them that you know I also knew these trees this tree in particular uh coming from Reiner Goebel you know who did a lot of collecting around the Great Lakes these eastern white cedars came right out of uh right out from the around the Great Lakes area so I wanted to find something in the Great Lakes but I also wanted something sort of geographically distinct enough that you could point to it and not just have kind of an expansive you know Great Lake kind of saying yeah this is just a coastline of the Great Lakes like how do you again pin down a location that you can then say well this is where these trees are found growing um so yeah another sort of unique perspective um from sort of within under these caves um as if you're again kind of kayaking along uh coming up underneath one but the biodiversity of these is so unique because each island is almost its own micro environment and you can have old growth forests on one you can have sand dunes on another you can have bogs and swamps and uh there's over 800 different plant species among these islands because some of the limestone uh uh mineral minerals are conducive to certain plants and some of the strata are not so you actually within the same island can have layers of plants that you would not find growing normally together but because the mineral content of the sandstone varies it's actually allows uh such a wide range of plants to grow within such a small realm so again another area that I was totally unfamiliar with in the U.S. but you know an amazing example of just how geographically and um you know botanically diverse uh the U.S. is and so again just to her, Vicki's container again kind of mimicking that there's a little kind of arch there you know playing on the the sandstone arches and you got some heavy hitters too you have a Rainer Goebel uh you got a Nick Wins and then you've got a cedar styled originally by Mr. Kimura yeah and another Rainer Goebel tree but yeah styled by Mr. Kimura as well so again all these trees trying to communicate that northeastern uh Great Lakes environment and many of these coming right out from that region themselves so it made sense to include them a lot of stuff yeah the people that come to see this exhibition you know if you don't walk them through this the ability to latch onto this level of understanding is pretty much impossible it would take somebody who's an expert on so many different levels uh maybe hopefully not I mean we made a I mean they can enjoy it but understanding this depth yeah I mean partly so but you know we haven't really been going in depth over we made a really strong effort to try to communicate some of these big ideas to people um but that's kind of the benefit of doing these talks with you is to be able to dive in deep to some of the the nuances of of display and uh what we were trying to do but um you know we're gonna hopefully we're gonna be working on getting a exhibit catalog out so that people can get some more of this in depth uh information we're gonna be producing for the exhibit um at the end of the exhibit so nice and we'll have that exhibit catalog available while we're streaming yep absolutely very nice so last but not least um one of uh one of my favorite trees in the collection uh this tree I've used in every exhibit uh that we've done of the three uh and it's the staghorn sumac that uh is uh becoming an iconic uh PBM tree um you know the shape of it alone is just enough to make you smile but um you know wanting to again represent the whole US I didn't want to be so uh western uh focused um and so trying to re to represent uh a wide range of environments and so uh the Blue Ridge Mountains came to mind when seeing this tree um as well and you know uh the container uh Vicki had made this was sort of one of her favorites uh that she had produced um you know it's it's it's still pretty angular in design but it has been rounded out and you know part of that is you know again I didn't know the Blue Ridge Mountains were these massive mountains that sort of rivaled the Himalayas at one point uh you know old old mountains and so now they've you know weathered down over millions and millions of years so again we have a little nod to that geography uh geology where the the container is has been smooth and kind of worn down a little bit um as a result of that but uh uh you know I really like this tree too the the and this pairing I think works really well just the the angularity of the of the um trunk you know I think mimics a lot of the the mountain range you can almost turn this tree on its side and it might even you know follow some of the some of the uh topography Man alive uh the shift in the feel of the compositions from when she was working in acrylic to when she was working in watercolor is very interesting yeah to have the last pieces being watercolor it's almost like it kind of carries you out of the exhibition in a really beautiful way yeah and you know I what's what's also kind of made it interesting is I try to actually utilize the the environment of the display when I lay out the exhibit so we have these really massive uh dug firs here that you know I try to it creates a sense of you being in a forest and so again you know trying to use that you feel them yeah you yeah you're peripheral you're aware of them so this spot I really try to um make that connection to where you actually are kind of feeling like you're in uh a forest of some kind um and so I was trying to do that as well with uh with this display I'm humbled I'm humbled thank you yeah me too thank you guys very very very impressive what you've done here next level that's it that's a wrap I wanted to just give my impressions um you know as far as exhibitions of bonsai that have been conducted in the United States I think this you know went a long ways towards uh closing the gap of that connectivity to our environment and what's creating the shapes that we reference you know culturally as well as um you know artistically and uh I was blown away man I mean sick as hell I was definitely blown away yeah yeah I mean what a collaboration of artists you know from the bonsai to the paintings to the ceramics to the kusumono and to the facility and the architecture behind it so kudos to you and your team yeah thank you a few questions that you guys asked and we want to hit those before uh Aaron kind of walks us out of the evening but uh Deeds you wanna yeah first question from Nicholas um is in regards to caring for the trees how do you I'm sure that's a huge challenge with your museum and the question was angled as Ryan how do you trust your trees to be like out of your care for so long yeah yeah how do you guys work together yeah yeah yeah I mean uh for me you know there aren't a lot of facilities that I would lend my trees out to where I would be hands off and um it started with Dave DeGroot and the first exhibition that he had of kind of new faces in the Pacific Northwest where Michael Hagedorn and myself were there and then um you did your decked out exhibition and we put one tree in last year and Aaron's a student at Bonsai Mirai and uh I've respected him as assistant curator and so you know I have a lot of trust in Aaron and you know how do you guys care for these trees yeah so the trees that are on loan specifically I think that's probably what the question is being probably yeah so you know part of approaching curation is what I've been trying to bring into the bonsai sphere is how do museums function right um I'm not trying to approach this as a bonsai garden or a sort of you know landscaping type of thing I mean we're handling these trees as if they are museum objects which is how we view them um and so we've communicated and whenever you have a loan within the museum world you have conditions of care that are outlined beforehand that say this object needs to be within this much of a humidity level or light level or for you know there's very clear cut parameters for care of loaned objects and so we had talked to all the artists and said you know what are your requirements for care while they're in our while they're in our care we want to provide the same standard of care that you would provide and so I think we're able to do that but we're very clear to know what each person sort of expects of us um just as if you were to loan a you know a painting to a museum you would want to know the care it was getting they would work to match that so we work really hard to try to um not only just give trees that are on loan to us but our own collection we're maintaining at the highest possible levels as well so you guys do a great job you and your team Scarlett and everybody yeah what else you got okay uh Greg wants to know uh for PBM what are the demographics of your visitors do you tailor the show to any specific age group and his question is um backed up by a follow up question he's been talking to others about how to make Bonsai accessible to younger audiences yeah that's a great question that's a question we ask ourselves a lot at PBM um so our demographics are extremely diverse I mean we get people from all over the world all over the country um how far outside of Seattle are you guys we're about 30 miles south of Seattle but we're about 15 miles south of SeaTac the Seattle airport and so a lot of people will come visit us kind of either on their way to or from the airport you know you pick up your friends from out of town they've just been on a plane for five hours let's go do something northwest and the Bonsai Museum is just down the road check out these sick bonsai yeah so you really have that feeling of being sick bonsai or people traveling you know from Portland traveling to Vancouver you know wherever off the I-5 so anyway um we get a really wide cross section of people and um so yeah it's not just simply a certain demographic we get a really broad one from young to old would you say that your exhibitions pulling in these uh maybe more familiar art forms or you know vibrant lively art forms as opposed to a more quiet subdued art form you're injecting some energy that attracts younger people would you yeah I definitely would agree with that I definitely think with Decked Out our last exhibit where we used skateboard art that was definitely a deliberate attempt to attract a certain type of crowd and backing up to curation I mean I want to see exhibits that I get excited about first and foremost right so these are things that I think are cool and I kind of hope other people do it's the only way you can be it it's the only way you can be it I'd love to focus on that though like how do you what do you go what goes into thinking and creating an innovative fresh bonsai exhibit yeah yeah so I think well I think there's a how do you filter yeah right how do you filter that and how do you respect tradition and also stay new and current and 30 seconds go yeah right bam um I don't think you can do I think we talked about a little bit so that's there's a lot of questions there so um the respecting the tradition one that one kind of jumps out at me right off the bat was was you know we have this very traditional art form that has been practiced and cultivated for hundreds and hundreds of years that's something that I value very much um I love Japanese culture that's what brought me into bonsai um you know there was no real like American bonsai movement to get me excited as an American about I was drawn in by the the Japanese aesthetic and the Japanese cultural approach um and so I think there's this there is this foundation that's been created um you know we talk about having you know conifers in unglazed containers and deciduous trees and flowering trees and in glaze and there's a visual fundamentals whether that's a hard and fast rule I wouldn't I wouldn't agree to but there are certain parameters and things that have been aesthetics that have sort of been tried and said yes this works and that probably is better than another so if you look at the displays the concepts are the same we have a tree we have some sort of image which in Japanese culture would be a scroll of some sort yeah um and then we have an accent object a kusumono a flowering plant and you and you still adhered to you know I don't know if you guys noticed but the way the paintings move the way that the trees were facing and stuff we talked about that and then you deviated from it like the redwoods being centered some of the you know Michael Hagedorn's original hemlock kind of being almost over half of the the backdrop right very interesting wait so what are those rules of you to say that to say that the tree should be facing into display to say that the scroll should be facing the tree to say the accent should also be facing the tree you know and the other thing that Aaron played with I don't know if you guys noticed this but um you'll be able to see it a little bit better on the tertiary content some of the containers for the tree and the accent piece matched which is you know for our practice as bonsai people we're like ah you can't do that right oh that's not what I was taught but for that context it was very interesting and we really hit that point I think you and I you guys didn't get to see this clip but where we recognized I think in this exhibition the discussion the actual physical conversation of engagement was different than the way that you engage with a traditional show you know and people are either traditional or innovative or cutting you know avant garde but it's a different conversation I think that we're having now and that was really significant to realize walking through Natives was oh this isn't even we're doing something different here and it's okay it doesn't it deviates but it's okay yeah well I think it deviates in a way that though is not we're not throwing the baby out with the bathwater in a sense of so there is this fundamental concept of a three point display being carried through every display there's the elements are there but the elements now are reflective of of a western you know an American sort of they're being reinterpreted going back to what a curator does is interprets so I'm interpreting that image now not as a scroll last year it was a skateboard deck now it's these massive works that have been blown up as backdrops well Ryan you talked a little bit about this in the panel discussion that this idea isn't a new one this idea of yeah could you talk a little bit about I mean if you know if we go back to Bonesite History and you guys look at Coke's album pre you know 40th exhibition you start to see elements stands accents the shape of the trees the way that they're handled aesthetically and it is definitively more reflective and wild and so you know to talk about doing this now I have a picture of of a exhibition down in Los Angeles in one of the most modern art facilities I've ever seen and the picture was taken in 1972 or 68 or something and it was like oh snap we're not doing anything different and then if you look at Bonesite Techniques too and John Naka is blowing or taking pictures of bristlecone and shrinking them down and drawing a bonsai pot around them you recognize that this thought process has been there the entire time it's just been kind of teasing out what does that look like and I still feel like we're very much teasing you know whether or not culture was able to stop that exploration in Japan or have a stronger impact in the United States it seems that we're wanting to and David Benavente echoed the same thing in Spain you know I don't think that this is unique to us it's not like it has to be branded or quantified but I don't think it's unique I think it's what makes bonsai so beautiful well just dovetailing off of what you're talking about John Naka you know taking these images of trees and breaking them down into a bonsai design in Techniques 2 he also when this is sort of where this idea of this exhibit spurred from and I sort of saw it after the fact because I thought I was so you know clever for picking it up but the original concept for this yeah we're not actually that original so you know out of the Artisans Cup you know just like Decked Out kind of spurred out of that the idea of how do you display right I mean that's really where I think the most appeal for bonsai is going to come to people who are a broad demographics right so context yeah context providing and that's what again curation is providing a viewer something that they can engage with yeah allowing them to connect in a way that is deciphering all of that you know there's definitely a lot of insider information in bonsai terminology and you know this tree faces this direction and this and also it's like taking a pulse on a very specific energy in the bonsai community in the United States and in the Northwest in particular agreed but you know and here's the thing though is a lot of people as a professional and I'm sure you as a curator a lot of people come up to us and say how do we get younger people involved number one great question by the way and number two they say how do we change a club show well context in so many ways it gives you the freedom to explore I think because it's changing the dialogue that's being discussed and that's I think that's what you did masterfully well Tanya was wondering if you would consider this like if you would label this exhibition avant-garde or as an American bonsai exhibition oh wow Tanya stop it yeah so I mean it's hard to not definitely say that this is promoting and sort of shining a light on American bonsai would you be pissed if somebody else did this no no are you sure yeah I don't think so someone else wants to do this concept and actually what we're doing is we're actually wanting to provide this as a traveling exhibit so people want to actually use the backdrop for their own maybe club show or if another bonsai garden wanted to like do this with their own trees and create their own labels but going back to the avant-garde versus American bonsai avant-garde you know I haven't quite thought about that to that degree I mean I definitely feel that it is distinctly a representation a reflection of what I think American bonsai is yeah I would agree sounds to me like it's a proposition to start displaying in a different way though if you're talking about taking this and duplicating this it's an offering for me the color is an offering I've just never seen so much color you know what's interesting about it is color is just a simple artistic principle I know it's like oh we're doing something new no actually you're just looking at the color wheel that was invented a gazillion years ago you know and playing on that strength of the way that we interpret colors using and recreating in a way that's so personal for all of us in these environments the ponderosa pine in front of this was the best that that ponderosa pine has ever looked in its life as a bonsai maybe in its life ever particularly in the wild what else we got Deebs we got more questions yeah Doug wants to know this is for Aaron can you talk a little bit about how your time in Japan influenced your role as a curator wow interesting so yeah I've only been to Japan once I went for a very short lived you know apprentice style sort of experience for three weeks at Daijouen Daijouen the Suzuki family yeah the Suzuki family created created the Zuisho white pine that's right pretty much what we know of Japanese black pine handling techniques are attributed to Saichi the father grandfather Mr. Kimura went down to Mr. Kimura spent some time observing the techniques of Daijouen for pines very interesting historic nursery how would my time in Japan have influenced me as a curator that's a very interesting question you know I think as I'm going to maybe say this more as a bonsai lover of bonsai it helped me to sort of see what I've studied and loved up close and personal for so long it's like I love great white sharks and I want to go cage diving with them once so when I actually go do that like it's going to be that kind of like got that okay like got that son you know got the like the bucket list and so once you've done it though it's like okay that mystery is maybe lost a little bit yeah you know it's not quite as it's like one day I'm going to get there I've gotten there that one's not lost you know it's you don't lose it anyways I'm just saying the great whites hold the power yeah hard to ignore a great white but you know coming back and just in my progression to as what I resonate with me what I connect with is kind of what I have to and it wasn't as strong a connection with Japanese trees as I was connecting to with native trees nice the idea of embracing our trees that we have here sure I think a lot of it comes from you know you using them in such a prominent way yeah just falling in love with what we have to offer as a byproduct yeah as a byproduct it's a falling in love with our own environment right even as someone walking through the exhibit and in hearing other people's experience of walking through the exhibit each like everyone had a different one that stood out to them a lot of people were like wow Rainier because they're from that area Seattle love and so it's just to see yourself in a bonsai in an environment in a way that is just really shedding that mystery and having the capacity to be able to relate to it in my mind makes bonsai magic yeah and sort of even going to the question that I haven't quite answered is how do you get you know how do you attract young people or you know I think we're classifying young people as anyone maybe what you know under 50 you know to do bonsai you know someone who's non-retired and so that would be our demographic and you know and I always go back to this and it's like for one I don't think we need people we don't think we need more people practicing bonsai we need more people appreciating bonsai right so you go to a museum the museum's not trying to convince you to become a painter or a sculptor right it might some people say I want to do that but most people go there just to feel inspired to have that to feel to appreciate these works of art right I know I can't paint so I'm going to go to a museum and appreciate these paintings and each person takes something different away from whatever they're viewing and so to be able to create an exhibit that allows people to come here and connect with it in a way I think the biggest chasm that if we're trying to generate new audiences is to find is to give people new ways to relate to bonsai so bonsai has typically only been presented as a as an Asian art form or a garden pastime or something that you know you have to either be interested in plants or in Asian culture you know to really kind of agree to appeal to bonsai and so how do you get people who aren't interested in those to appreciate bonsai well it's a tree I mean that's your starting point everyone can relate to a tree so whether you're taking your tree and you're putting it next to skateboard art you're drawing one subset of people we're drawing people who can you know who can't relate to one of these environments just on your own it's tapping into that ability to connect well and even Dave's use of you know whereas you're pulling in a lot more color a lot more energy Dave's use of a lot more subtle but yet still very artistic and explorative you know forms and shapes with the ceramics and some of the work that he had was really cutting edge so I think this idea too which is a very you know modern western I guess idea is the collaborative effort too and that this isn't just sort of a one man show like Michael Hagedorn said something about that in the panel discussion where he's learning collaboration is like wow opening the door for new things so I think and that sort of shows the power of that where we have these exhibits where people are creating different components to a display which sort of works in a bonsai like we're not painting the scroll but when you actually have the artist making something for a specific tree the potter making something for that tree and the accent and there's this sort of focus on what you're trying to convey but each element is reflective of a different person when you put those together you're getting something you know larger than the sum of its parts and so I think that's yeah and you spoke to me about how you really wanted to highlight different artists to show how each tree can look different depending on who's hands are on it you can put two ponderosas right next to each other one is done by Ryan one is done by they look different but how do you balance that right in the show to make it seem cohesive and then I think that's where the layout of the museum works so well is we have these very distinct alcoves that allow you then to actually segregate each artist and so when you go in to most of the alcoves it's all reflective of your work there's one that's all of Dan's work there's one that's all of Scott Elser's and Michael's so you can actually sit there and appreciate each artist individually but how Michael's Engelmann spruce compared to Scott Elser's spruce very different very different I mean you could just go on and on so what's really fascinating too when you see how maybe Japanese white pine are handled in Japan you know you'd have to be extremely have a well trained eye to distinguish the nuances of individual artist whereas here it's very clear you actually can say that's a Dan Robinson you know what I mean that's a Michael Haggard so I think not only showcasing the species but also the it almost really showcases our like idea of cultural individuality and how that is so for us bonsai is such a mirror of the individual that created it you can't hide when you create bonsai and I think this is why people respond so sensitively to criticism you know in critiques or in people judging their bonsai but one thing that we keep coming back to is the facility itself Pacific Bonsai Museum being this I would say imperative institution for the growth and evolution of bonsai as an art form not just in America the growth and evolution of bonsai as a facility that's exploring that how can the people watching the stream tonight how can they help the Pacific Bonsai Museum thrive continue to innovate and really survive in a world where we're pulling on everybody's how can people help you guys what do you guys need we need people to love what we do and support us what does that mean becoming a member donating we just talk frankly here you guys need to donate you guys gots to donate so we have memberships that support the museum annual memberships are there perks with memberships we have newsletter we have different levels depending on how you're going to give different perks come along with that that's all on our website I got you what's that website pacificbonsaimuseum.org pacificbonsaimuseum.org and then these prints are available below the stream those also go to support you guys absolutely as well as the originals so if anyone's fallen in love with some originals as some people do guilty Mariah officially has the bad lens I couldn't not do it how do you pass on a piece a one off piece of I think that by the time October rolls around this exhibition will have changed Bonsai for the better I can honestly say that it was extremely powerful I think this is just the beginning of the momentum for sure we should mention that it's free entry free entry it would be worth flying to Seattle to spend two or three hours in that exhibition no matter where you are in the world it's a game changing exhibition noticing the nuances understanding the depth of that display tell people that you know get people there help Pacific Bonsai Museum get some awareness and support around them and Aaron man we have a few more questions we'll come back to questions I appreciate that I think for us my passion is to do exhibits like this where it might not be always this avant-garde or cutting edge thing I do value tradition oh keep it coming man don't stop you keep pushing on the gas pedal it's very easy to keep going but I do love that said you do have to have a pretty epic Demoto yeah the Demoto maple maple there which is pretty jaw dropping it's jaw dropping Aaron and I took a little side step from the exhibition to go through the history of the Demoto maple and for those of you that don't know the Demoto maple is one of the oldest bonsai in the United States and part of a family part of a pair basically the first bonsai nursery in the United States if you guys are at all interested in knowing that history we have a little tertiary clip that we get to go through why don't you I'm sorry I didn't mean to cut you off yeah just to say that these exhibits though are kind of what I'm about is caring for the trees providing top notch care for our collections but also the exhibits that's something you can expect from PBM on an annual basis is an annual museum quality exhibition where we're taking our collection though and interpreting it in a way that's going to be allowing people to connect with bonsai in new ways that just you know I'm so stoked I can't wait to see how you guys evolve I think this is going to be ridiculous let's get to your guys questions we could talk our faces off all night one of the questions is how much of a constraint is the length of time these exhibits need to run Michael asked that yeah it's a constraint right because we're dealing with live trees and so it's not like we can take these exhibits indoors and have them indefinite like a painting you can just hang on the wall so we try to maximize it because the amount of time it takes to do it for one month or six months or a year is the same but really our highest visitation is from spring until fall and really late winter early spring not really outside in the Pacific Northwest plus the way we winterize our trees really inhibits our ability to do cool displays what do you do to winterize? yeah so we have these basically these large cubes that are black sand and so basically each tree gets its own mini greenhouse they kind of look like little soft boxes yeah they're basically like light boxes that a tree sits in and then we have a heater that is put in and they're covered up if we get below freezing which normally doesn't happen very often but this last winter we covered our trees almost every day so that inhibits display so really trying to maximize the length of time but an annual exhibit where we're changing it out giving people a reason to come back you're going to see new trees a lot of the trees on display this time too haven't been on display for a while if ever because they're all native trees within our collection as well so each artist has trees lined up to rotate no these trees are going to stay at the museum throughout the exhibit so Ryan's trees, Dan's trees those will all be there throughout the six months but within our own collection we rotate out trees Greg was wondering about the Kusamono pots, Nikki Chamberlain he was wondering where he could Nikki or Vicky? Vicky Chamberlain I got it right typing it not saying it her work was amazing did you like it Arthur? I did yeah I was checking it out Junior and I were really paying attention to the Kusamono after Young Cho's work Young Cho started it off and Vicky just worked with Young a lot Young's a big fan of Vicky's I got to say you just kind of blew Vicky up if you guys haven't heard do you know her website? earthwares.com Vicky Chamberlain another Oregon ceramicist that is going to specific sites harvesting and collecting ash and different minerals from those sites using chemistry in a very high level way to create new and incredibly accurate metals textures, stone surfaces some of the Kusamono in there I couldn't tell if it was rock or not the half dome one where she's basically replicating a granite shell and pebbles with movable pieces she looks like granite pebbles Vicky Ryan was like how big is your kiln how big I need a granite slab like yesterday like Kusamono Legos it was speaking of Kusamono Bishop was wondering about Young Cho's process for going to the different locations he was wondering if she actually collected while she was there or how she picked those plants so I think definitely don't want to under under represent Young's contribution because she wasn't actually able to be there for the opening she wasn't part of the panel so she had come out a few weeks prior so we were talking and I said these are the environments and they all have to be plants from these environments so you need to find plants from Alaska from Florida from the Great Lakes and so her wealth of knowledge is just so vast but she really was pushed to get familiar with West Coast plants because she's based on the East Coast and so we worked together we found a lot of local nurseries here on the West Coast got plant lists established but then also she went to Florida and found plants for the Florida composition she drove and picked up stuff here in Oregon and Washington State so she had this massive Excel spreadsheet of plant specimens and then she gets everything together and then as you guys if you saw the stream she puts them together in this very artistic way so she's adding, she's removing she's creating the Kusumono their art in their own right her approach she was here before she went up to Pacific Bonsai Museum she was here for the stream that you guys can check out in the archive for tier 2 and tier 3 and she had that whole list and she was going through the plant species and showing me the regions and showing the physical plants growing around the species of trees that you're displaying with and I think it was the first time for me I've seen that level particularly with the diversity across the country I don't know that I've ever witnessed that intensity being put into that piece of bonsai and it's not just bonsai or Kusumono as a standalone it's very, very beautiful Young, next level and also sourcing ceramics calling out to ceramicists telling the ceramicist what she wants and needs from different pieces is something that Young started to do I think you'll see some pretty big things from Young Cho and Vicki Chamberlain in the future and to just to represent the wild flowers or the wild botanics beyond trees we have some amazing native plants it's like why are we not using more of those in our Kusumono like each environment has probably just a lack of knowledge lack of awareness just not seeing it it seems intuitive not seeing it, maybe not knowing how to take care of it not knowing it's the dive into the unknown or the value of it it's my backyard that fern growing out there might not look as good in a pot but give it some attention and it just starts to sing I'm excited to see what comes out of the Kusumono use too and exhibits, maybe people starting to go visit those native plant nurseries now and start seeing what they actually have and what looks good with bonsai Amazing Wow, natives What else we got? Greg was wondering how you go about marketing this event and what's your strategy for getting people to the museum you talked a little bit about Yeah, so we definitely are trying to maximize social media in the normal sort of ways today that we do that we've taken advertisements out in The Stranger and Seattle Times Nice, big publications around Seattle print, media, things like that we were in the Alaskan Air in-flight magazine as we were last year for Decked Out, we were in again this year but I think it's really hard to you know the bonsai community can also be very insular and regional and so not everyone is aware of what's going on I'm not aware of everything that's going on in Florida or Rochester I'm really hoping that the opening was just kind of like the pebble being dropped and just watching the ripple effect go out and so that's going to be kind of it's been less than a week that the exhibit's been open so I'm just we haven't even hit May But I mean you guys could be helping distribute those social media pieces that are already out there showing people and coming to see the show and coming to see the exhibit I mean do that for yourself don't do that for PBM, do that for yourself for real Well Aaron, where do you see PBM's future, what is your vision for moving forward in the next eight years Our vision's pretty big I mean we want to be the preeminent bonsai museum in the world we want to be known around the world for doing exhibits like Natives to where we're taking bonsai and getting non-bonsai people to love bonsai and appreciate what we're doing here so we want to really be the trendsetter for the art of bonsai in the 21st century You guys are putting your hat in the ring for the WBFF after Tokyo fingers crossed on that maybe the WBFF in the Pacific Northwest shooting to have it in 2021 would be awesome to highlight again what we've got going on up here in the P&W Nice, nice, nice Do you guys have anything else for us? People are asking for your contact info My contact info? Sure, email is aaron a-a-r-i-n at pacificbonsaimuseum.org and if you guys ever do make it out to the museum please knock on the office door and say hello Don't go see this museum without talking to this guy because your experience walking through the museum with Aaron or one of his staff it changes the way that you experience that museum they really, really put a lot of effort into what they do and it shows, it's wonderful Awesome, I think that's all we got Is that a wrap? Cool Aaron, thank you so much man Such a pleasure, such an honor to be involved not only in hopefully documenting it in a beautiful way but also having my trees on display there I walked away from that show I was driving home and I was just thinking I am freaking proud to be a part of that Thank you so much It's tremendous I'm proud to have you involved Pacific Bonsai Museum you guys check it out aaron at pacificbonsaimuseum.com if you need to communicate In tier 3, check out this tertiary content because it's going to be really robust Thursday evening our stream will be archived 5 tertiary pieces of content 4 or 5, we'll see what happens I got a really interesting question just now Christopher was wondering do you have any thoughts of adding more dimensions to exhibits going forward as opposed to the 3 traditional pieces Christopher Yeah, so I mean another dimension, that's a good one Ahhh We're talking about what's next I think it's almost what materials do we start to draw into display Context man, context It's the open box right now There's so much you can do, yeah Christopher, why don't you collaborate I'm already starting to think about 2018 so this exhibit's up moving on to next year so we have to start thinking about exhibits for next year already I'm just saying He's not going to give away all his good ideas I don't know Metal, fabric, and glass untouched untouched I don't think it'll stay that way for very long How do we you know definitely looking at space, use of space which people are getting to but how deliberately can you get in using space to control a display I don't know Space was the obvious after the artisans come to me Doug made a comment, he said I asked Juliet if as a non-Bonsai person she is more in love with Bonsai after seeing The Native Show and she said yes There we go Love it, love it Good seeing you too Doug Always good to have you down Thank you guys very much for tuning in We hope you enjoyed We love you guys, we appreciate the support Pacific Bonsai Museum is very near and dear to Mariah's heart as an epicenter of our Bonsai community Let's reach out and support them as much as we can If you guys like the art from the show please look at their online store One last thing too We'll be doing an exhibit catalog taking pre-orders on our website That's in the related content It's in related content below the stream Order your exhibit catalog Beautiful Photography It'll be having all the displays Talking with the artists And if there isn't a print that is there available maybe email Aaron and Juan We only did 3 prints of the 14 that were made So if there's an interest in a certain print that we don't have we'll definitely be interested in responding to demand Take care of you guys Thank you very much guys Have a wonderful night We'll see you next Tuesday Check on the archives on Thursday for this We love you We'll see you Have a good week 
