So here I have two different, very different situations in terms of how the wire is going to be applied on a developed Hollywood juniper branch. So I'm going to clean both of these, and I'm going to use both of them to illustrate different secondary tertiary wiring approaches, theory, and application. First, I've got to clean to prepare them, okay? So again, I'm going to start out my cleaning process by getting rid of some of those weak interiors, and I'm going to start by opening up that first quarter to eighth of an inch. This is going to be a very, for me, a very standard approach to how I sort of familiarize myself with the structure of each of these pieces, okay? And if I've got weak interiors or I've got a conglomeration of growth, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to use that staggered approach, but I'm also looking to keep nice, strong, or compact pieces. Notice that I have crotch growth here. That crotch growth may, in fact, be a higher quality piece of foliage than these other two pieces. If I remove these two pieces, I'll also remove that crotch growth. So I'm going to save these two pieces and keep that crotch growth, knowing in the future that crotch growth could potentially replace these leg year, less strong, and less ideal pieces of foliar mass, okay? As I continue to move back, I'm going to continue to clean out these crotches and some of the weaker pieces along the branch, okay? And I get to this junction here. Notice that I have one, two, three branches and some crotch growth right there. I need to make a decision. I need to make a decision in terms of how I want to select and start to structure my branch. Now, notice that these two pieces have a nice spacing and a nice alternating approach. Typically, what bonsai knowledge would tell you is to remove the center piece. But notice if I remove this center piece, I would create this very obtuse crotch right here, which in bonsai pad formation is a very ugly and not ideal structure of the crotch. As a result, and because this is a fairly strong piece that can fill in the silica, I'm going to remove this center piece. And I'm going to have this silhouette here. I'm actually going to come back, and I'm going to make this decision on a branch that's refined, to create this acute crotch between these two branches and improve the structure of this developing, refined but still always trying to work towards that higher quality product, developing branch, okay? I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to clean out some of these weak interiors and that first eighth to quarter here. This looks good, okay? This branch is finished and ready to be wired. I'm going to move over to this section. Okay, I've got this nice long piece here that can fill in on the silhouette. I'm going to go ahead and clean out that first eighth to quarter. And when I'm saying eighth to quarter, I'm talking about the first eighth inch to quarter inch of this junction wherever I have these two branches emerging from one location on a branch just to give myself the space to be able to apply wire. And then as you notice, any of these more significant foyer pieces, I'm coming out and I'm cleaning that first eighth to quarter around these as well to give myself the space to be able to get that wire applied. Okay, that feels pretty good. I'm going to move to this one. This one, too, in a location where it's got its own isolated area, I have this piece here that's starting to form. Now, this is opposite of this big long branch, and I've got this piece coming here. I'm going to leave this to potentially cultivate a branch in this location and potentially be able to eliminate this big long leggy piece in the future. Okay, and these are the decisions that when we're starting to form branches, we're thinking about the current formation, and we're also thinking about the formation of future branches that are going to be being cultivated and built to be replacing current branches that are less than ideal in terms of structure and quality. Okay, and it's an interesting thing when we start working with bonsai. So many people talk about trying to strike an immediately pleasing aesthetic branch versus cultivating the long term, but you can see that we're considering both the immediate and the long term in terms of what we're leaving and how we're making our branching decisions, okay? Now, notice opposite of this one. I've got another branch growing on that same junction, so I've got one, two, three. I'm going to have to make a decision here in terms of my staggered pattern, and I'm going to say since I have this piece here, the most likely consideration would be to remove this piece, okay? However, I'm also cultivating this to potentially take over. I've got this coming in exchange. For the time being, I'm going to go ahead and say even though this may take over as a future branch, I'm going to deal with that when that time comes, and I'm going to establish my staggered pattern to make space for the current structure knowing that it's going to change. I'm going to have different considerations. I may be shortening this whole branch in the future. I'm not trying to control the final outcome so much that I'm leaving everything because we can render ourselves basically immobile or incapable of making decisions if we try to plan five. Ten years in the future, the tree is going to develop. We're going to respond to the tree's development, so we've got to give ourselves the space to do that, but also to be able to actualize a really beautiful aesthetic now in this tree's current iteration of its development, okay? Cleaning off some of the bottoms and opening up that first eighth to quarter to make room for my wire, okay? This feels really good and really capable of being wired in an appropriate way. Weak interiors here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to get rid of these guys. None of these. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to get rid of these guys. None of these. I'm going to get rid of those. When we say weak interiors, I'm talking about branches that don't have these really beautiful, strong, robust growing tips. When we look at these pieces, these are old, spent pieces of foliage. They're virtually not growing. You notice that they're a lighter color. The tip of that is not necessarily really robust and strong. We're going to go ahead and get rid of those so the tree can focus on the stronger areas. And interestingly enough, when we make those decisions, what ends up happening is the tree is then more capable of focusing its attention on the stronger areas. Those stronger areas grow, draw energy through this branch and will get back-butting through here by allowing this to move those resources. So many times in bonsai, we talk about getting back-butting and people cut back to the weak interiors that don't have any potential to actually become stronger branches. This is when we compromise that tree's shape, okay? So now this piece is clean. Let me go ahead and get rid of this stuff. This branch feels really well cleaned and manicured, thawed out. Alternating structures. We've improved the shape of the crotch here. This is ready to be wired, okay? I'm going to move to this branch over here, which has a lot more going on, okay? And I'm going to continue to dialogue with you guys about the decisions that I'm making. I'm going to start on the interior here. Pieces off of the bottom, whether it's foyer pieces that are hanging below sort of that bottom plateau of the branch where we create that definition, okay, as well as crotches to open up that first quarter to eighth inch. Giving myself some space. Giving the foliage mass space. This is a constant, every time we come back and we touch our juniper in terms of manicuring, getting ready to wire, or even in our routine maintenance of junipers in terms of cleaning, we're going to be coming back and sort of exercising this same thought process in the cleaning action, okay? Now notice here I've got opposites. I'm going to go ahead and take this back. Boom, boom, which means I take this guy back here. So now I'm going to be transitioning to a branch on the left. I'm going to take this back. I'm going to take back some of these weak interiors back to here, okay? Now I can start to clean out these. I don't have any opposites occurring, although this does feel a little bit tight and compact. So I'm going to go here, here, take that off. Now I go from here to here so I can take this off. I've established that alternating branch pattern. I'm going to go ahead and clean out those interiors and those weaker pieces. Now that piece feels really nice and well laid out to become a good branch, okay? Coming out to this end. Coming out to this exterior. I'm going to work my way around that outside silhouette. I'm going to clean out these weak interiors here, clean out any pieces hanging below the bottom of this branch so that I don't have any foliage mass hanging below that line of definition that I'm going to create. This feels pretty good. I don't need to be removing a whole lot. This feels very weak, though. I'll go ahead and take this out. Now I've got my staggered pattern running out to the tip of that branch, okay, coming back here. Again, cleaning off those bottoms. I do have a relatively strong upper. Upward growing branch here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take that out because I've got so much foliage mass in the other branching that surround that that I can take off that and to some degree in this small section forego that lateral branching sort of staggered pattern because I've got other foliage mass on surrounding branches to be able to fill in those spaces. Now here's one of those exceptions to a crotch. Notice my crotch has really strong, nice growing tips. It's very compact. I've got this weaker leg gear piece. I'm actually going to keep the crotch and I'm going to take off that weaker leg gear piece to be able to build a better branch moving forward in terms of the development process. And I'm going to continue to work to take off those weaker pieces so that I continue to hold back and develop tighter, more compact growth. Okay, now transitioning here. Again, these bottom growing pieces, thematically this is going to become almost repetitious what you guys see me do. And this is an application of technique that really allows me to do this. This is a technique that really allows me to do this. This is a technique that really allows me to do this. This is a technique that really allows me to do this. This is a technique that really allows me to do this. This is a technique that really allows me to do this. This is a technique that really allows us to sort of form a backbone for how we approach the cleaning process. Now when I look back in the interior, all of these are weak interiors because, again, none of these tips are strong and robust and growing when I compare them to… Notice how they're ramifying at the tip, in the stronger areas we've got that beautiful, nice lime-green new growth. These are yellowish, they don't have actively growing tips, and there's no ramification on those pieces. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take all of those out. Those are old, spent interior pieces of foliage mats. pieces of foliage mass by doing that I'm putting the strength into the tip it'll draw resources through here and I will get back budding as long as this branch gets adequate Sun exposure okay cleaning out those weak interiors cleaning off those bottom pieces and notice how I'm not focused on coming into these tips and really cleaning out the tips this is my tuft that forms the definition of my branch I want to make sure and keep that tuft intact this is the aesthetic of junipers in particular that gives them value a lot of times we can get carried away with the cleaning process out at the tip we want to avoid that we want to continue to remove those weak interiors and pieces that aren't giving us any value and maintaining that quality of the tuft itself at the tip okay and this is one of those things mr. Kimura used to educate us about and say you clean to to create the appropriate foliage mass at the tip and you need to know when to not do that and I'm going to show you a little bit of that in just a go any further. So as long as I've got this sort of tip and this cloud-like tuft at the tip, I'm not going to go in here and clean any further into that. I've removed all the weak interiors. This strength exists in this tuft at the tip. Continue to clean those weak interiors in here. Take off this little stub, and I'm always improving, taking away those structural issues. Now, I do have a bit of a crossroads here where I may choose to reduce the strength of this tip back to this finer branch. As it stands now, I've got two, and notice how I've got this beautiful alternating structure. I go left, I go right, I go left, I go right, I go left, I go right. That's a really well-laid-out branch. That's clearly been built to be a good bonsai branch up to this point, and we're going to maintain that structure. Okay, bottom weak interiors so that they're not hanging below that branch line. These weaker pieces on the inside, leaving that tuft on the tip. Okay, bottoms, weak interiors, broken record. Broken record, but it still helps to kind of iterate and discuss and dialogue about the choices being made. Again, notice these weaker guys here. These are all spent, so I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take those out. Now, here, notice that I've got a stronger piece here, and I've got these weak interiors. I want to open up that first quarter to eighth on these pieces now that I'm breaking from secondary into tertiary ramification. I'm going to clean out some of these spent pieces. Here, I'm going to maintain the integrity of my tuft. There's my tuft at the tip. I'm not going to go any farther than that. Notice I've opened up that eighth to quarter, that eighth to quarter, and now I'm at my tuft. I've got some secondary or some tertiary pieces here that could contribute, and this is always subjective. There's no black and white rule to how far we clean, but remember that we're trying to maintain foliage mass. We're not trying to denude this tree. There's a misconception that when we clean, we should be taking this tree back to step one, but that's not how a tree evolves and develops. That's not how a branch evolves and develops. If we're always taking it back to step one, everything that's accumulated over the course of this branch's sort of evolution, we strip it back to step one. We take two steps forward and two steps back. The branch never evolves, right? So we've got to kind of draw that line for ourselves where we're keeping that foliage mass that drives strength. We're improving it. We're getting rid of weak stuff. We're cleaning out that first eighth to quarter. Tops and bottoms, crotches. That's where it's necessary or potentially replacing with strong crotch growth, weaker, longer, leggier pieces that don't have good ramification. Feels nice right there. Taking out some of these weak interiors, spent pieces on the bottom, getting that tough, nice and established. Notice that I have this beautiful piece of crotch growth here, and notice how all of these are becoming quite long. I'm going to go ahead and save this crotch growth right here, knowing that I may use it to replace this branch in the future. That's always that sort of pre-building of a new branch to be able to reduce the length of this greater branch that we're building. I'm always going to be cultivating these pieces where I see opportunity in the future to be replacing longer, leggier pieces. Okay, bottom growing pieces, weak interiors. Now we've got that beautifully set up. Notice how this piece is starting to become really leggy, these big long pieces. I'm not going to worry too much about it right now. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to leave those pieces in the future. I could see this as being a branch that will grow. Actually, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take it off. Notice that we've got a nice tight sort of, these are together like here. I can go ahead and I can take that piece off. I've got a good branch here. I've got nice nice crotch growth to replace this longer branch there. That cleans up my structure a little bit. All of this is responsive. It's responsive to the strategy of cleaning and preparing for wire. It's also responsive to the foliar mass that exists in that same vicinity and proximity of the branching that occurs around it. This is why it's so difficult to teach these aspects of bonsai because there is no rule, there is no black and white. There is a reaction and addressing of the structure as it pertains to all of the pieces that exist around it. That feels like a a beautifully cleaned branch that's ready for wire. Here I have a Mugo pine branch. This branch has been part of a bonsai for quite a while. You'll see some wire scars on it. Now, when we start to deal with pine branches, depending on whether we're dealing with a multi-flush, a single flush short, or a single flush long, the timing for this cleaning changes. With a single flush short and with a multi-flush pine, we can do this cleaning as the candles are elongating. Not a big deal, because it's not gonna impact the length of the needles that are occurring. We're a little bit late, but in the nature of trying to create this video and give you guys some direction, we're gonna go ahead and we're gonna do it on this even though the candles are opening up. If we were dealing with a long-needled single flush, like a Ponderosa, we would wait until these had fully hardened off, which is not gonna happen until the latter portion of summer because we know any needle mass that we reduced, the needles that are elongating would become that much more lengthy, okay? But I'm gonna come in here and I'm gonna go through the same process. However, my consideration with pines changes a little bit when we start preparing for wire. So as I'm working through this situation, now you're gonna see me doing a lot more needlework, and in terms of the needlework, separating the buds that exist, okay? So if you notice between these two buds here, I've got this needle mass that's really in that first eighth to quarter inch area. I'm gonna be coming in here and I'm gonna be taking that needle mass out to be able to create that space that allows me to wire out onto this. Now, when we're cleaning pines, we wanna be sure to maintain needle mass all the way around sort of this chute that's occurring on the pine. On the bottoms, and I'm just gonna angle this up, on the bottoms, I'm gonna take off the pieces that are hanging below, but anything that comes out laterally that still gives us that shape on that chute, I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna keep these. Now, in the wiring process, if we get to, if we get to a point where when we go to wire this, they're still hanging down, we can always come back and clean those off later. One of the big misconceptions about pines is that in the cleaning process, we should take off all of the three-year-old needles and just leave last year's needles, and this is absolutely incorrect, okay? Pines hinge on and depend on these older needles for hormonal allocation, auxin distribution, et cetera, so we always wanna keep some of the older needles present on our pine. Now, you'll notice here that I've got this chute sticking straight up. When I come back into this, because I've got a nice lateral here and I've got a really dense branch here, in order to be able to wire, I'm gonna take a lot of these verticals off and go back to a more lateral distribution. I also have a beautiful sort of secondary or tertiary piece coming here, so I'm gonna go ahead and save that knowing I've got the density to remove that vertical branch, okay? Cleaning out these areas, notice I have a back bud right here, so I'm gonna clean out the needles around that back bud to be able to give definition and separation so I don't get this real mounded, dense area inside of what I'm trying to create as even visual distribution of needle density, okay? I'm gonna clean off these bottom growing pieces, still leaving my needles to get that nice presentation of pine foliar mass, okay? This feels like a good, nice reference for the density that I'm gonna be using on the rest of the piece here, and I'm just gonna go through this, okay? Cleaning off the pieces hanging really below that lateral line, still maintaining that pine, and shape, okay? Coming in here, maybe reducing the old needles just a bit, but saving some of them, okay? Got this nice secondary piece here, or excuse me, tertiary piece coming off of my secondary. Just gonna take off some of those, maintaining that nice 360 distribution of needles. That feels good, that was minimal, okay? Now we're here. I've got some interior bud right here. Oh, no, actually that's just a needle. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna take those off. I'm gonna clean off some of these bottom pieces here. Gonna go ahead and maintain that nice distribution. Maybe reduce some of those older needles, but leave quite a few of those still on the branch. Taking off those bottoms. Cleaning that up, and I'm gonna be, knowing that I'm gonna be orienting that bud upwards with the way that I wire. Now, wiring on a pine, when we start to talk about good pine wiring, we're gonna be propping up a lot of these buds. If you'll notice, this has kind of an awkward shape. Our wire is gonna have to hit here to be able to control the inclination of the bud. So in the cleaning process, I'm already starting to see how I'm gonna have to wire this in order to make this a really beautiful presentation of needle mass. Okay, so when I get into this area, notice that I have one, two, three, four branches all in one region. And I'm gonna say that this longer piece is still important and it does have back budding occurring on it. I'm gonna go ahead and clean this and I'm gonna save it. In cleaning this and saving it, I know that I need to make some decisions at that junction. I also have a little bud on the bottom of this longer piece. Now, this is where I start to look at aesthetics. Do I want the length of what's coming here or do I wanna cut this back and actually use this longer piece to shift, take that length out? I'm gonna say for this branch, I'm gonna leave that length on. Pretend that this branch needs to be a little bit bigger. I'm gonna take off that bottom growing bud so that it's not growing down below my sort of bottom line of my branch that gives me the definition pad to pad. Just cleaning out some of these to give it definition. And now I'm gonna come back in here. Now, I'm gonna go ahead and clean these out so that I have a clear idea of what I'm dealing with before I make my decision, right? A little bit of extra cleaning to give us a better idea so we can make accurate choices on the chosen branch. That makes a lot of sense and it doesn't take that much time. Okay, I'm gonna clean off that knob. Now, when I look at all of the distribution of my branches, I notice that I have these pieces that are on the interior of the branch next to it. Whereas over here, I don't have anything. So when I'm making this choice in this junction, if I've got pieces that are gonna overwhelm this side and this piece here can fill in a gap there, I'm gonna use that to make my decision of which ones I'm gonna remove. I'm gonna take these two off, nice and clean, and open up that space for this piece to be able to fill into that region, okay? I'm gonna come over here. I'm gonna continue that cleaning process. Now, when we get into this, we see that we've got this big, long, strong guy growing vertically, and we've got this smaller guy on the bottom. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna make this transition. Even though there's only two there, I still want to be balancing out the distribution of foliage mass in my branch. So I'm gonna take off that vertically growing, stronger guy. I've got a nice, fine piece here. When I get into the interior, these are very close to that branch. I'm gonna clean out these buds, right? And a lot of times we tend to value back butting almost a little bit too much, almost to the point where it compromises our structure. Don't be afraid. Once we get a big, healthy, built-up tree, don't be afraid to remove buds that are unnecessary, okay? We still want that open, sunlight penetration, air movement through this foliage mass, and sometimes that means eliminating back buds. Okay, I'm gonna take off some of these needles in between these, see how these are growing all the way up to that junction there. I'm gonna clean out that first quarter to eighth inch. First quarter to eighth inch. Just making a really beautiful, clean, nice, notice how I've got that nice spacing there. I've got needles on the bottom. I've got needles on the bottom here that are obstructing that really beautiful, nice, flat bottom to that, but I still maintain that 360-degree distribution. 360-degree distribution, that feels really good right there. Okay, coming out here, just a few of these bottom needles on the tip of this branch, and I'm gonna separate these buds just a little bit to make room for my wire and get that beautiful foliar distribution. Now, what a lot of people don't talk about when we do this cleaning process is they don't typically talk about, trying to evenly distribute your needle mass throughout this pad, but this is really the crux of making sure that at each location in this pad, we've got the same quantity of needles. If you do that, you avoid having dense, sparse, dense, sparse, and bringing attention to that unevenly distributed foliar mass. That's all a part of the cleaning process and setting up, and we can go in and further refine that once we've started to actually wire this branch, okay? Now, when I'm looking in this area, here, I notice how long this piece is, and it's starting to encroach on some of these others. I've got this beautiful, sort of alternating ramification here. I'm gonna go in and I'm gonna go ahead and take that out. I'm gonna clean these bottom pieces and just give that space for that even distribution. We may choose to even take out this strong piece in the future. We'll know more when we start to wire, so I'm gonna leave that for now, okay? Opening up that first quarter to eighth, okay? Cleaning off some of these interior weaker needles, the bottoms that are giving me some of that visual pollution in terms of needle mass distribution. That feels really good. Now I'm gonna get into here. Notice that I have this really sort of small interior piece right here. Now, if I needed to cultivate something to replace these, I would leave that. I'm gonna say it's really tight in here in an already small inner node. I'm gonna take that out. Go ahead and I'm gonna save this length. This branch needs to be a bigger branch in terms of the scale and proportion of the tree. We don't need to push that back because this is still very tight. So I'm gonna clean out those interior weak, old sort of spent needles, these bottom pieces here. Clean up the bottom of my branch line. Create that definition. Okay, and then in between these here now, notice that I've got these older needles. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna delineate these two, leaving some older needles. But this is where you're gonna start to see when these are so tight and close in proximity, we may, whoop, caught a little bit of the foliar mass there. That actually won't kill the branch, but we want to avoid doing that. It's part of the problem with cleaning at this time where there's so much water. Now we've got that distribution between these two, okay? So that feels really good to me. I'm gonna come into here and go ahead and just remove any of these unsightly needles below that. I'm gonna come into here. I've got this piece of ramification that I'm gonna go ahead and keep and just clean up a few of these bottom pieces. Then when I'm in here, we again see some of these needles forming at that junction. Typically, what ends up happening is this was the beginning of the growth, last year. You can see both of these candles emerging because we had two buds at that location. So then we can come back in here and we can just sort of clean up that space between them, open it up in case we need to wire them. A lot of times we think about trying to wire every single branch, but in the end, you're gonna notice that on a refined branch like this or a branch that's been developed as a bonsai, we're not gonna be wiring every single branch. And so with one piece of wire, we can control both of these buds. Maybe we come back and take that off. Maybe we continue to cultivate that. Okay, so now we're all the way over to here. And we'll notice that we have this big strong piece sticking vertically up off the branch and it's getting stronger and stronger. I'm gonna take that off. That opens up sunlight penetration to these lateral smaller buds that have occurred because it is a healthy branch, because we have accumulated a lot of needle mass. Needle mass moves sugars and starches. Needle mass causes a transpiration to occur. And that generally tends to create the vascular tissue that gives us interior buds as evidenced by these two finer pieces. Now these are very close in proximity, but neither one is showing them to be excessively strong compared to the other. So we'll keep both of those. Okay, cleaning up some of those interiors, opening up that first quarter to eighth to be wired, giving definition between these two pieces. Notice that I'm only reducing this by a few needles at a time. Notice that I'm only reducing this by a few needles at a time. Notice that I'm only reducing this by a few needles at a time. If we grab too much, that's what caused us to tear the tissue on that one. We pulled too many needles at one time. It grabbed onto the piece of tissue because we had so many needles in our hand at that time and that causes that tearing to occur. Okay, now we're here. We've got this guy growing off of the bottom. We could say that it would be safe to have that longer guy. So I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna make this decision right here to go ahead and go with the stronger of the two, clean off the bottom, get rid of, saving those older needles, but getting rid of a few of the most interior, to that junction. Okay, now I've got a real interesting situation here because I've got a fork here. Both of these are very long. When I look at this, I don't need both of them on this branch. I've already got sort of this width that I need. Notice that the back bud here has died. If you see that sort of yellow, weak, dead bud. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna take that off in exchange for a branch that already has back budding occurring in a way that's usable. That creates space, decreases the width of my branch. Obviously the tree, whether it's masculine or feminine, is gonna start to dictate some of those decisions. Clean off some of these interiors and the bottoms to clean up my branch line. Okay, leaving some of those older needles yet again. Broken record. Apologize if it sounds broken. Okay, and then I've got this piece here. Notice that I have three at the tip there. Now if this is gonna be used, this is gonna be brought in this direction. And you see that this is gonna start to encroach on this bud. This interior piece is gonna encroach on that bud. We have a nice back bud there. So I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna take off that piece right there so that I create that space for this to exist and still facilitate and foster the development of that bud. These are all of the decision. It is a constant puzzle and problem solving situation to be cleaning and preparing for wire. But this is fundamental. I feel like we jump into wiring before we ever touch this cleaning process. And your success in wiring is gonna hinge on this cleaning process being executed. Prior to ever applying a piece of wire, okay? This is for our pine branch. This is a beautifully clean pine branch with the ability to be effectively wired. Okay, here we have a Douglas fir or what I would call an elongating species branch. Now, once an elongating species is producing this kind of really soft growth, then we're past the point where we're gonna be wiring it. We're gonna let this elongate and harden. For the sake of wiring exercises, we went ahead and took this branch because it gave us the awesome opportunity to discuss a lot of different aspects of choices on this, okay? I'm gonna take off this weakest interior piece, not only because it's right by the clamp, but also because it doesn't have a growing tip on it. This is for spruce, this is for abies, this is for hemlock, this is for redwood, this is for Doug fir, this is for larch. These weak interior pieces without growing tips, we take those off. They're just drawing strength from the tree, okay? And as we move out here, you'll notice that we have several branches that lack growing tips. We don't want to bank on those branches on a tree that's already showing this kind of strength in the other tips. We don't wanna bank on these weakest pieces that are already showing a decline in health, that they're gonna develop growing tips. So we take those off and we take what is already showing health in the tree, okay? Now, when we start talking about this, whether it's a spruce, whether it's a Doug fir, whether it's an abies, these older needles that exist on the interior, okay? Cleaning those out so that we have the reduction of those older needles on that first quarter to half, or even longer. Because those older needles aren't really doing much compared to three years ago, last year, and now we're getting growth this year, okay? I'm also gonna be coming in and removing some of these pieces off of the bottom just to clean up the bottom of that branch line. And the extent that we remove here hinges on what is the length, what is the size of the tree, and what does the surrounding foliage mass have to offer? Because sometimes on a very large tree, it's unnecessary to remove this bottom growth, but it does give our tree a cleaner appearance and the smaller the tree gets in terms of chuhin, shohin-sized trees, this is really the aesthetic manipulation of a foliage mass that produces growth in a 360 degree, much like a pine, of really cleaning up the bottom of that branch line to create that definition, okay? So this feels very good. Notice that we have three branches, but they're staggered in terms of their alternating occurrence. We're gonna go ahead and leave that, okay? Now when we get to this point, we have two branches growing in very close proximity to each other. On an elongating species that thickens so rapidly in the fall with the production of their vascular tissue geared towards the higher alpine and a greater cold tolerance, this kind of close proximity, if we have a healthy tree with an established branching, then we're gonna wanna make some decisions so this doesn't become a piece of inverse swelling. If, for example, this branch was very weak, we would be keeping this stronger interior, more compact piece. But when I look at the total scale of this branch, I notice that this piece here is not too long and in fact fits into the silhouette very well. As a result, and because I've got this young, vigorous piece in front of that, I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna take this off. I'm gonna save this for my exterior silhouette formation, and I'm gonna use this to build the density on the interior of the branch, okay? So now I have a really good distribution. Now notice that I've got one, two, three, and they're all on the right side of the branch. That's okay. Where we put the movement into this branch is gonna effectively decide and form how well these function. So our wiring of this structural piece is going to either create function with these three or defeat function with these three. Our goal is to put movement in that creates function for these three, and we'll show you how we do that, okay? Coming out here now, I've got a place here where I've got one, two, three, and one junction. This is very common for Douglas fir. When I think about this piece coming to the interior and I think about the presence of the other branches that I have in this location, I need to be making my decision based on what I've got to facilitate. Because of the location of these three, I'm probably gonna be flaring the branch this way, and when I look at these two, I still see that this branch is gonna be intruding on some of this interior pieces. This is a little short, and this one fits into that exterior silhouette. So I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna make that staggered cut there. When we move forward, we see another junction of three. Typically, we would say remove the longest point, but I'm gonna say if we do that, we create an inferior crotch there. So I remove this left side piece here. I'm gonna remove this right side piece here. And now I've got that beautiful stagger in terms of my branching layout. I'm gonna clean out these interior pieces here, the older spent needles, okay, to open up that first quarter to eighth. I'll clean off some of these bottom growing pieces to be able to create that beautiful bottom to my branch pad. Any of the sort of yellowing or at times on elongating species, we'll see the older needles become more susceptible to what appears to be disease, but in all actuality, it's not disease. It's just sort of the tree saying goodbye to what was a very functional piece of foliar mass that helped it establish this strength. We can take those pieces off, okay? So I'm just cleaning off that first quarter to eighth to give myself that ability to get wire onto the beginning of this branch. I'll show you how to maneuver through these needles once we get to the wire and then I'll show you how to do the wiring process, but I am gonna go ahead and clean those up, okay? That feels really, really nice as a prepared branch, okay? This younger piece here, and these tips are wilting because it's been pruned. I'm just gonna clean up this bottom and this first portion of this so that I have the ability to get wire on it, and I'm not gonna go much beyond that because this is an interior piece, and it's still developing. We wanna keep strength in it. Maybe we'll take off some of these bottom course guys. Okay, that feels pretty good there. Now we get out to this section here. We've got a staggered left. We've got a staggered right. We have another right, and then we get to this fork with this bottom growing piece. Unless I want to reduce the length of this tip, and when I look at these two, I notice that I have ramification here. I notice that I have ramification here. I'm gonna take off that bottom growing piece because I've got that similar length, and once I get to here, again, I see one, two, three, four. This is an area where we have a nice enough crotch here in terms of being able to bring them closer to be acute that I'm gonna take off the strength of that tip. Okay, so I'm gonna come back in here because we don't have any branch removal that's gonna happen in here. I'm gonna clean these guys up. Older interior pieces. In Japan, when we would be starting to prepare a tree to be wired, this would be the first step that Mr. Kimura would take in terms of preparing the branches for the youngest apprentices. As we became more seasoned and experienced and understood the dynamics of pruning, Mr. Kimura would make more of the primary branching selection and then the older apprentices would come in and do all of this cleanup and preparation and then go ahead and wire the tree based on what he had provided in terms of a framework on the primary level of branching. So this is a staged process for him to build our skills and still with students now at Mirai, I follow that same strategy because it really is a process of learning how to go about doing this well, not overly reducing the foliage mass and denuding the strength of the tree. And setting the tree up for really strong success, both in the branch formation, setting up younger students to be able to have success with wiring, but then as my older students become more and more capable, then walking them through these processes and watching them learn how to make those decisions is an important aspect of teaching bonsai, okay? So this feels good. Now notice that I've left the needles around sort of the base of this. These are third year needles. I'll take off one that looks like it's diseased, which is really just the tree saying goodbye. But I don't want to take off one that looks like it's diseased, which is really just the tree saying goodbye. But I don't want to take off one that looks like it's diseased, which is really just the tree saying goodbye. So I don't want to overly reduce this area here. I may have to come back and make some decisions, but I'm gonna go ahead and leave this as such, knowing that with one piece of wire, I can wire one of these, control both of those, I'll leave that as is, okay? Cleaning off these pieces here, little bit more established, not quite as thin, not quite as delicate, so I can clean off some of that eighth to quarter, eighth to quarter, okay, not cleaning all of them. Needle mass is what generates resources that help the tree function and build, okay? Just trying to prepare for wire, give that nice, clean bottom. Notice these needles hanging off of the bottom here. Come back in and I'm gonna reduce those. I'm gonna reduce here. Okay, I've got a group of three on the tip. I'm gonna take off those buds, or that bud, singular bud. This is a really well-prepared, elongating species. Whether this was a spruce, a doug fir, a hemlock, a larch, this is a really good layout, staggered in terms of the occurrence. I've got the branches. This is what I was given. I can't necessarily establish that staggered shape, but this is gonna influence the way we form the structure. We're ready to apply wire. 
