Some of these smaller ones are what I would say is not quite developed enough, but the ramification because we're going to leave it is going to become so fine that it's actually doing the same thing without defoliating. Those decisions, to leave those as opposed to prune them, are strictly being made on the maturation of these actual pieces that have elongated. That really needs to be at the epicenter of where we're making our decisions with Bald Cypress because they do have so many different types of growth and so many different sort of decisions to be made inside of this big mass. Any of these pieces of ramification... Any of these pieces of ramification where we made this cut last year and we're getting all kinds of elongating growth that says it's wanting to lignify and become a branch, we can always come back and shorten that now as well, back to those pieces that are going to give us that ramification so that we can fix or revamp any decisions that may have been poor design decisions at the time based on our lack of knowledge or just in response to. Then here again, we get to this mature piece. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to cut this back to the desired length. That's the only mature piece coming off of this, but I have two pieces that are looking like if I don't shorten them or try to work on them too much, they're going to become ramification as well. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to leave those to continue maturing. Here I'm getting that ruby color, that transition happening here, so I'm going to make that decision on the ramification and clean out all of the junctions and branches that are forming around it. I just keep working my way through this fold. I'm going to make this decision based on what the tree is giving me. If it's strong enough and we're getting that kind of lignification and it appears as though it can handle pruning, then we're pruning. If we want to shorten some pieces that are too long, we can shorten, cleaning off of the bottom, cleaning out crotches, alternating what we're leaving in the defoliation process, knowing that's going to be encouraging growth to take place from that location, leaving some of those vertical branches. . . . because that is the natural way that bald ramification forms and just in general going through it and making all of the decisions we got to make to continue growing this thing towards a higher level of refinement as a bone size specimen. So here again we see that we made a pruning decision here. We've got these two pieces here that are starting to lignify. Now these feel a little underdeveloped but I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to give this a try and see if we can get those to produce a nice flush of growth based on the fact that they matured and they lignified a little bit faster than everything else. But I'm not really super concerned at this point with the final product of this working being aesthetically as good as it could possibly be because my goal is to continue using that strength to drive that growth and to actualize ramification. And if we need thickening, we need elongation, we see pieces on the interior, we see pieces on the interior, we see pieces on the interior, for example, I have a piece of elongating ramification here that is already starting to become lignified. Well I don't have anything back on this branch behind my ramification taking place here. I'm going to let that grow and try to form a substantial branch that I'm going to be able to utilize moving forward. So I'm not going to prune that to try and slow down its growth. It can become a secondary piece of structure that can support a lot more ramification. I'm always trying to make engage those differences about how we want to handle each piece of growth. As we go through this process, and from this cut site, I've got these two but they're very underdeveloped because they've been buried in the canopy. Just bringing those to the surface is going to allow those to contribute. I want to make sure that I don't further exacerbate kind of the situation of the clumping of the growth here. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take down the pieces of ramification that are around it and allow these to continue to grow. I'm going to continue to develop on the twigging and the pruning decisions that I made in the spring so that we get a little bit stronger growth there that's going to last over the winter. Okay and again here is the decision that I made in terms of pruning. These guys are still a little underdeveloped so I'm going to hold back on pruning them. Then I have ramification forming behind them so I'm going to go ahead and clean this up to make sure that I don't have any really structural flaws or issues forming. Clean these up behind it and I'm getting another really vigorous piece of growth that's going to expand the ramification from this much finer branch that already exists. So this is exciting to see all of these different levels of ramification forming and these levels of ramification forming to give my tree a lot of diversity inside of the canopy of the tree as it continues to mature. Okay now here again I've got these two pieces of ramification that were pruned right here in the spring late winter early spring. I've got two pieces here that are starting to lignify and are producing secondary branching. i'm going to go ahead I'm going to shorten that back to those and accept the fact that these are going to continue to grow and get stronger because nothing on this was strong enough. But now when I look at this one next to it I have a little bit of a different situation because I pruned here I got elongating growth along these and this elongating growth is starting to turn that ruby color instead of that green that means i can prune here and i can get two pieces of ramification coming from there. Now this piece here that also seems like it's going to have ramification the future is still green I know when it's green I don't prune it it's not mature enough vascularly to produce those adventitious pieces of ramification and this is how I continue to preserve the development of those weaker branches that do offer the potential to become refinable in the future but aren't quite ready yet here again is another piece I'm going to shorten back to these two pieces these are not showing the kind of color change across the twig that I need so I'm going to leave those and now you can start to see how much Sun and air and and light are going to get into the interior pieces that have the potential to develop but if we just leave it or if we just defoliate it all we take off all of that ramification and this is really that process of preserving and using the things that are going to make this a finer and finer example of a bald cypress in its dormant form or in its future or its winter silhouette so notice how I've staggered from here to here to here to here in terms of my reduction of the needle mass this is what's setting me up and also notice that I've staggered from left to center to right to left to center to right to center to left so that I open the door for that vertical ramification to form on this branch here none of these were forming a dominant piece of ramification outside of what I've established on the tip here so inside of that I need to be able to create that position for that next frond that's going to form that ramification to have the positioning that I want to contribute to the shape of the tree again at any of these branch junctions and let me rotate here at any of these branch junctions I want to be sure to clean the fronds out from that first quarter inch or so and this is standard procedure for any ramification creation because the last thing we want are multiple branches coming from that interior junction I'm going to come in I'm going to clean out the bottoms anything coming off the bottom and then I'm going to again refer to the tip and establish where my ramification is going to be sourced from I'm going to remove fronds growing around pieces of ramification that are contributing to the shape of the tree I'm going to make those pruning decisions staggering that length that I'm leaving when I do choose to prune I'm going to take off any of these unnecessary branches that form around those junctions and then I'm going to start working back trying to find my strongest pieces or anything showing that lignification working back and alternating where those positions of those potential pieces of ramification are in relation to the rest of the tree so again we get that alternation from here to here to top and then we'll go and make that commitment to this side this side being because we have a branch here we wouldn't want to be encouraging growth into that branch 
