What's going on everybody? I wish, I do wish that I was in house tonight, but Super Tuesday from afar, we are on site engaging in a pretty exciting project that I'm relatively sure you'll get to see at some point in the near future. But for the time being, as we enter this next phase and big change of seasons, I wanted to just come back to this concept that we've kind of started on the live stream, which is really covering the knowledge that is necessary to understand how we handle this time of year and how we handle the major monumental shifts of the physiology, the activities and the technical executions and the artistry that we apply to our trees. So welcome. To the fall wrap up. We've got Eve on the chat this evening, Josh producing the live stream. As always, the team put a lot of effort into it. Without further ado, let's begin. Now, much like we started with when we started with the summer wrap up moving into fall, we always have to understand physiologically, where is the tree at? What are our trees doing? What is happening inside of the mechanisms of our tree? And when we broadly kind of cover the concept of physiology, we also have to understand. That although the same mechanism is happening in all of our temperate trees, and we say temperate trees, trees that experience a dormancy, the same mechanisms are applying what that mechanism looks like is going to differ greatly species to species. So as we dive into this, be thinking about, especially at this time of year, we've seen or are seeing the color change happening in our deciduous. We might be seeing shades or tints of winter color coming on to some of our junipers. We might be seeing that brilliant green. Kind of leaking out of our pines, and there's sort of a little bit more of a putrid yellow being left behind, and we're like, is that okay? My juniper turned brown, right? Hopefully, it's like a hydrated brown, right? There's a difference there. Be sure that you get that. Purple, red, are these things okay? Right? And any time we see this massive dramatic change of the physiology of the tree, we always have to be aware, is this what's supposed to be happening or not? And we definitely recognize with the reduction of the number of trees that we're seeing, we're going to have to be aware. Reduction of the daylight length and the dropping of the temperature, that trees are changing their physiological behavior. What is that behavior? Let's dive into the water aspect of physiology. Now, water movement and water mobility, and we talk about the function of water, and let's return to water just as it's basic. How does this behave in the tree? How does a tree use water? What does a tree do with that water? We recognize, and we should be clear, and this is revamping, not revamping, excuse me. This is readdressing the information that we're constantly kind of rehearsing. This is revamping the information that we're constantly kind of rehearsing. Reciting and understanding, right? And the whole notion of bonsai as a practice, right? Bonsai as a lifestyle, bonsai as something that we start to understand, is to develop this kind of almost automated response. When you talk about something becoming a practice, you talk about the action of the art form becoming synonymous with walking, with breathing, with eating. We talk about the function of water being a basic principle in that entire thing. We talk about the function of water being a basic principle in that entire thing. When we talk about water's function inside of a tree, air conditioning, cooling is the major function of water, okay? So when we talk about that, we use that broad brushstroke of 85% air conditioning, now here's the thing about moving from the fall into the winter. Is we definitely recognize at this point in the physiology of the tree it is still using water to a significant degree. But it is not using water to cool itself, right? So we talked about that other 15% as metabolic, right? metabolic activity, utilizing the hydrogen and oxygen from the water molecule broken down via photosynthesis, reconfigured C6H12O6 glucose. This is the energy system of the tree. Now, why is that important? Because the tree no longer has to cool itself. Shorter daylight lengths, lower temperatures, not as much heat that it has to remove out of its system. Transpiration's not being driven. Okay, so we see that 15% now be the component, the portion of the water mass that the tree is utilizing. And how do we know, right? You always have to have a checks and balances to be able to give validation to this is what is happening and here's how we know it. And this is where we see that arc of the increase of temperature tolerance as a tree moves through the fall into the peak of winter and then moves out of that into the motion of spring. And we start to see this as, and if we use the vertical axis as this notion of temperature tolerance. Now, it's a little bit confusing because we're talking about this in degrees. So if we say in the middle or early portion of September, a tree that's in complete growth, right, is tolerant of 32 degrees Fahrenheit, zero degrees Celsius. And we say, yes, okay, if we had a freezing event and it sat at 32 degrees for an hour of time, would that tree be okay in the middle of September in the middle of growth? And the answer is yes, it would be okay, right? But it can't take much more than that. It can't take 32 for two hours. Three hours because the cellular structure is so filled with water. And let's come back to the cellular structure, center of that structure, vacuole, vacuole filled with water, especially in the middle of the growing season. Some sugars and starches, primarily water, right? Because we are cooling in September, hot temperatures, long daylight length, a lot of transpiration. We start to move into this period, fall, vascular growth, productivity, the creation of new cells, of highways, of roots, of xylem, of phloem, branches, trunk, tips, all of this, right? And we start to say, well, now temperature is decreasing, daylight length is decreasing, air conditioning is not necessary, but metabolic activity, when we start to look at the change of winter tolerance, metabolic activity is continuing or else we would not see a tree become more and more tolerant of cold temperatures. All the way up in, when we look at this perfect bell curve, this is almost identical for all temperate trees, the bell curve of winter tolerance. And we say, what is this bottom basement figure? How tolerant is my tree? Because as we move into the winter season, we are making decisions. Do I put it in a greenhouse? Do I set it from the bench down onto the ground? How do I make these decisions? It's a juniper. It's a pine. It's really healthy. It's kind of healthy. It's in a big pot. It's in a small pot. How do I know? The answer is we don't. So we always err on the side of caution, but to understand that that water at this point in the season, understanding water's role at the winter is still based on the decomposition of the water molecule into hydrogen, oxygen, the decomposition of carbon dioxide into carbon and oxygen and to the reformation of hydrogen, carbon and oxygen into glucose. This is your fundamental building block that allows that temperature tolerance to increase to say, maybe it's 10 degrees Fahrenheit. Maybe it's negative 10 degrees Fahrenheit. Who knows what that is? We're going to err on the side of caution, but this accumulation of energy is what allows us to be more tolerant of the temperature. So we're going to err on the side of caution, but this accumulation of energy allows us when we start to push out into April to have the energy to generate that next flush of foliar mass. And so we see this accumulation of energy, right? This accumulation of stored sugars and starches, this new tissue that's produced and the energy system of the tree. When we start to talk about that generation of vascular resources, where we have this recession of sugars or this movement of sugars from the tip, and we see those leaves falling off. What's changing? What's causing that change? Reabsorption of the chlorophyll pigment, right? Because chlorophyll is very susceptible to cold. And we're looking at water movement, giving mobility to giving the capacity for those sugars and starches to be pulled back, to be loaded into the vacuole as dissolved solutes, right? What gives us what gives us this increased cold tolerance, dissolved solutes inside of the vacuole, the pigmentation from chlorophyll, the component that make the green coloration, but also the accumulated sugars and starches of the continued photosynthetic process. However slow it is, however slow it is, it is still constantly happening. This continual amassing of sugars and starches that get tucked into those vacuoles. And here's the thing about this, right? If we're talking about deciduous trees and water mobility, and we're saying, listen, all the leaves have fallen off. Well, you still have a high concentration of sugars and starches in the cellular structure of the plant, right? And that's what we're talking about. If we're talking about deciduous trees and starches in the cellular structure at the tip of that branch for two to three weeks after all of those leaves are gone, and as that that sugar and starch concentration of all of that pigmentation that's been reabsorbed starts to redistribute across every single cell on the tree, and we see the roots carry the same amount of stored dissolved solutes as the trunk, as the branches, and as the branch tips, all of a sudden we start to recognize, oh, that is where the opportunity to continue that work or do that fall pruning as the leaves fall off. That's where the opportunity to continue that fall on our deciduous tree arises from. That redistribution of energy, that compartmentalization of the damage from the pruning process, that is the deciduous model. Now, does that apply to the conifer? No. No, it doesn't. Oh, conifers start to show winter color. This is not a good time to be working on our tree. Not a good time to be working on our tree. But you said with deciduous, it's a great time to be pruning. This is where we separate. Deciduous, high water mobility, effortless transition of resources through the vascular system of the tree. Conifers, even the most highly water mobile conifer, still functioning at a mere fraction of the water mobility of deciduous. And when we say, oh, I'm pruning my deciduous as they go into dormancy, late fall, early winter, I should be pruning my conifers then, or can I prune my conifers then? Can I prune my deciduous conifers then? And the answer is no. Deciduous, yes. Conifers, no. Because the water mobility that a conifer needs to compartmentalize, the water mobility a conifer needs to have auxin delineated at the stronger tips to guide the growth and navigate that tree's next season of full year production, if we remove that and send it into dormancy or a slower state of metabolic activity and water movement, it does not have the capacity to maintain its winter dormancy and its cold hardiness, and it does not have the capacity to respond next spring with a vigorous push of growth because its hormonal allocation and its navigation system has been offset by that pruning mechanism at the wrong time of year. So we see same physiological behavior, but we see a divide in how we handle it. Hands off on conifers, time to be pruning the structural pieces, the finer tips of a lot of our deciduous species. As we see that pigmentation reabsorbed, the transition of sugars and starches across that chain of cellular structure, and we see those trees move into that dormant period of the year. The last gasp opportunity, all driven by the continual movement of water, but the lower portion of that water as the metabolic component primarily, lack of necessity to cool, shorter daylight length, decreased temperatures, and we start to see a reduction in the amount of water we apply to our tree. Nutrition, nutrition. Oh, this late fall, early winter. What do we do about nutrition? This is such a big topic. In fall, bonsai practice 0-10-10. Do we fertilize? What should we use? There are several components of the physiology of a tree that help us analyze and understand how do we handle the nutritional delivery of resources at this time of year. Is it necessary? Does the tree need it? What would encourage us to be giving nutrition at this time of year? If we did give it, how would we give it? What would that look like? And what happens afterwards? What are we expecting for tress? Are there risks? Let's dig in to this. One thing that we understand in terms of the energy system of a tree is that we recognize the fall season is the first season of growth as far as a tree is concerned. And this is an arguable thing, debatable, because you germinate seeds in the spring, not in the fall, right? well you germinate a seed in the spring, so doesn't that make the spring the first season? Let's be careful here, okay, because the seed already has from its production last season the energy that exists inside of the physical seed itself, the stored resources that give it that first push to create the radical or the root and the cotyledons or the initial leaf mass, okay, so even if you think, hey, listen, that root is growing in the spring, the root that's growing in the spring, the foliar mass that's growing in the spring of a seed came from the stored resources last fall when that physical seed was actually made through that reproductive meristem of the plant, and so when we see this, we recognize, oh, there it is, the fall season injecting stored sugars and starches as it's amassing all of the other stored energy across all of the cells of the tree. That dissolved sugar and starch inside of that cell, lowering the temperature that the water inside of the vacuole of that cell freezes at, crystallizes and ruptures or causes freeze damage to that cell and that cell's cells and that cell's cell's cells and that tissue, that group of cells, the damage or the necrosis of that tissue, when we look at the loading of a seed occurring in the fall while all of that energy is being dumped into the system and water is being utilized, granted to a lower degree because it's for the metabolic process, which we just covered and not the cooling process as much, but still a pivotal component, and when we look at this, we recognize, ah, the fall season, so big, right, because it is what sets us up for the stored energy of next year, and as a result, right, when we turn the tables, we have that summer dormancy in the hotter portions of the world, whether you're southern hemisphere, or whether you're northern hemisphere, right, the farther away from the equator you go, the less summer dormancy is going to be experienced in temperate trees, right, so when we get to the Pacific Northwest, you're sitting at a point where the heat accumulation in the middle of the summer isn't for most, isn't most years enough or prolonged enough to cause a dormancy, right, upstate New York, are you going to get dormancy, you know, when you talk about the Canadian border, or Canada itself, are you going to get dormancy, when you talk about the Scandinavian countries of Europe, are you going to get dormancy, you know, but you go down to Spain, you go down to the Mediterranean basin of Italy, of France, are you going to have dormancy, yeah, you go down to the southeastern United States, you get into Florida, you get into the Gulf Coast, are you going to have dormancy, yes, you get into Southern California, you get into some of the interior portions of Southern California, non-coastal areas of California, are you going to have dormancy, absolutely, right, so we see, that latitude in your position from the equator weigh in on whether or not you experience that summer dormancy, but the summer dormancy matters, because when we talked about this in the summer wrap-up, we begin fertilizing as soon as we get past those really hot temperatures that cause the tree to say, listen, not time to add any more tissue, not time to cellularly divide, not time to add that additional water draw on what we're already trying to do to cool ourselves, we're going to go ahead, we're going to take the time off, oh, shorter daylight length, a little bit cooler temperatures, especially if it's nighttime temperatures cooling down, boom, let's start growing, and we have this race, this very aggressive race over the fall season to accumulate the kind of resources that we need to not just give us good growth next year, but also give us the resources to create the vascular tissue, which sets up structure, but also create the vascular tissue and store it, lock all of that, pound that vascular tissue with all of the sugars and starches, from all of that supplemental nutrition and the fertilization process that allows the metabolic activity that 15 percent to function to the highest possible efficiency and capacity, and create those dissolved solutes in the vacuole of that cell, again, keep in mind that water, H2O here, but when we talk about that gain of winter tolerance to temperature, we're loading this up with sugars, we're loading this up with starches we're loading this up with dissolved solutes. decrease the temperature that that water right like an antifreeze decreases the temperature that that water will freeze at crystallize and rupture the cell and so we see wow this is huge but what about this what about that area right there we're closing in on freezing temperatures maybe we've already frozen but daytime temperatures are back in the 40s 50s 60s does it make sense to fertilize at this time and what do we fertilize with now i think this is when we really start to refine our fertilizing practices right because when we're talking about the beginning of summer we're talking about temperatures high metabolic rate rapid water movement and if the tree is active to that degree so is the microbial activity in our container that we work so hard to cultivate nurture and move forward and so all of a sudden we've got a lot of microbial activity we've got a very active water mobility in the tree and we say, listen, high active microbial activity, high water mobility, dry pelletized fertilization, feed the microbial activity, allow the microbial activity to take action on that dry fertilizer, whether it's a bio gold, whether it's a cottonseed meal, whether it's, uh, you know, a rapeseed cake, whether it's, uh, some Dr. Earth, whether it's, you know, whatever we're using that we have found to be successful in our region and contribute to the health of our plant, we use that dry pelletized fertilizer at those moments where we have high metabolic activity and high microbial activity. And the beginning of fall is that moment. Now, if we can squeeze two applications in over the course of the fall, we feel pretty good, but there are those moments where we get this continuation of fall. We get this lingering. We see the trees staying in a relative state of, of activity. Temperatures are decreasing nighttime temperatures, specifically decreasing. And we say, man. I would like more energy. I didn't get two applications or my trees are hungry. I want to set them up for a big push. They're in development. They're in secondary. Maybe it's a deciduous tree in a high degree of refinement. And I feel like it needs a little bit more, right? Depending on how you handle your fertilization. This is where we start to talk about liquid. Okay. Liquid fertilization from the discussion of fish hydrolysates from the discussion of kelp, these resources that in liquid form, you water it in boom. Tree has access. To the resources. We don't depend on microbial activity, but the application of that organic liquid fertilizer also does not have a detrimental or a decreasing impact on our microbial activity in the container, right? And that's the difference. When we talk fish hydrolysates and we talk about kelp versus a miracle grow and Osma coat or these chemical-based fertilizers, the chemical-based fertilizers probably will have a detrimental impact if used for a prolonged. Period of time on microbial activity, at least in the bonsai container in this aggregate soil that we utilize. But when we start continuing not start when we continue to build fish hydrolysates complex amino acid chains, we're using kelp. We're facilitating these components that feed to that system that both fungi and bacteria benefit from but also is immediately accessible to the tree and does not require rapid microbial activity to break the nutrition down into usable forms of ionic content for the tree. That is where we see in that lower temperature lower amount of activity tree still being triggered to take in water and metabolize liquid fertilization and I would encourage you. As we evolve in our knowledge of supplemental nutrition in the bonsai containerized environment, we recognize there is not one fertilizer. There is not one approach but there is a mixture and an understanding of with the question of supplemental nutrition. What are we trying to accomplish? What are we trying to accomplish and if we get to the tail end wrap-up of fall moving into winter and we still need want or see the opportunity for more to feed what we are trying to accomplish with whatever that tree is necessitating that we're considering this action on liquid is going to be the choice that gives you the best option effectiveness and has no downside right now. What would be the downside? What if we take this moment? What if we apply dry pelletized fertilizer at this point in time, what would happen? Well, number one, you don't have the temperature driving water mobility. You don't have the temperature driving microbial activity and there's a strong chance that with the lack of those two triggers being driven by daylight length and temperature, which we've lost the majority of we really don't have dry pelletized fertilizer being broken down into usable forms of nutrition case. So it doesn't necessarily serve a point but beyond that right we add a tremendous amount of organic mass to the surface of our soil and then we move into a state of dormancy where that organic material just sort of sits there and in a very wet region will turn into kind of decomposing organic material a sludge a slurry an oxygen space causing fine decomposition of mass. Potentially not just non-functional for the tree potentially detrimental for the balance of water and oxygen. And again, how do you give health? How do you create an environment? That allows you tree to thrive balance of water and oxygen in this shallow containerized environment that does have a limited amount of gravity acting on it the application of dry pelletized fertilizer at the tail end of fall is a very negative thing that we could do if our trees are not active if water is not moving and if we don't have the microbial activity to make the resources available and again just promoting that liquid organic fertilizer as your potential last application. If you need it. And it satisfies what you're trying to accomplish. Okay, supplemental nutrition helping us create vascular tissue supplemental nutrition helping us generate the stored dissolved solute sugars and starches that give rise to a greater degree of winter tolerance and supplemental nutrition at the different times of year in its different forms to be usable accessible and valuable for the tree the microbial environment in the containerized system that we're cultivating disease and pest this during the winter time. Although it seems like we don't have to deal with disease and pest is actually a time in the year where we have the capacity to deal with them the most and what does that mean? What state are our diseases and our pests existing in within our trees? If it's a fungal body, there's no way or no real reason for a fungal body to be actively infecting unless temperatures are warm enough that they can drive metabolic activity in the tree and metabolic activity. As far as the pathogen germination of the spore and penetration of the cuticle. There's not a lot of pathogens when we're in a dormant period of the year that are going to be doing that or really growing or actively harming our tree insects just as susceptible to cold if not even more immobile than the tree the water the resources the microbial activity as well unless the insect is inside of a warmer system like the containerized environment. Okay, so we don't necessarily deal directly with visible insect activity or visible fungal activity during the winter time, but we know that it is there and it is there in the exact same dormant stage as all of the other processes of our tree at this point in time. So we start to talk about disease in the form of spore and we start to talk about pest in the form of egg and we start to recognize hey, this is a moment in time where my tree is not necessary. Really active metabolically or very lowly active metabolically and as a result can we do something to knock down the accumulation of the pathogens of the insects that have occurred over the course of the season or multiple seasons as we see problems with fungal activity we see problems with insect activity starting to amass inside of our garden and this is where you see the common practice of the dormant spray become a very big aspect of disease and pest management at the very onset of winter tail end of fall deciduous leaves have shriveled have dropped. Maybe we've pruned. Maybe we didn't need to coniferous trees pines have had that recession of green. They're now slightly yellower junipers have turned their brown or their purple or the red or their bronze or their light lighter green. We see all of our trees showing some indication that they have pulled that pigmentation susceptible to cold. Back into the vacuoles that exist at the tip of that tree and this is the moment where we recognize that dormant spray is possible now that dormant spray may look like one of two things that may look like some sort of oil and we can talk about a Volk oil. We could talk about a mineral oil. We could talk about a neem oil as a potential dormant spray that acts via the action of suffocation. Okay, so when we talk about oils, we are suffocating or eliminating. Even. In a state of dormancy a spore or an egg. There is still a necessity for oxygen to be press present that oil suffocating those components of the spore of the egg is where the action and the benefit comes in decreasing populations. Therefore next spring temperatures rise daylight length increases and we don't see the triggering of insect or disease pathogen infections because we suppressed the components that give rise to those diseases. Okay oils. Number two and potentially the most commonly utilized in not just the bones. I practice but horticulture or any sort of agricultural process lime sulfur lime sulfur as a very alkaline high pH component that through its caustic action of pH makes an inhospitable environment for the spore or for the egg to survive and if we go back to the very basic history of dormant sprays as they were utilized in Japan for bonsai we really saw. Dormant sprays come about when the increase of scale and when the increase of spider might started really impacting bonsai cultivation in Japan and they found that the dormant spray of lime sulfur eradicated a lot of the overwintering insect populations and allowed them to cultivate their trees without as much disease and insect pressure. Mirai has historically not abided by or utilized dormant sprays but as the winters get warmer and. As we see more although low metabolic activity we see more continuation of pathogens over the winter we see an expanding amount in the drier summers spider might populations scale starting to impact our junipers again we are at a point where we will be applying a lime sulfur spray why would you choose a lime sulfur over an oil well very simple reasoning for me oils have the secondary effect benefit of suffocation spore egg. We got that okay secondary effect of dissolving the waxy covering or the cuticle that protects the foliar mass of some of our trees now most of the species that we utilize oils on if we follow label recommendation don't really suffer at all it's not a big deal it's a completely safe methodology neem oil Volk oil mineral oil horticultural oil right follow label recommendation should be just fine but when we deal with our wild species of junipers when we deal with our Rocky Mountain when we deal with our seer our California or Utah and we pull those trees into a domesticated state we know that the foliar mass changes the foliar mass gets longer it gets bigger it gets more aggressive it's not as tight and compact as it was in the starved environments will that change that more aggressive growth higher water consumptive faster rate of productivity sugars and starches but also driven by the thinner cuticle that guides all of that behavior. And that thinner cuticle when we take an oil and we apply it over the top does give rise to the opportunity for phytotoxicity the dissolving of that cuticle to the degree that the tissue underneath it cannot sustain itself and this is where at Mirai because we have such a high quantity of native junipers I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to move towards lime sulfur okay now lime sulfur are there negative aspects of lime sulfur absolutely this has a significant white residue you follow label recommendations it's on your pots it's stays on the tree you know does it have a continual prolonged impact is it impact the soil you know can we dilute it to a point where we don't get that residue and it still has efficacy these are all of the questions that we ask ourselves around lime sulfur and so we recognize that a dormant spray is a potential tool it is something that at this time of year fall wrap-up winter preparation we do have the ability to utilize and utilize in a way that will potentially offset some of the pressures and necessity for further chemical use we might have to lean on should we not apply a dormant spray but we also have to juggle the pros and cons experimenting on a few trees making sure they're fine right trying it out reading the label understanding the application the methodology the dilution rates etc these are this is the work that we have to do to effectively utilize these proactive preventative measures but I do think that they hold a lot of potential I think that they do have an opportunity to help a garden that is sliding into a greater degree of fungal activity and a greater degree of insect activity and where Mariah's at with the warming winters the prolonged moisture the perpetuation of phomopsis over a greater number of months in the year and the increased population of scale and spider mite this will be our action to curb the disease and pest expansion we've seen over the past few years at Mariah okay now energy at this point in time and I always I find it so interesting when we get into fall wrap-up winter preparation in the winter season most people say well this is my time right in and I'm gonna put my trees in cold storage I'm gonna go inside hot cocoa apple cider maybe a little hit of schnapps in there depending on how you feel right apple pie Thanksgiving Christmas nothing to do wrong right depends depends actually let me say it depends okay because there's a big difference between dormancy in Minnesota. There's a big difference between dormancy in Sweden and dormancy in in in some poor. I don't even know if Australia or South Africa would experience dormancy. I would tend to say no, but you see do see pictures down in Tasmania of some fairly cold temperatures. Yeah, there's a big difference between intense dormancy where it's like I got to put my tree underground or it's not going to survive the winter versus dormancy where it's like I've got them on the bench occasionally. It'll get cold and we'll set them on the ground or to dormancy like Southern California where it's like. Well, it's not really dormant and pomegranates don't even fully lose their leaves. Oh, okay, cool. So what does the energy system look like in any of these regions? How does that impact the choices I make to overwinter my trees? How could potential methodologies and mannerisms of overwintering impact the energy swing? Okay, we have to go back. We have to go back again to what we've been talking about. Okay, this accumulation this continued amassing of cold tolerance. Of temperature resistance to the point where just after the shortest day of the year in the month of January in the Northern Hemisphere, this would be the month of June in the Southern Hemisphere. We hit that point where we have maximum cold tolerance. Maybe that's negative 10 degrees Fahrenheit for a ponderosa pine in a relatively large container. We will come back to the technical aspects of dormancy in the next section that we're going to discuss. So hold tight. We'll get there. I promise. Okay, but maybe we get. It's a negative 10 degrees Fahrenheit as a cold tolerance with the characteristics and the soil mass and the containerized environment that that tree has and we say well January, you know from September to January we're talking about basically November and again the farther north you go from the equator or the farther south you go the earlier this is going to happen. Maybe it's October in in some of the portions of you know, New York maybe it's late September in Chicago or Maine, right and we start to say I'm going to experience my first freeze. Is that the trigger or the onset of dormancy? No, no. Okay, and no matter how far south you go the continual amassing of energy over the course of these months October November December January is occurring. This means that sugars and starches are being generated by the tree metabolic activity is happening doesn't necessarily mean happening to a degree. That we need to be fertilizing to promote it but happening rapidly because there is still photosynthesis taking place and this photosynthesis this accumulation of sugar and starch that's being stored in the vacuole of each cell across that energy system. This is very important to understand when we move into the winter season because we start to say well listen if I don't get to this peak amount of energy when I start next season, where does that bar of energy to produce that foliar mass where does that start on this chain of energy to generate the kind of growth and further development of my tree? Well say for example, we put this tree into darkness at some point in time. Does that mean that I only accumulate that much energy because I stopped the photosynthetic process? Maybe is that the only way you keep that tree alive possibly I'll take it. I'll take it right? This is the balance. This is the give-and-take of bonsai. This is the understanding of physiology and how we work with the environment that we're pursuing this art form in right? What happens if I put grow lights does do those contribute probably not as much as the sun but probably maybe that increases. Okay, do I want to keep the temperature high? No, no because keeping the temperature high is actually going to keep metabolic activity happening when at a point where we have shorter daylight lengths and less sun intensity and the trees actually going to use energy instead of create energy and we're going to have far more problems. So we want that dormant temperature. We want that. 32 34 36 38 42 degrees Fahrenheit and below you are in the window. That's where we need to be 42 degrees Fahrenheit or below. There is no measurable metabolic activity. That is where we say dormancy exists, right? If we exist in that realm, we are good to go anything above that. We've got measurable metabolic activity. Okay, so this continual sort of trend is also a big discussion cold tolerance. If it equals stored sugars and starches in the vacuole, the more sugars and starches that are stored. The tree is withholding water from moving in through the root system and you got to think about this. Okay, this tree here this tree has this root system and there's a ton of water in this root system. This is a copious quantity of water out here, but you have a ton of sugars and starches in here. Now if you know anything about water water water can be a little bit of a tricky customer from time to time. It can be a big force. It can do things. We don't want it to do it can cause significant damage water kind of does what it wants and what water wants to do is water wants to move from a higher concentration to a lower concentration. Well, look at what I have here a higher concentration of water in the soil. I have a lower concentration of water in the actual cellular structure of the tree. Wait, why do we have a lower concentration of water again? The vacuole that holds water we dumped a whole bunch of sugar starch and D solve solutes inside of that the amount of water inside of that is very very low again. Salt water freezes at a lower temperature than pure water when we dissolve sugars and starches into the water of the cellular structure that water freezes at a lower temperature hence getting this greater increase of winter tolerance hints having this greater amount of stored sugars and starches to give us that winter tolerance hints elevating the stored energy. We have come spring of next year to generate profound amounts of vigorous. Growth and manage them in whatever technique and way we can to give us the kind of product and accomplish what we want to accomplish. All right. So when we start to see this the tree is actively keeping that water out out of the root. That's an expenditure of energy. This is the beautiful thing about the cellular structure when we talk about the cell wall. What's the function of the cell wall of the cell wall gives structure to the cell. That's great. It keeps everything in cell wall controls and keeps everything out at this time of year. It is. An impenetrable fortress. This is a castle wall on all of the membranes that control whether water enters or leaves and it's saying halt you shall not come here. Right? You do not get in because I gotta store more sugars and starches to make sure that I don't freeze and die. Right? And this is what's giving us this kind of performance here. So as we start to see the turn of the daylight link. Now we start to see daylight length going up and we start to see incremental temperature. Increases on average which a plant if we're saying look February is cold. I don't know what you're talking about temperature increase their incremental increases and the plant feels it right plants much smarter than us. That is when the tree starts to allow a little bit of water in a little bit more water in quite a bit more water in now the water is starting to move and it's pushing and it's applying this pressure and it's carrying the sugars and starches cell to cell and there's a little bit of transpiration taking place, which is what's evacuating water. And creating the space in this already compressed chain for that to leave that to fill its space that to fill its space that to fill its space that to fill its space and with each movement a little bit more sugar and starch being carried to start to move all of that energy up to the foliar growth component of the tree as we move into the spring and as it creates foliar mass it spins that on photosynthetic expansion of the surface area solar panels leaves needles, right and then that cuticle forms and we regain that energy and then we get to fall and we get in excess of that so that we make a bigger tree each year and on and on and on the cycle continues right. So when we talk about energy over the winter time and we say our job is done here. You could not be farther from the truth. You could not be farther from the truth. And this is a misnomer in bonsai that I think has significantly impaired and set back the practice of bonsai to think that over the winter season. I'm hands-off now. Some of you are going to say what about deciduous trees? Okay, they don't even have any leaves. They can't photosynthesize well check this out. Yeah, I'm a blow your mind right now deciduous trees drop their leaves and they still follow the same arc of accumulation and increase winter tolerance. How how does that happen deciduous trees photosynthesize through the bark deciduous trees continue to photosynthesize through the bark. Are you kidding me? This is a study that was done on Aspen's populous tremuloides. How do Aspen's exist at Alpine elevations if they don't continue to amass more sugars and starches and how do they expand to a greater size photosynthesizing through the bark? Okay. So when we see these behaviors and we say listen this applies to the physiological Trends of temperate trees, right there are divergent moments where we prune a deciduous as it drops its leaves. We don't prune a conifer or it compromises winter hardiness, right conifers have full your mask. They keep photosynthesizing. We understand the continued increase deciduous trees lose their leaves. How does that happen different mechanism now, right but all in all what you need to understand is the winter season is a paramount time for you to either complement the stored energy of your system or potentially detriment the stored energy of your system. And this is really where we have to think about intelligently this dance that we do and this border that we are constantly giving and taking with to find the line where our trees can exist in our environment. With our facilities and the species we've chosen to have success right and there is no perfect system at Bonsai Mirai with the water that we get and the increase of temperatures in the winter time. Every tree should be inside of a greenhouse not to protect from cold but to protect it from the water, right if you were in Minnesota every tree should be in a greenhouse where it continues to get sunlight but doesn't get down to negative 15 or negative 20 degrees. If you lived in Southern California, ideally every tree would be in a cooler that would get down below 40 degrees cause it to go to full dormancy and have the maximum amount of energy for next spring, but we recognize that that's not realistic and that's not possible. And so we do the best we can trees sit outside at Bonsai Mirai and consequently we have to rotate them through the greenhouse right in Minnesota. There are dark shelters because heating a greenhouse is not realistic. Okay, we sacrifice the light. It is what it is, but they survive right Southern California. Yeah, pomegranate, Japanese maple, Chinese elm, they're semi-evergreen. They look a little ratty. They're going to continue to have a lot of energy. They're going to behave just fine next year. Okay. Okay. Okay, we can deal with that. Can we improve it? Sure. I'm sure some of us are learning things. We can improve it. All right, but as long as we understand it, at least we can intelligently make that decision. Energy systems over the dormant season, definitely an unexplored and under discussed topic in Bonsai. All right, it's time to cut to the chase. I understand and I think all of us are curious. Hey, how do we prepare for winter? Like what does this even look like on a higher level? Are there things we can do better? Are there things we're doing right? At what point do we need to be more aware? Where's the danger zone? How cold can this tree get? Will it die if I leave it outside? When do I take it off of a bench? Do I need a greenhouse? What is a dark space? All of the considerations that go into the actual knowledge and technique. We've talked about the physiology. We understand the water mobility. We get the role of supplemental nutrition for prepping the tree for this winter tolerance, but it's such a it's such a untouchable concept of where do we cross the boundary of life and death in winter? Where does work on a tree over the fall season compromise its capacity to be able to tolerate cold conditions and on and on and on the technique of the fall wrap-up and winter preparation? Is a big one. Now, let's just first start by talking about winter prep. Okay, because prep and then the actual technique of overwintering. I feel are two very different things. Okay. So when we start to talk about winter prep, I think winter prep has a multitude of components and whenever anybody says there's not much to do at this time of the year. I just look at them and think you're crazy either. You're crazy or you don't have that many trees because. Outside of that. This is one of the most challenging because of everything we have to do times in the season. Okay, and we start to say with winter prep. We're talking about the fact that number one. We've got facilities are our facilities ready for that moment when we are going to have to turn trees in and you might be saying well, you know the facility preparation happens. We slowly put our trees in there and then if a cold event occurs that occurs and I would then automatically challenge. That and say, okay, I don't know your region. I respect if you've had success and continue to have success. Have you noticed any abnormalities in your trees or challenging components of their growth over time, especially the strength of their spring growth the productivity and their evolution as a bonsai over the course of a singular year of growing and do we ever think and look back on that fall fertilization and the course of winter as a potential limitation that has reduced. How far we can push a tree and how much we can achieve in a singular year as a result potentially of this moment in their growth quote-unquote growth where we think that they are inactive. And I think a lot of times when we talk about that challenge, we do have this sort of lack of or a little bit of an obtuse viewpoint of the dormant season as this inactive moment where we can forget about everything tuck our trees away and call it good and that's totally inaccurate. Okay. So from a facilities perspective, I would say having your facilities prepared cleaned having whatever kind of healing in material bottom dressing borders around your healing in beds. I'm having your your ground clean the leaves blown the debris out of the way or maybe the debris if you're going to use leaves as an insulation factor accumulated to be able to rapidly make that change from fall into winter because the longer we leave those trees at an elevated position on the benches where they get great sun exposure where they can continue amassing that energy. We're already very clear that those trees are amassing a significant amount of stored resources over that fall season giving them maximum capacity in a position to potentially apply that last liquid solution of fertilizer at that tail end of the fall as we start to begin winter having them in a position where your dormant spray is possible and then having the capacity to put them away so that we can really make sure we get thorough coverage everything that we do in bonsai is speaking to really ensuring the highest level of execution as we apply the techniques and that is what gives us the effectiveness and validity of the effort. We spend to apply that technique at Mirai when we talk facilities, we have our heat beds heat beds are prepped heat beds are tested each season to make sure that each mat is functional to provide the bottom heat that we need. The pumice is clean the heat bed is set up. We make sure that our electrical systems are dialed in we run through our testing systems on our heaters. So we run through that propane. We stock our heaters with propane. We check all of our electric space heaters. We check our emergency kerosene systems should we lose power and run out of fuel over the course of a prolonged period of time. We clean the gutters. We go through the exterior of the greenhouse. We've washed off the paneling or the plastic. So we get ultimate light transparency, right? We talk about cleanliness. We talk about space being prepared. We talk about benches being washed. We talk about potential irrigation systems being disinfected. We talk about fans making sure they're operational to move air, right? All of the things we talk about landscapes being pruned. We talk about the facilities if we're going to drop the trees to the ground. Being prepared for those pieces to be in place. We talk about the accumulation of blankets. Should we need to wrap containers on the bench or should we need to protect sensitive trees on the ground? We talk about whatever construction needs to accommodate new trees or facilitate the rapid movement of trees that might be very precarious to carry. Facilities as a preparatory process that we are not reactive to a winter condition, but we are proactively prepared for that winter condition become a major technique and we don't think about this typically, but and I'll just be honest with you even over the course of Mirai. This has had to be a learned process. I didn't come back from Japan and be like I know how to do bonsai in the Pacific Northwest with completely different facilities and species and conditions. This has been a 10-year process to be prepped to the point where our facilities are up to snuff and ready to accept trees, come fall season when we experience that initial Arctic cold front that inevitably is going to blow down in the middle of November typically over the course of a very prolonged period of weather history in the middle of November, right? And even to that degree winter preparation. Are we aware of the winter trends? Are we aware and constantly monitoring the weather to dictate and guide our approach to the bonsai process? These are pieces that we can execute at a higher level to enable us to give our bonsai the best at the end of fall and really maximize that energy accumulation as they bind all of those sugars and starches in the vacuole and help ourselves put our minds at ease that we have everything prepared should winter conditions demand that we take action. And so we talk as one of these last big pieces of winter preparation soils soils, right and and and I don't nobody told Troy and I this when we start to talk about soil. Prep at Mirai. That if we wait much past the middle of summer in the Pacific Northwest, I can't get dry pumice. I can't get dry lava. And if my Akadama isn't stored correctly, I don't get that Akadama to be dry either all the way through the winter into the spring repotting season. I cannot have dry soil components. If I have not prepped my soil conditions to be able to store. First of all obtain dry material if it's wet dry it in the summer sun and then store it so that it stays dry and we're repotting with dry medium. And now some of us might be saying well, why would you want to repot with dry medium? Anyways, isn't that bad? No, this is the only way that Akadama holds its structure as we're chop sticking those particles in to those open spaces in the root mass of the tree. We need those components and even if pumice and lava are wet and Akadama is dry the second that you mix them Akadama is so thirsty. In that state right minorly hydrophobic in terms of the watering application, but really wanting to imbibe that water that Akadama very quickly becomes very wet very soft and ultimately decomposes simply in the repotting process worst-case scenario to repot with wet Akadama soil prep as a technique for fall wrap-up moving into the winter season huge component of Bonsai huge component of Bonsai, right? And this even carries us into now. What about repotting? Tool prep. Okay, have you have you gone ahead and sharpened your scissors sharpen? Have you gone ahead and prepared chopsticks? Do you have your bamboo have you created your chopsticks for the season? So that when it is time to repot in the rare instances that we have a break between family between life between work or if you're a Bonsai professional to handle all of the copious quantities of repotting and student utilization and all of the things that we're doing. Have you made those preparatory moves to have that bamboo on site or to have formed those chopsticks? So you're ready. Have you gone ahead and screened your soil masses? Have you created died shredded and dried your top dressing you have you collected your moss from the mountains from the surrounding area short fibered tight growing on aggregate surfaces. Do you have that at your disposal ready to be able to apply as a top dressing to those trees that you're spending a lot of time care love money and attention on. Giving them the best opportunity to thrive as you move forward. This is fall prep. This is winter being ready for that next turn of events knowing that it is far more challenging to come back at the coldest time of the year with the shortest daylight length and make all of these adjustments if we're not ready for it and didn't think about it proactively. This is a very well-timed video giving you a tremendous amount of opportunity to be able to take these actions after seeing it set yourself up for success. Okay. One more piece. I'm going to throw at you in terms of winter prep and then we're going to dive into all the ways. We protect our trees and establish those thresholds for what we do with them in that run up to that first major cold event. Okay, do we have the ceramics? Do we know what trees were repotting? Do we know why we're repotting them? Okay in the fall season as I'm walking through the garden at Mirai. I'm utilizing my memory my records of trees. And I'm also. Utilizing their current state of health what I've witnessed as issues accumulating over the course of time. Maybe I have root aphids becoming an issue. I'm recognizing root aphids are a bigger issue for trees that are root bound in containers at Mirai. Okay, so I'm looking at root bound trees. I'm looking at do I have root aphid issues? I'm looking at do I have decomposed soil whose surface I've cleaned and I still have a lack of water percolation. Do I have aesthetic changes to containers? Do I have the containers to make that aesthetic change? Have I thought about sourcing? Those ceramics? Have I looked at my resources? Have I ordered those containers from the the custom ceramicist that I'm going to be supporting or from a facility like Bonsai Mirai? That's constantly trying to supply containers. We can utilize in a variety of form shapes and sizes. Check out our web store, right? Have we made those types of proactive moves towards knowing what we're going to be repotting having our soil system set up having the resources and having the eventual vessel that that tree is going. To sit in right because if we haven't these are things that you can do that will heighten the success of your Bonsai operation and waiting until the week before we repot to figure out your soils or to find that ceramic is the the recipe for creating a subpar at best composition. You take what you get at that point instead of proactively finding what you want and having the time to source that piece that makes that tree truly spectacular. Okay, just some. Ideas. I'm not telling you how to do to perform Bonsai. I'm not suggesting you go out and buy a ton of containers. I'm not telling you you need two tons of soil prepared. I'm just saying hey look. As we look at this season where people say, yeah, there's really not much going on. I'm sitting here saying who really are you sure? Okay, something to think about. The moment that you've been waiting for and let's just address. The elephant in the room and that is I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. Right? I don't know. I don't know what temperature your tree is going to be damaged. I don't know what winter conditions are going to be thrown at you that could compromise the health of your tree. I don't know what container size or what species or what wind or moisture or temperature are going to do to each individual tree that we deal. With here's what I do know. I'm not interested in finding out right? I'm not interested in finding out now. We do have some very significant things that we can make an educated guess about right? And let's just start with how would we recognize a tree would be cold tolerant and how would we recognize a tree might have cold susceptibility? Okay, so when we start to talk about tolerance. We're saying. Number one species the species what environment does that species come from? What characteristics does that species have? What elevation? What is it typically experience? What is that species geared to survive when I look at pines? I'm saying listen extremely fleshy tissue filled with sugars and starches low water content already and a low water mobility. These are trees that with that course root system that holds resources that heavy trunk that holds resources those thick branches and beefy needles that hold resources are extremely cold tolerant. They come from cold conditions. They come from cold environments and historically pines are incredibly durable to the cold as a result of all of those factors right now when I shift and I start to say junipers are junipers cold tolerant. Juniper. It's above ground incredibly cold tolerant junipers in the native environment extremely cold tolerant junipers in a bonsai container pretty cold tolerant. But there's a nuance here right strength and junipers comes from the foyer mass junipers have a tremendous tannic content. Which is what gives rise to the red heartwood in the core of most junipers of significant age but doesn't necessarily mean that the live vein is is rock-solid cold tolerant. Although I very much. Doubt you'll ever see a juniper die from damage to the branching or living tissue the susceptibility in juniper comes from the moment where we sever that root that holds the juniper in the ground where we separate it from its big thick beefy roots in the nursery container and all of a sudden we start leaning on the fine fleshy roots those white tips and those highly scaled tiny small fine root mass that gives rise to that compact foyer mass up in the top of the tree. That is when juniper. Junipers become susceptible to cold it's not the foliage strength and junipers comes from the foliage it's not the living tissue or the vascular system above ground it's that transition we've made in junipers to below ground finer root mass that doesn't have the flesh the meat and the stored resources to be able to actually take on the kind of resistance to cold that we see at the peak of that opportunity in the winter to potentially damage a tree and this is where we have to be careful. With junipers so we understand pines behavior. We now understand the susceptibility of junipers does that mean that we moved junipers in no but it means we take other factors into consideration we will get there stay with me let's move into elongating species. Where does the winter susceptibility occur any long getting species great question right great question because here's what we know about elongating species strength is in the vascular system. Vascular system being the trunk. Vascular system being the branching. Vascular system being the trunk. Vascular system being the branching. Vascular system being the branching. Vascular system being the roots and so all of a sudden inside of our elongating species we recognize that their cold tolerance is directly associated and I would say in the bonsai realm any trees cold tolerance is directly associated with how much for your mass over the fall season was accumulating and creating that new vascular system as well as stockpiling it with sugars and starches we heavily reduced a tree and then styling in the early spring. in the early spring. guess what that trees not as cold tolerant. We left the four year mass on the tree all through the season fertilizer aggressively in it was healthy guess what that's a very tolerant tree okay we chose to style towards the end of the fall that's a tree that we definitely need to protect if we're going to experience adverse winter conditions elongating species winter tolerance directly associated with how much for your master to have to beef up that epicenter of strength and its vascular system now you could pull some of this into the press and deliver it to the setting. You could pull some of this into the press and deliver it to the setting. the deciduous realm as well but I think there are also components of the deciduous realm that we have to be careful with in terms of tolerance as we talk species because in a deciduous tree we start to see that transition of taper in the deciduous model from big thick primary trunk and branches emerging from the trunk to secondary branching that shows that necking down of size to tertiary and sub-tertiary and we even get into a third level of tertiary at the highest level of deciduous and now all of a sudden we start to recognize ooh hmm the deciduous tree is durable to cold for the most part that's why it sheds its leaves right however some deciduous trees come from warmer areas some deciduous trees come from come from cooler areas does this have an impact yes it does okay and then beyond that we are arguing that the deciduous tree is durable to cold for the most part that's why it sheds its leaves artificially amassing a quantity of twigs in a in a space on that tree that it was never organically or naturally designed to accumulate this is how we play with the energy systems to recreate this larger image in a miniaturized scale okay and in doing so the distribution of sugars and starches throughout the cellular structure of a highly refined deciduous tree with these subsections of tertiary ramification means that each of those really tiny twigs may not necessarily have the stored sugars and starches to hit a peak resistance of the coldest temperatures you're going to experience and be able to protect themselves from experiencing dieback and oftentimes when we see deciduous trees suffer over the winter season it's the finest branches that we see being lost to ultra cold temperatures okay and so all of a sudden in the deciduous model we're saying listen to me listen yes the leaf mass that it had on how we handled it we pinched we partially defoliated boom boom boom we got all of this maybe we held back a little bit on fertilizer in the fall maybe we gave aggressive fertilization and decreased the size of the leaf mass to reduce the swelling of the twigs all of those things count and i would say the more refined your deciduous tree is the more we need to look to protect it once we start experiencing really cold temperatures okay so first of all we look at species where did it come from where did it come from where did it come from what is its epicenter of strength how much foliar mass did the tree have on it over the course of the year and what is the ultimate temperature that we are going to experience okay number two i think we look at temperature in terms of kind of blocks or gradients right so we recognize that during the growing season during the growing season where a tree has absolutely no stored sugars and starches all of that energy is out at the tips in foliar production right these kinds of cold spells that can happen for example uh you know arctic front blows down the rockies september went from 95 degrees to 22 degrees this is catastrophic that is a tree where all resources are at the tips of the branches 95 degrees to 22 degrees in 24 hours danger danger no cold tolerance whatsoever built in that tree if you had that tree experience 32 degrees for even hours you are going to get die back or damage on that tree 22 degrees yikes okay not a possibility and as we progress through the fall season that tolerance increases more and more now generally once we have seen the onset of fall color once we have seen the tree triggered by daylight length and a shift of temperature right that 32 degree fahrenheit cutoff ultimately we're going to be able to see the tree in the fall season and we're going to be able to see the tree in the fall season and we're going to be able to see the tree in the fall season 28 degrees fahrenheit and the tree is telling you this the tree is telling you this by the surrounding pieces being stimulated by the environment to begin the process of moving the elements that create the green pigmentation of chlorophyll into the vacuoles at the immediate tips of the branches this is the loss of green this is the loss of green pigmentation in your deciduous this is the loss of green brilliance in your pines this is the turning to bronze of junipers that is the indication that the the tree is recognizing winter is coming i'm breaking down chlorophyll and i'm storing the components of chlorophyll in the vacuoles that will then start to be redistributed from the cellular structure across the tree and let's just understand that one time to make sure we're speaking the same language chlorophyll here iron nitrogen magnesium at this leaf right here broken down stored in the vacuole heavily of that cell immediately next to or in the cell vacuole of that particular tree and we're going to be able to see the tree in the fall season and we're going to be able to see that structure where the chlorophyll is broken down high concentration here transferred transferred transferred transferred to cells across the tree along with all of the other chlorophyll that is moving cellularly from this leaf mass to balance out that stored sugar starch and dissolve solute solute concentration across every cell in the tree this is the process by which a tree prepares itself for those winter conditions and so as we see that that immediate indication of a shift in the color says hey now 28 degrees becomes your benchmark for danger the tree has started to prepare itself it can endure 32 degrees it can endure 31 it can endure 30 it can endure 29 it is right now at 28 tolerant because it's already started to load up the vacuole with dissolved components that prevent that water in that cell from crystallizing and rupturing the cell and causing winter damage beautiful okay now as this continues over the fall season and we continue to from september we've got october we've got november we've got december and this point being january as we continue to see this right we have a total dropping of deciduous leaves we have a further accumulation of stored resources and a loss of brilliant photosynthetic coloration in the chlorophyll pigment we start to see the carotenoids and the underlying pigments express themselves with the recession of chlorophyll our cutoff and our threshold becomes 25 degrees fahrenheit we've had some freezes maybe we've experienced 28 the trees have naturally moved into a state where they are preparing themselves and we see that cellular accumulation of sugars and starches start to amass okay and once we get to 25 degrees now we recognize enough stored sugars and starches exist in the water of the vacuole of that cell cellular structure big sack inside of that that is the vacuole vacuole holds the nucleus of the cell vacuole also holds water and vacuole is also where sugars and starches are deposited to decrease the water quantity and decrease the temperature that that water will freeze crystallize and rupture that cell okay so now 25 becomes a benchmark now 25 degrees is a benchmark for multiple reasons when we talk about that susceptibility of juniper root mass when we start to talk about potential fragility of nuanced species like a hemlock having some winter susceptibility 25 degrees becomes a tipping point where we start to think okay and we start to think and this takes us and i'm going to blend these two together now we start to think of the soil mass and container size okay because suddenly as we start to get past that 25 degree mark i'm going to start saying a short tight compact juniper real beefy uh powerful bonsai in this tiny little pot show pot or a proportional pot to make that tree look big the proportion of the root mass to the foyer mass or the size of that container medium size bonsai shohin size bonsai suddenly i'm saying oh this looks dangerous now i might be proactively protecting shohin before they drop below 28 i might not even roll the dice there that's up to you that's particular to your environment and that's up to your environment and again it leans on the species to it to some degree but i think 25 is that moment where i think you really strongly err on the side of caution soil mass of a medium-sized tree soil mass of a shohin tree you don't want to leave that small mass in temperatures that cold for any sort of prolonged period of time because the temperature is going to cause that soil mass you think about this as a block of insulation you have these layers of insulation where that is going to start to freeze the colder the temperature and the longer the time the deeper that system is going to freeze and when we start to look at that 25 degrees for a small container that is going to freeze the heat is going to be leached out of the interior tissue of that plant and you are going to experience 25 degrees at its rawest form and that can be catastrophic for small soil masses right this is where we start to take caution maybe we set sensitive varieties like a hemlock or some of the junipers and smaller pots on the ground we put the medium size and the shohin trees into sort of a removed protected environment where temperatures don't get as low and we're able to weather that storm what if it continues what if we start talking about 20 what if we start talking about 15 what if we start talking about 10. once we get to 20 degrees fahrenheit even my tolerant larger sized pines junipers elongating species deciduous trees they all come off the bench and they go on the ground when we talk about dropping a tree onto the ground we have the ground here we put a tree on the ground here and at mirai typically what we'll do when we put that pot on the ground is we will just pile up a little bit of gravel right around the edges of those air spaces to stop the free flow of air around that ceramic and around that root mass environment when a container is up on a bench we've got our bench here and we've got this large picanha and we've got two little benches to look used to hearing the wind out of the pincers and then you're just going to have a large treatment ground near that like landing ground and then somehow try to get that ground off there while you're catwalking out in the jungle we are able to h permitir also see distributionally. of air into the ground in these three spaces so if it doesn't happen then we're more likely to freeze the plants and we're more likely to find Bahrain ge HYDIRO SC Scan  we can get a nice bring out up to it And this is definitely the biggest problem with these centers. to keep some portion of that ceramic from losing heat rapidly and maybe even allow the earth to act as a heat source once we drop 20 degrees Fahrenheit or below. Now, as we move into the teens, I feel as though a healthy tree, significant foliar mass in a substantial soil environment has the ability, if the species is tolerant, to exist on the ground until we get into single digit factors. And now single digit factors, in terms of temperature loss, starts to really reform our context of where we're at. Because once we get into those single digits, we think about not just the species, not just the temperature, not just the soil mass and container size, we now start to consider the time frame, how long is it going to sit at this temperature, and the environmental temperature. Conditions. Is it windy in addition to single digits? Do we have snow as an insulation factor, a benefit to have snow? Do we have that snow? Do we have that insulation? Do we have that buffer? Do we have that protection? In single digits, this is where I start to say the construction of a healing in bed, if your trees are going to stay outdoors, right? A walled structure of two by eights, two by tens, whatever the depth you need. Your container sits on the ground, maybe we use straw. Maybe we use leaves. Maybe we use some form of insulation that allows, right, leaving that surface open so that the tree can be watered and have oxygen exchange, but making sure that we've stopped airflow around the sides and the bottom and we've maintained that bottom buffering capacity and temperature exchange of the earth. Single digit overwintering of our trees does demand a higher degree of care, okay? And when we start to talk about just the temperature, we need that. When we add wind, when we add other environmental factors, now we may need a windbreak. Maybe we place our healing in bed on a sheltered side or location of a building, outbuilding your home, your fence, in your yard, right? These are the ways that we start to acclimate to give further degrees of success and protection, right? And so we have, like, in the logic of this, how do we know? Right? First of all, you know, a coastal redwood, I'm not going to leave that out in 20 degrees on a bench, right? A shogun Japanese maple, I'm not going to roll the dice at 25 degrees, right? A challenged or an unhealthy juniper, I'm not even going to let it hit 28, right? I'm not going to risk, I'm not going to ask the question of, hmm, is this going to be okay? And beyond that, for the tree that's like, ah, 28, no problem. 25, all good. 20 degrees, that feels pretty cold, but I'm still pretty confident. 15, hmm, it's feeling a little bit worse. 9 degrees, whoo, it's getting pretty chilly, right? 0 degrees, oh, I really need, I really need to take those kinds of actions or have a plan in place. This is that stair-step effect of the things that we can do to really protect our trees. And I'm not going to leave that out in the trees and not have to ask that question by finding out the answer next spring. Was that okay or not? I sure hope this wakes up. Let's go ahead and just say, I can't wait for you to wake up. Take that proactive action, right? What species? What are they tolerant of? What are their susceptibilities? The temperatures, the temperatures, and where is that step-down effect? We talk about soil mass and the container size in comparison to the foyer mass. Did it have and if it did, how is that soil mass in relation to it? Large soil mass, no worries. Small soil mass, let's be more careful. And then we move into those time frames. How long is it going to be cold and what are the conditions acting on it that may trigger the necessity for that healing in container, for that greenhouse movement, moving it into an unheated garage, and all of the other ways that we can protect our trees. Last point, cold shelters. Unheated basement, unheated garage, completely dark environment. Is this okay? This is such a tough question to answer and I think this is where we get into the notion of stored sugars and starches that were accumulated over the fall needing to be present for us to successfully cultivate that tree next spring, right? This is the discussion of this because that is our stored energy system. That is our energy population. That is our energy population. That is our energy population. That is our energy positive that gives rise to. When we talk about our energy systems here and we talk about spring, the height of that beginning energy system is directly correlated to what happened over the course of winter and where did we peak out, right? Peak out in terms of maximize our cold tolerance. If we're not allowing the tree to photosynthesize, and this is really the misconception, do trees photosynthesize when temperatures are below freezing? Yes. Yes, they do. Yes, they do. Because we understand, hey listen, that system has stored heat inside of it. There's still water in the system even though we've loaded it with sugars and starches. The reason that we talk about the time frame for prolonged cold is how long is it going to be under exposure to that cold means that cold is constantly pulling that heat. The longer the cold lasts, the more dangerous it is because it's stripping that tree of heat. There is stored energy inside of that system that even though temperatures are below freezing, the tree is still seeking that sun. It's still getting that sunlight, it's still being utilized to some degree through the needle mass. Even in a deciduous tree, through the bark, it is photosynthesizing to follow the bell curve of cold tolerance as it exists for mature and sophisticated plant matter or plant species. Inside of the nuances of Winter's Shelter, I've compiled a list essentially and there's more options than this. There are outliers to this and there are nuances to this. But I feel like over the of bonsai practice, this has been the basic discussion of options, right? And I haven't necessarily listed them in a ranking of priority because there are ways to make any of these very, very efficient and effective systems. But I'm just putting it out there in terms of what does seem to be a preferred priority. Again, winter shelter as a greenhouse absolutely is the most luxurious. It's the most controlled. And when we speak of a greenhouse, let's just understand that we expect a greenhouse to be heated, to be light transparent by the glazing material, and we expect there to be air movement in order to have successful overwintering and temperature distribution throughout that structure, okay? So when we talk about a greenhouse, we would say, hey, listen, ideally, the larger the air mass of a greenhouse, the higher the roof, the wider the structure, the more of a temperature stability we are going, to achieve, right? The greater the insulation factor of the glazing material, whether it's plastic, whether it's a double layer of plastic with an air insulation barrier between, whether it's double wall poly, triple wall polycarbonate sheeting, that is a cellular structure, plastic mechanism, or whether it's glass and all of the ways that we would be using glass, those materials have this constant discussion of balance, between insulation factor and light transmission. Now, if you're trying to grow vegetables and produce vegetative growth over the winter season, temperature is going to have to be high. Light transmission is going to have to be of a really nice quality, right? And we're going to have to seriously consider the economic trade off of that insulation factor to light transmission to make the best choice. But when we speak of a greenhouse, heated, has light transmission, mean it's a transparent structure, and it has air movement, what would be, if this is our ideal overwintering situation in a cold winter area, what would be the very best choice in terms of temperature to be able to maintain our trees at, have them in a greenhouse to protect from ultimate lows, and not break dormancy over the course of that time? I would say, we want to be maintaining our trees between 35 and 40 degrees Fahrenheit. Inside of a greenhouse structure, as the general temperature that maintains dormancy and prevents trees from being damaged by cold. Why 35 to 40 degrees? Well, typically when we talk about measurable metabolic activity, the horticulture and biology books say 42 degrees Fahrenheit and above is where there is a measurable rate of metabolic activity that begins to consume the stored sugars and the stored gases that are present in the environment. So, if we're going to be talking about how we can reduce the production of fat, in your own house, for ever, by using a frozen starches, that we are so valuing for the vegetative growth at the beginning of next spring. And if we're talking about shorter daylight length, and we're talking about a poorer quality of light allowing photosynthesis to keep up with the spent metabolic resources at 42 degrees Fahrenheit or above, we are losing energy once we start to have temperatures above that 42 degree Fahrenheit range. Now, you might be saying, why not have it at 32? One of the worst things that we can do is oscillate a plant through freezing, thawing, freezing, thawing, freezing, thawing, freezing, thawing. We do not want to create that condition. We do not want to duplicate that condition. And we do not even want to open the door for that to occur, which is to say, I would much rather have a plant that I was trying to prevent from freezing stay frozen once it's frozen, then warm it up above freezing, have it freeze again, warm it up above freezing, and have it freeze again. Because at least in the state of being frozen, that tree can start to reach an equilibrium, sort of distribute energy appropriately, and not have to respond to that fluctuation. So keeping it at 35 degrees as your bottom threshold and not allowing it to climb close to 42, right? This is your range that maintains dormancy. This is your range that maintains dormancy inside of this protected condition. This means you need airflow. This means you need to be able to vent the peak of your greenhouse. All of these things in your region and the temperatures that you experience will determine the design, the materials, the construction, the orientation, and the accoutrements that allow you to maintain that structure, okay? Last piece about greenhouse. When we talk about heat, well, maybe I have one more. When we talk about heat, let's understand. There are forms of heat that are completely... Completely safe to plants. Electrical heat doesn't have a risk of off-gassing carbon monoxide, doesn't have any burnt fossil fuel byproduct that could potentially be toxic, but does have a very high demand in terms of the utilization and the bill that you may experience from your utility company. It's not the most efficient, it's not the most effective, but it is very clean from the perspective of heating a confined environment. When we move into the burning of fuel to heat a greenhouse, this demands that we have a heater that is able to burn the fuel to a degree of cleanliness where the byproduct of that combustion does not create a toxic gas or a byproduct that is both harmful to humans as well as plants. This means we need a specialized heater that is adapted for the greenhouse environment. Enclosed spaces and combustible materials are very, very dangerous. On multiple levels. Number one, they can explode. Number two, the byproduct of burning typically is not healthy and that's where we really need to be careful about what we are heating our greenhouse space with. But if we want to stay in this range and temperatures drop below that range consistently and we're going to have a greenhouse to enhance our bonsai cultivation capacity, we do have to consider heat. Last piece now. Truly last piece. Air movement. Okay? Okay? This is real. We think so much about the height, the airspace, the insulation factor, the light transmission, the heat source, the cleanliness, the utility bill and the cost of that. We also need to consider how are we moving that air through that space to homogenize the temperature, to move the heat from the peak of the greenhouse down or potentially to move the heat from the peak of the greenhouse out depending on whether the temperatures are exceeding 40 degrees or are at a point where we're needing to heat the greenhouse. Okay? We also need to utilize a heat source to maintain 35. Air movement to decrease fungus, to homogenize temperature and to be able to cool the greenhouse is a major demand on this system that we have to consider in a greenhouse space. And these three factors are going to ring true. Heat, light and air for every single structure that we would use to protect our trees from intense cold. Okay? Let's move to the cold frame. Now the cold frame, when we talk about a cold frame, this is a discussion that says I do not have heat. I'm using a glazing material, whether it's plastic, whether it's poly again, whether it's some other transparent material, I'm using a glazing material to keep the cold from settling on my trees, to give them a layer of protection from the environment, to potentially maintain accumulated heat. But I am not going to be adding artificial forms of heat. There are definitely positive and beneficial things to be gained from a cold structure just by simply cutting the wind, cutting the settling of cold and cutting the elemental application of forces on your trees where we can see trees not tolerant to cold, be able to tolerate high degrees of cold because of that cold structure. Okay? Now, when we get into a cold frame. Okay? When we cover those trees and we have this cold frame structure that protects from cold, the problem with a cold frame is typically the air mass is small and once the sun comes out that cold frame, just as much as it cools off, also heats up to a considerable degree. Cold frames demand that we pay attention to what is happening inside of it when they have a light transparency. Well, what about when they're dark? In-ground structures or dark shelters. Really common structures. We have structures for incredibly cold regions of the world farther away from the equator and we say, is this good or is this bad? Well, let's go back to the notion that we recognize over the course of winter a tree is photosynthesizing to peak out with a maximum amount of stored sugars and starches at that shortest daylight length period of the year. That means even in areas where trees are completely frozen. Say, for example. The 10,000 foot elevation mark in the Rockies. The study that allowed us to understand that deciduous trees continue to photosynthesize through the bark was to try and define how do aspen trees without leaves continue to get to that high state of sugar starch storage at the coldest point of the year they photosynthesize through their bark. Right? All of a sudden, we recognize that even in that metabolic temperature or that low metabolic rate of those really intense and extreme conditions, we are continuing to photosynthesize and you say, what does dark do then? Well, if that is your only option, if that means that you can maintain consistency of temperature and not oscillate because of that light transmission and that solar gain of the sun and that you're able to keep your trees at a temperature that allows them to survive through the year, then that is what we're going to do. Would there be a benefit to add light into that system and potentially give them the capacity to photosynthesize? Yes. Yes, it would. As long as the light does not raise the temperature. As long as it does not raise the temperature. And this is where we start to hit these odd little discussions inside of cold shelter and the technique of winterization that has a nuanced approach. If we can provide light that creates beneficial spectrums to enable the metabolic process to occur however slowly without raising the temperature or changing that environment, then we are effectively assisting those trees. And continuing to at least maintain, if not increase, their sugar starch storage. And if we're able to keep the temperatures low enough for those sugars and starches to not be utilized in measurable metabolic activity, we will get to spring with a level of stored resources that gives us the best chance of maximizing our trees growth that following season. And so when we talk cold frames and we talk those structures for winterization, significant differences between a light and a dark system. That's what we're going to do. We're going to try to make sure that we have a transparent material that experiences the greenhouse effect and the warming of sunlight versus dark and the necessity or potential decision-making capacity around do we need a light source inside of there in order to make that decision and have the best possible outcome for your trees. Do not, in this discussion, let me tell you that your overwintering practices are wrong. I am not trying to do that. I am not criticizing. I am not saying you need to go buy a greenhouse. Or you're doing it incorrectly. No. If you've had success, you know your environment. There is historical, you know, bonsai practitioners that have passed down this knowledge for that region. And I think of Minnesota. I think of the Scandinavian countries in Europe. I think about these northern areas of Hokkaido in Japan where they do definitely use dark shelters over the course of the season. Hey, listen, keep on rocking. If that's given you success, do not let this change. The only point of this discussion. It's about helping people make decisions and potentially offering some insight physiologically of how you might, if you've experienced problems, potentially rectify those or give your trees the best chance of having a high degree of energy come spring. Number three, an unheated garage. Right? Now, when we talk about inclement winter conditions where we're going to drop into 25, 20, 15 teens, and that's only going to happen for a short period of time, ideally, you won't pull that tree into the 70s. You're going to have a 70, 75-degree heat of your home, and you would have an area that stays above freezing that you could house that tree in for that short period of time. But a lot of us, and me included, as a beginning bonsai practitioner in Colorado, the only thing I had was an unheated garage. And all of a sudden now, in an unheated garage, much like a cold shelter, you have this temperature range that your trees are going to fluctuate in. You're hoping it stays below 40. Oftentimes it warms up above 40. You're hoping that it doesn't get below 32. Oftentimes it does, but it's still a break from the weather and the exposure. And you're saying, how much do I need to do in the use of an unheated garage? If you are raising temperatures or if that garage stays at temperatures above 42 degrees, the only way that you stop the exhaustion of sugars and starches is the use of artificial light. And if you're going to use artificial light in spectrums, red and blue, that you're going to give rise to the creation of metabolically usable resources, i.e. sugars and starches, you need to make sure those lights don't increase the temperature and increase the rate that those resources are exhausted. Let's move to the basement. When we talk about a basement, typically a basement in ground structure has a high buffering capacity. Now again, we get to this notion of, is it a heated basement or an unheated basement? Heated basement, tough, same as an indoor environment. That's the last, that's kind of the last option for us is overwintering, but we'll talk about how we manage it, okay? Unheated basement then, when we talk unheated basement, a lot of unheated basements still stay above the 42 degree mark. They're in the 45 to 50 degree range. We say, do we need light? I've got windows, you know, unheated garage, I've got windows, is that enough? Ultimately. If we love 42 degrees Fahrenheit, those windows and that source of light is not going to be enough. We definitely need an artificial light source to continue red, blue spectrum, facilitating the creation of photosynthetic resources or else we will start to deplete and exhaust our photosynthetic reserves, right? And so when we start to talk about the unheated basement is any other thing, we really need to be cognizant of that light level, that temperature level, and whether we need to supplement with something that does not raise the temperature. That. Let me just do that and comment on that. Okay? Where and when we kind of went through all these things a little bit, I'm trying to think of the examples, find the good-looking and the bright ones. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Shape doesn't matter. If I just do like the right*** kokinode that feels like we really have, it does make sense. Okay. So when you're talking about  , what you're actually doing is you're taking into account what temperature you're compensating on top of the span and the settlement area where you have c catal. There's enough coat ratio. that's unheated most likely it's unsealed and we do have these really wet dank factors contributing fungal issues can be a very significant concern and airflow is how we avoid that okay so there are factors that go into that basement utilization for dormancy that we do need to be aware of artificial light our temperatures as well as airflow to maintain the health of our plants over the dormant period of time okay last and I would say least right the whole last but not least you've got an indoor that's just fine I I'm sorry but I can't say that right tropicals are a different discussion we are talking about trees that typically exist and we're experiencing or need to protect them because of where we live in harsh winter environments and this is where you really start to see cultivating bonsai in apartments being a very challenging thing to do and we're going to talk about that in a little bit but it's doable and let's dive into this okay because it's the least ideal these trees ideally exist outside they ideally have the intensity of the Sun and a high foot candle level of light they ideally experience those those elements of winter but when it becomes too compromising that they can't survive if all we have is an indoor environment then let's crush let's rock this out okay indoor environment several things happen in an indoor environment that are very very challenging number one it's warm so we know that we have temperatures above 45 degrees in fact if we're living in the indoor environment they're probably gonna be above 60 degrees high metabolic rate high utilization this is challenging right which means we have to have supplemental light it is just not an option if we cultivate indoors try to close down the heat source around the area where the bonsai are existing as much as we can keeping the temperatures cool but definitely needing a supplemental light system and when we talk supplemental light a supplemental light is always definitely needed as we're talking about our Legendary Houses. light system that is equivalent to the time of the daylight length outdoors. Very, very important that the light length is not triggering behavior beyond what is happening in the native environment. Okay. In addition to the indoor environment, oftentimes is extremely dry and not many people talk about the fact that that humidity or loss of that humidity has a major impact on your trees to apply an alternative light source to give the red and blue spectrum for that daylight length equivalent to the outdoors, but also to add a slight degree of humidity that allows those trees to not experience that ultra dry indoor highly heated condition will go a long ways towards helping them weather the storm of having to exist indoors over the winter season, right? And last but not least, airflow. Again, airflow. So now we're talking about this amalgamation of light, humidity, temperature control to whatever degree we can manage it and airflow. But one thing that we as human beings do not notice in our house is that our air is relatively stagnant in the house when all our winter's windows are closed and our home is closed up, right? Plants don't thrive in stagnant air. They have to have that transpirational, moist, oxygen-rich air that sits around their leaf mass moved away. Okay. And carbon dioxide, fresh air brought in or else they do start to stagnate, suffer and starve to death. Metabolic activity is already causing them to use sugars and starches. We're giving them a light source to create sugars and starches, but we have to have a constant supply of fresh carbon dioxide. Moving through that canopy to get rid of that moist, oxygen-rich air, the byproduct of photosynthesis driven by the light and allow fresh carbon dioxide to come in and be. Carbon source that helps create through photosynthesis and the artificial light source, C6H12O6, glucose, sugar, the trees, self-feeding food source. Okay. So those become the criteria that if that's what we got, that's what we need. Is a sunny window a good idea? Good idea. Is there a sunny window that can be too intense? South facing in the northern hemisphere, north facing in the southern hemisphere. Let's be very careful. Do tropicals need to be wintered indoors? If you're going to experience temperatures below 40 degrees, and for some tropical species below 50 degrees? Yes. And do we need light? Is the humidity still applied? Does the airflow still apply? Yes, yes, yes. Indoor bonsai cultivation needs these things. Okay. That's the most complete conversation I've ever had about structures and overwintering inside of structures. But I feel like over the course of time, we have been able to really hone in our skills of how we create a future. favorable environment to overwinter our trees indoors in these differing areas and think about the considerations that we need to at least talk about or think about and decide whether or not they apply to us and it's something that we can contribute to raise the quality of our bone size growth and health come spring ah and finally and finally we get to tree work right the so much when you think about the active endeavor of bonsai right and and bonsai we talk about bonsai as this art form which it definitively is right uh depending on how we pursue it can can hold greater art connotation um at its very basic element it is a craft um maybe at its root it's a it's a gardening or a horticultural endeavor but then we start adding technique and then we start adding artistry and we see it accumulate into a very complex activity lifestyle practice whatever it is for you okay and we do have to have inside of this holistic annual cycle of natural events that occur with our trees regardless of where we live in the world we do have to have an understanding of nuances of the seasons and at some point inside of your practice you do have to have a moment a moment to be able to to gather yourself, prepare for that future growth or that next season of opportunity that this tree is going to present to you. And I really do think when we say winter's a time to not do much, we're reforming that with this discussion and providing a lot of different things to think about so that you have the capacity to raise your level, right? But winter is not void of tree work. We've talked a lot about proactive activities to improve your bonsai practice, to improve and prepare yourself for the onset of cold, to raise the level of stored energy that you experience in your tree next spring and to set you up for the highest level of aesthetic success with all operations that are going to follow the winter season with the onset of repotting in the spring. There are things, once we have our practice dialed in, if we still have gas in the tank, time left, or we still have that desire, that burning itch to really handle our trees, there are definitively things that we can be doing over the winter season to be moving our trees forward. And a few fundamental things that we can be executing are as follows, okay? Number one, unwiring, unwiring of wired trees. Okay, now I'm going to say unwiring, but I'm not going to say rewiring. Unless your skills, are of a very high level, the act of wiring most of the time means that we're going to be removing foliar mass, we're going to be plucking needles, we're going to be pruning branches. And with that change of hormonal content, reduction of the tip, sugar starch productivity, the opening of wounds at a dormant portion of the year, wiring in an area where you need dormancy or where you need the tree to perpetuate its tolerance of cold conditions, oftentimes with, all of those tangential pieces and actions we perform, not the activity of choice. But you've just come through fall. You've just come through the greatest point of vascular tissue accumulation. And a lot of times at the end of fall, we start looking at trees and going, oh my gosh, that put on so much vascular tissue, the wire is now effectively biting in. I've got to do something about this. Do I wait till next spring? Absolutely not. Absolutely not. This is a time where, because we're not going to be coming back in, and doing a ton of work, you can focus on the act of unwiring, of being very careful, of looking at your tree, of acknowledging the gains that have been made, of removing that wire safely, and setting that tree back into its dormant position, not having reduced its canopy, having been careful and attentive in the unwiring process, and having dealt with that. So you set yourself up, come spring, come the tree's movement out of dormancy, to being ready for that next wiring operation, or potentially, even allowing it to just exist, recover, and continue to amass full your quantity on that structure that is now unwired. This is a great time to take advantage and do this task on all those trees that you didn't have time to get to as they were growing, you were fertilizing, you were watering, you were preparing for winter. Now is a moment of reprieve where you can really take that time and address this fundamental operation of bonsai. Number two. Live vein. Identification. Slash. Deceased. Live vein. Removal. Slash. Deadwood. Work. And preservation. Okay, now be very careful. I want to quantify what I'm saying here. Live vein identification. The cleaning of the live vein on junipers. The removal. The removal of older bark. The maintenance of that aesthetic. If we do find that aesthetic appealing, we do have the issue of identifying the presence of potential borer larvae, which do continue to feed over the course of winter on our living tissue. And just that simple act of maintenance of this component of junipers, which tends to be quite time consumptive and during the growing season, oftentimes is overlooked as one of those operations that is not absolutely necessary, but we want to make sure that we're doing that. But we want to get to it, right? Because styling, because pruning, because big bending is not an operation to be performed in this point in the year, right? We are at a state of dormancy, of low metabolic activity. This is the last point in the season that you would ever want to be styling a tree. The very worst time. This is A number one for the point where you do not style a tree. Because you're saying any damage I do, any break, any tear, any cut site, the compartmentalization of that, the tree's ability to respond at a point where its metabolic rate is at its lowest means it can't respond with any sort of strength or dependable response and capacity to stop that damage from continuing to expand, to atrophy, to creating embolisms or oxygen breaks in the water chain in our tissue. And come spring, styling over the winter season as the tree begins to grow becomes an observable impediment on the tree. As a result, these maintenance components, the unwiring, the removal of bark on the live vein, not shrinking the live vein down, not reducing the size of the live vein to an aesthetic degree, but just the maintenance of the live vein. And for those areas, once we remove that bark, where we recognize the live vein has receded, which it is constantly doing on a juniper, we can come back in, remove that adhered bark from the deadwood and create that definitive line of live and dead and bring about that contrast. And finally, once we find and define that, cleaning off all of the accumulated organic debris, algae, moss, and things that over this wet, prolonged winter season tends to have a negative impact and degrade our deadwood, cleaning that off, washing that, preserving it, wood hardening it. These are the actions that we have the time now at this moment to maintain and continue raising or preserving the quality of our tree so that come growing time, we can manage the growth, we can focus on wire and we can fertilize in water and not be bogged down by these components and these activities that are necessary, again, necessary, but time consumptive and oftentimes get put off for all of the other things that the growing season demands of our efforts, okay? When we start to talk about disease and pest maintenance, dormant sprays, dormant sprays. And we talked about this already just in terms of, the disease and pest component of the dormant portion of the year, but this is really, I want to accentuate this. This is really when we do have the capacity to continue to facilitate environments that are not favorable for the evolution of fungi and insect accumulation, right? And so during the growing season, we don't have that capacity. The elements that we utilize oftentimes for dormant sprays, are much more diluted if we use them during the growing season or are not even an option during the growing season. And so we see their efficiency and the manner in which they work increase in terms of its effectiveness over the dormant portion of the year. And this becomes a fairly time consumptive scope of work if we're going to do it well and have our trees come out on the other side, looking spectacular and having experienced the benefits of a dormant treatment to decrease that spore population and that insect overwintering egg population, okay? Okay, number four, deciduous maintenance. Now, don't mistake deciduous maintenance for deciduous creation or deciduous pruning or deciduous wiring or deciduous styling. It's not what I'm talking about. Deciduous maintenance means that much like the deadwood of a juniper, we do want to very much try and control the amount of moss accumulation on the trunk, the discovery of the nebari or the, rediscovery of the nebari and to prevent the degradation of the bark on our deciduous trees by that incremental accumulation of moss and algae. Just the same way as it impacts the deadwood on a juniper, it degrades the bark on our deciduous. So maybe we come back in with a vinegar solution to knock down that moss. We take a toothbrush and water on our smooth bark varieties and we clean off our Japanese maples and our beeches very gently with that soft bristle brush in that water, just that routine maintenance that we need to perform every single year to maintain our trees at the highest possible level. Maybe we also come back in on all of our bonsai and we look at the top dressing. Do we need to clean off that surface? Do we need to improve water percolation? Do we use this time to do so where we're going to be watering our bonsai less, re-top dress so that we don't blast all of that top dressing off and allow the top dressing in this dormant, moist portion of the year to give the potential and rise to moss accumulation that re-establishes it before spring. A great moment to maintain the branching, the trunk, and the nebari of our deciduous and the surface layer of soil for all of our bonsai over the dormant season. What a wonderful thing to be doing to set our trees up for success in spring. Last, and I'm not going to write this, but I'm going to state this because I think that there is a really significant moment, much the same way, as we re-gather ourselves in terms of all of the soils, the systems, the ceramics, the environments to really prepare for in that late fall, early winter period, the next season of growth. We mentally as bonsai practitioners need a moment to reflect, to reflect on the success of our trees, to reflect on the failures, to do some of the research, to catch up on streams or pieces of knowledge through podcasts, through literature, through all of the outlets, to gain inspiration visually, to take trips to remote locations and renew our creative mindset. The wintertime is a time where everything slows down and man, do we need to value that. Welcome that opportunity to replenish your knowledge, to advance your understanding, and to reignite, if not move forward, your creative opportunities and understandings of what bonsai can be. I find the winter season to be the moment where I set my sights on where I'm headed next year and I would encourage you all to find that season and that moment where you can take that respite to be able to refresh yourself and regenerate a new vision of where you're headed the following season. As far as technical execution, there is still a lot to be done and a lot of it is the work that we have a hard time finding the space or time to do in those other moments of the year and this is a beautiful time to stay in contact with your trees, give yourself a boost in terms of executing those operations we weren't getting to, and really giving yourself an advantage or a moment to catch up in your own personal application to bonsai so you set your sights on a brighter future come spring. For all of the seasons and all of the discussions that we have conversations about, I feel late fall and the beginning of winter the most under-discussed and it still continues to be. It's a moment where we are at a huge risk with our trees without the understanding and it's also a moment where we can really make significant headway on the operations that do take time and bog us down as bonsai practitioners. I hope this stream was helpful, I hope this video has educated you and given you some sort of inspiration, insight, and motivation to utilize the winter season and to prepare for it properly knowing that that is only going to set you up for success come spring and come the beginning of growth on your bonsai again. Good luck, enjoy that moment to catch up, to reflect, and to further set your sights on a positive season and enjoy winter for all of the nuances and the opportunities it provides in your bonsai practice. Thanks. 
