ah what up guys super Tuesday yes the beauty of Mirai live is we can react in real time to what we're observing what we're seeing any knowledge that has grown since we gave it to you last time and we've talked about this idea of redwoods kind of being workable in the late fall early winter based on that sort of late November December even early January time frame and here's what we found we got a lot of feedback from you guys in different parts of North America in the world saying hey we did that work we didn't see it produce what you said it would produce is there any reason why that might not be working and one of the things last year if you look at the redwood stream from last year I said I was going to be doing an experiment and timing in terms of pruning redwoods at different times throughout the fall to test the efficiency test the productivity of those pruning times and what we've come to is I think something that's been really important and I'm going to share it with you guys now really accurate body of knowledge where you're going to be able to look at your tree read the response of the tree or the indicators and then act accordingly not based on somewhere in November December January but more like this tree is doing this now this is your indication and this is always what we're trying to tease out of the knowledge at Mirai to be able to give you guys real-time information when you view your tree it's telling you what to do at that point in time so if we can just come in on the detail cam right here I'm going to have some weird shadows it's not going to matter because it's the detail cam and I want to show you what's happening with this redwood right now that's giving me indication that it's time to be pruning now if we look at the tip of this one of the things that you'll see is you'll see these little buds that are swelling right here at the tip okay and if I look at any growing tip or if I start to look back along this branch if I look in these crotches can you see that Jesus that nice little green bud right there okay and I'm even going to go back farther on this branch and I'm going to show you on raw wood we're getting this swelling of this bud now when we start to see the redwoods set up these adventitious bud sites this is the indication that we've been looking for to this point to be telling us this is a good time to prune because the redwood is now saying I'm setting up my vascular tissue to be promoting foliar growth next year and that means in this very long shoot where we see those buds swelling here if I prune this long shoot I have a strong likelihood that I will be getting buds right here in this area where I prune now we know that redwoods don't always necessarily do exactly what we want them to do and in this timing mechanism of pruning saying this late fall early winter period is when we can prune redwoods at that desired length excuse me on those big elongated pieces of growth and we can prune at the location that we want to bud when we see them start to put on those buds for next year's foliar development what I've found over the course of last fall's is that was the indicator some trees had it and when I pruned them it gave me what I wanted some trees were already past that meaning they'd already set up all their buds they weren't as as lime green they had turned into more of a dark green and settled into dormancy I was too late and where I pruned I didn't get buds and if I'm not seeing that swelling and we prune I also didn't get buds so those buds being present across your branching is the indication that the redwood has entered that phase of growth being a temperate rainforest tree but also slightly north of that Mediterranean environment along the Pacific coastline they start growing after that dormancy they experience because of the drought over the summertime they start growing in the late fall early winter with the onset of the rains in the Mediterranean regions and above the Mediterranean regions when they're putting it on this is when we can execute that pruning some of my redwoods have already been pruned some of them are not showing me this indication right now and I need to wait longer but this is what I need to see to be attached and pruning and knowing that's my highest likelihood that I can prune anywhere that I want and get buds at that cut site not back at the base of that elongated piece of growth and I know for people down in California this has been the timing for this has been a real tricky one to try and measure Bay Area where there's more heat maybe less rain or no rain that isn't triggering this weather conditions have been a little funky this is your indication to be able to key into when the tree is behaving in a way that gives us the opportunity to for success okay you're going to see a lot of pruning tonight from that perspective all right so that's technically what we're talking about now as far as the formal upright formal upright style when I was studying in Japan as I've been at at Mirai this is one of those styles that has always been a mystery it's very difficult to create a good formal upright it's very difficult to make a good formal upright interesting and when we look at native species that can create great formal uprights there's one there's one that's very difficult to create a good formal upright there's nothing that compares to the coastal redwood now can pines be yes can there be formal upright deciduous yes can there be formal upright spruce yes can there be formal upright Doug fir yes can there be formal upright juniper sure why not okay but what we need to key into in terms of the formal upright design what makes a good formal upright what makes an interesting formal upright how do we execute the formal upright style in a way that allows that tree to be engaging and draw viewers in and the answer is still asymmetry okay asymmetry in terms of design gives the tree an older appearance asymmetry in terms of the design gives that tree direction and flow asymmetry is sort of that design concept that we're applying to almost every bonsai that we style and I would argue we apply to every bonsai people say what about the broom style even the broom style I would say should have some degree of asymmetry in it in terms of length of branching offset to one side or the other in order to really generate that beautiful impactful design that draws people in and generates interest okay that's point one now when we look at this we've got this rigid trunk this upright straight and a good key to a formal upright straighter the trunk the better the front right so when we look at the formal upright design we're looking for that rigid straight line no movement or as little movement as possible very very centralized position of the apex okay and then we're looking when we talk about asymmetry how do we generate length to one side and length to the other as that subtle hint towards the asymmetrical form this is where we create the asymmetry in a formal upright in addition to that though in formal upright design the apex doesn't necessarily need to be centered in terms of how we handle that visual mass at the top of the tree we can offset the high point of that apical region we can create and should create a longer point on that apex so that it insinuates direction that works with that defining branch that's giving us asymmetry in the silhouette and canopy to be generating that design interest okay this is point number two rigid upright creation of asymmetry and defining branch and apex gives formal upright design interest okay here's number three playing on length and depth is another key point of formal upright design what does this mean so as we move through this canopy one thing that you'll notice about this tree is we've created or what's happened over the course of the growth is that this has become very symmetrical and uniform almost one big round canopy a lot of times when we're just learning how to design with bonsai this seems to be appealing oh man i look at that it's filled out it looks beautiful but this symmetrical sort of continuation of the line across all of these tips this is actually the death of interest in bonsai the death of interest in terms of formal upright design when we say that play on length and that play on depth is really where we generate interest as you look through the canopy and you trace that silhouette with your eyes searching for that asymmetry and we're trying to generate that interest that draws people in we want to be really careful to make sure that we come out we go in we come out we push the eye back in we come out again this play on length the generation of that space this is how we move people's eye through the silhouette and create interest and in order to do so in order to come out in out again we would think okay so we just shorten some branches we elongate others not true okay the way that we tap into that depth is we come out in terms of long we remove or eliminate these branches that are competing with that length in that foreground region and we use the shorter branches in the back to fill that space and push back in to achieve that difference of length that movement through the silhouette but we get depth in terms of the utilization of that space and those back-branches as that inward movement so tonight as we work through this tree this is going to be the general concept how do we create that asymmetry to which side is the asymmetry of the design moving and what branches are we going to be pruning eliminating out of the foreground shortening or elongating to really generate that formal upright design that has a lot of interest i love this tree okay here we go so as we start to look at this i I've got equal length on both of these. Now, when I think about the asymmetry of this design and the fact that we've got these other trunks trailing off of this deadwood base, let me give you guys a rotation just so you can orient and familiarize yourself with the tree, okay? We've got this wonderful, this is probably the truest form of redwood that we've created at Mirai. And this is the culmination of so much work, experimentation, agonizing over what does a redwood really look like? How do you create the redwood form? How do we utilize redwood to the best of its ability? When we start to look at this, this I think is our truest iteration of a redwood. And the tough thing about redwoods is we go to the redwoods in California, we look at these old growth redwoods, we're standing at the bottom, they're 270 feet tall, and we're saying, I have no clue what the apex of a redwood looks like. I have no clue what the branching does. I have no clue what is actually happening inside of that canopy to mimic that in a miniature form. Here's the beautiful thing. James Balig published a book called Trees. And James Balig worked with National Geographic to attach cameras to cables, and those cameras were raised on those cables, and he was taking shots of the tree, straight onto the tree, as they were raised through the canopy of the tree, to actually show the forms of the giant trees across North America and other parts of the world. He actually did this in Australia, he did this in other regions as well. And that was the first real, true view of a redwood from a elevated point of view. What do the branches do? How do they form? What does the apex become in that Pacific coastline, heavy onshore storms, jet stream, wind, et cetera? And we start to see the nuances that create redwoods, okay? So when I start to look at this and we see this, this is a true old-growth rendition of a redwood, and this is where we want to be. Now, that canopy has gotten wide, which starts to make the tree feel shorter and more compact, more bonsai-ish. We want to narrow that canopy. We want to narrow that silhouette, and that drives that verticality in the design. But when we look at this and we talk about that asymmetrical flow, I've got equal length here and here, and I want to really start to push people in a direction. I'm going to choose that direction. I've got my structure, I've got my trunks, I've got my natural tiers and step down to flow in that direction, so I'm going to be reducing the length on this side and really starting to push in here so I can run out there and generate that design feel that we're really striving to achieve, okay? So let me just kind of take a look. You guys can hop in over my shoulder. We're going to execute some of these pruning techniques, and these are going to be big cuts at first. We're going to be pulling out whole branches. We're going to go through the whole tree and pull out these branches, create that space. Now, hey, Zeus, can you see here? Is that kind of tough? Eve's better? Okay, Eve, so we're looking right here, okay? When we're looking here and we're talking about shortening this and pushing this in, I see that these foreground pieces are starting to create a lot of that length, and this pad is, getting very, very large in terms of its presence in the design. Now, before I just start whacking and hacking, I want to try to make sure that I can recycle as much of the wire that's on this because it's not biting in. I'm going to recycle the wire that's on this to be able to utilize it to direct these pieces of growth on the interior of the tree that can take the place of some of these longer pieces. And this is a redwood in its purest form. We get to this point where it fills out. This tree has been wired once. Troy wired this tree last year, did a stellar job wiring. It now it's evolved. The shape has continued to build and start to become quite quality. The wire's not yet biting in, which means it still serves a purpose. So I'm going to be coming through this tree. I'm going to be unwiring portions. I'm going to prune off longer pieces, and I'm going to take this wire and apply it to the new growth that's occurred on the interior of this tree just to be maximizing my wire, maximizing my time, and making sure that I'm replacing those longer pieces that we kept because we didn't have growth where we wanted it. Going ahead and positioning that growth, and then I can come back and I can start to remove some of the pieces that are giving me that length. Cutting clean, always making sure our cuts are clean. Cutting back so that we start to establish that length and that differentiation. Now this is where it's so important to nail this timing because I've got all these pieces of growth at the tip. In this second iteration where I'm coming back and I'm pruning and I'm starting to utilize the theory and strategy around timing to prune where I want, where I get these big long runs, I don't necessarily want to get rid of this growth. So I'm going to prune this growth back where I want it to be in terms of length that fits into the shape of the tree, knowing this is my best opportunity to get buds where I want it. Now at this time too, I've got an extremely dense tree here. I've got all of these shoots all over this. I'm going to be going ahead and pruning for structure where if I've got two shoots growing at any one area, I'm going to go ahead and fix those structural flaws. I've got three shoots right here at the tip. I'm going to go ahead and maybe reduce this one, take this one off and take my best position, my best ramification, my tightest, most compact growth. This is how we evolve the redwood form and the redwood shape, okay? Now when I get down into here, I've got two shoots of the very same quality. One's very vertical, one's down below. If I can save both of these, that's awesome. Let me see if I can use my wire, and I can use my wire to drop them both down in. Now I can come back in and notice I've got several. Hey, Zeus, go ahead and come in close here. Notice how I have several of these smaller shoots in these areas. I can take off that really coarse tip. I can cut back to these finer pieces. I'll take off the vertical, and then I can come back in here to these longer shoots, and I can prune these back to the desired length. I see that I've got my buds mounting up on these elongated shoots. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to cut those back, and I'm really going to start to refine the structure of my redwood so that I create that space, I create that structure, I eliminate those flaws, and really start to refine the tips of this, so that this tree has that same quality that we see in other refined bonsai, and that we start to prize in terms of bonsai creation. Now when I get to these sections where I've got these three branches, I've got this central stem. This has beautiful ramification, if we can see that. Can you see that, hey, Zeus? Beautiful ramification, staggered, tight, compact. I've got two of the same here. Now I've got to look back on this branch, and I see that I've got a long piece here. I've got a nice, short, compact piece here and a longer piece here. I've got to start staggering my branch pattern to be able to take advantage and create that structure that's only going to get better. I can come back in, I have no fear of pruning at this point in time. I know I've given myself the best possible chance to be able to generate that fine ramification in these areas where I am pruning, and then I can tweak and sort of adjust the branching that I have on the tree to maximize that quality. Okay? And what you're seeing is I'm just reducing the size of this pad. So any time we apply that first wire, we're talking about that structural moment, right, where we're trying to establish structure. We're trying to set the very base angles of the branches, whether it's going up in the coastal, up and out, or straight up in the redwood form, particularly in the formal upright, setting those angles in that initial styling where all of these were set up, started to create the backbone for everything else to come down. Now I get to go back in, and I really get to refine based on the response that I got, okay? Now, one thing redwoods are notorious for when we come into these knuckles here. This is a junction where I've got two major branches that are holding a lot of my ramification. I'll get a lot of growth coming from these knuckles. I want to prune that growth out, and I also want to make sure that those buds, I take those buds off of those sites so that that doesn't turn into a big, cumbersome knuckle there on the shoulder of that branch, okay? And if I have pieces that have been generated, for example, this piece has been generated. It did not exist when this was initially wired. This is when I come back in, and I start looking to wire to give that shape, lay it down, and I need to be pruning to clean up that structure, right? Redwoods have been this massive experiment at Mirai. How do we create true-to-form redwoods? How do we utilize these in a way that is actually indicative of redwoods and not representative of the bonsai form? Now, we have a lot of redwoods that also are great bonsai forms that don't have the potential to be great, formal, upright redwoods. These, we've got to balance, and we've got to work within the limitations of these areas, because some of the material that we get from the collected environment in these old-growth, sort of heavily-logged areas that knock these down and gave them their character at the base is more conducive to creating the bonsai form. And every once in a while, you find this stellar iteration of a true, upright, towering giant redwood, and how do we execute that to maximize its quality? That's the focus of this evening. This experimentation, this journey that we've been on to try and figure out what is the best way to create that upright form, this is going to be reflected in an upcoming stream that you guys are going to see where we execute a whole series of formal, upright redwoods. And it's pretty powerful to see that composition coming together after so much time. Dealing with this, knowing how we set the structure in the developmental phase, knowing how we come back clean and pruned to maximize that. Now, if we take a look at the sleekness of this branch, the narrowness of this branch, and the reduction of the length, and we may choose to reduce more. We've got plenty of opportunity to further push in on this. But this is how we handle these pads in this second iteration in the refinement phase where we start taking all that growth, wiring it out, transitioning from weaker stuff to the stronger stuff that grew around it to really maximize that design and start to tap into the true potential. But this sleekness, this narrowness, and that dictation of length, this is where we need to focus. We've got a couple questions. And I'm responding to everybody's queries about the new site, so I know I'm a little behind. So Rafi wants to know, is any of the info you're talking about tonight on pruning triggers for redwood also applicable to Suga canadensis? Ooh, interesting. I can't say for sure, Rafi, that this would be applicable. They do have some similar growth habits. But I would refer, in terms of Suga canadensis, more to the mountain hemlock. Suga mertensiana streams that we've done, than I would to redwood for keys and indications to pruning. Because those are an alpine species. This is very much a Mediterranean variety that's existing in a part of the world that has very specific behavior to that region and their triggers for putting on foyer potential with the vascular growth that they experience with those fall rains, okay? Now, down here, notice that I've got this nice little trunk coming off the vase. Very, very redwood in form. This is very, very redwood in form. And I can come back and start to reduce some of these coarse tips. So, Jesus, go ahead and give me a little bit of goodness right in here. Okay, and we see that we've got tight, compact pieces of growth. And then we've got these elongated pieces. We're narrowing this silhouette where we don't have any structural flaws. I've got buds set up on this. I'm gonna shorten this quite a bit, okay? I wanna make sure that I really give myself the best opportunity. I've got wire on this. That's gonna hold that position. But I also got this sprig that sprouted from the shoulder of one of these. And when I have this opportunity, to create the apex of these smaller sub-trunks on a redwood, I'm gonna go ahead and go up in the air with this. And then I'm gonna lay this down, flatten it out, and reduce its size. Create that nice, small, upright apex. We talked about apex creation in the form of the western redcedar. We're utilizing a similar concept. That's why we started with the western redcedar part two with that apical formation where we were able to form so many apices on that tree. Now we're coming back in here. And I'm actually gonna take the time to rigidly wire this piece of growth upright so that I get that straight-up form. And my last turn, whereas most of our last turns on our wire is underneath the bottom of the branch to bring the tip up, my last turn, unless the fronds are hanging down, is gonna be over the top, because usually they're going up and I wanna drop that down to level. So I'm gonna come over the top. I'm gonna wire this up straight. And then I'm just gonna bow that apex towards you as the viewer so that you see that flattening out. Now once I have it bowed towards you, now I can come back in and I can start to prune some of these longer pieces, take off structural issues, come back in here, reduce these longer pieces, and really start to refine all of these junctions where I've got this growth occurring. And this is the key. Redwoods, when we talk about redwoods, redwoods are a monster in terms of work. This kind of maintenance of the form and shape is a big part of creating beautiful redwoods, iterations, and the development of the form in miniature. So we've gotta do the work in order to be able to get to the point where we have a really quality piece. Now I want you to blast in here again, Jesus, right in here, okay? This is a perfect moment where we see, this is the old piece of growth, this has wire on it. Now notice that it's kind of dropping its needles, it doesn't look all that healthy. And notice the sprig of growth that we have at its base. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna unwire this piece that doesn't have any buds on it, that's pretty spent, in terms of its time, it's pretty spent. And notice it's growing on the tree. This is one of its original pieces of growth. And a lot of times in this second iteration, when we start to manage this growth and make these decisions, we'll have healthier, more compact, tightly ramified pieces at the base, where I can prune off those older, more spent pieces, and I can take these younger pieces, moving water more efficiently through their green stem, we probably have a more compact, more dialed in form there, and we replace those bigger, longer, older pieces with these younger pieces. To maximize the quality of those areas and regions, okay? And if we get these pieces that have sort of sprouted up and really given us some prominent, positive growth here, we too are gonna wire these up to start to create that verticality. To have there be width at the base is not upright in form. Formal uprights, when we see those big, long branches at the bottom, we see that perfect triangular form, this is youth. This is a young iteration of a formal upright tree. Most of the time in bonsai, our goal is reflecting age. Age is the key. So we're kind of working inside of this. How do we handle redwood growth to refine it from that first styling? How do we handle this big, big vertical piece to create a good formal upright? How do we handle redwood with that vertical growth that it starts to create? These are thematic things that this stream is trying to address to prepare you guys for what's to come. Joel would like to know how old this tree might be. This tree is old. This is an old redwood. And when I say old, I'm probably thinking this tree, now, when we say old, if it were super old, it would be too large to be used as bonsai. I'm guessing, if we look back at the history, and regionally, I'm not sure exactly where this redwood came from. I know this was collected by Zach Scheiman. And so I know where Zach's general whereabouts are for collecting in Mendocino. And that area, I believe, was heavily logged probably 60, 80 years ago, maybe a little bit prior, maybe a little bit past. But most of these trees were obviously big, huge, vertical pieces. They get knocked out when they go in and they bulldoze the roads to log the redwoods back in the day. And as a result, anything that was broken off at the surface, underneath, you see this big, massive trunk. This was probably under the soil when Zach collected it. And a lot of this, when we look back here at the back, you see these roots that are exposed? The soil line, he probably only saw the tops of these trunks popping out. When he gets down into it, he uncovers all of this. This is all root mass. That's what gives this contorted, really grained, figured wood below the soil as the root mass. And he transitions those roots into trunks in the collection process and in the recovery process of the redwoods. But I'm guessing this tree is well over 100 years old, probably could be in the range of 150, could be in the range of 180 in terms of age. But we know that the redwoods are such a vigorous species. They're incredibly vigorous, incredibly prolific in terms of their productivity, of new pieces in the forested environment. So it wouldn't surprise me if this is slightly younger. It also wouldn't surprise me if this tree is a little bit older than that. So Ryan, just so we're all clear, this is a Sequoia sempervirens? Sequoia sempervirens, this is a coastal redwood. That's right, now a lot of people make the mistake of sort of lumping in to redwoods, the giant sequoia. And the giant sequoia is entirely different in the way that we handle it. Giant sequoia is a species that grows in the Sierra Nevadas, which is in the alpine region. And the reason that the big giant sequoia, you can see my, there they are. The reason that the giant sequoia still exists today is mainly because of the fact that when they felled the giant sequoia and they hit the ground from those big heights, the giant sequoia would explode. They would turn into literally splintered toothpicks. And that's the only reason they didn't log all of the giant sequoia, because the wood was destroyed when it was felled. So when we start to talk about that, the preservation, there is definitively a knowledge that had those trees been capable of being logged without being destroyed when they fell, that they probably would have cut all of the giant sequoia. Now, when we talk about giant sequoia, sequoia dendron giganteum, a lot of people call those slang term for redwood, right? The other confusion that's often had is the dawn redwood, which is an entirely different regional tree, comes from China, deciduous conifer in nature, should be handled more like this. It's more like a bald cypress or a pond cypress. So we start to draw those delineations of the behavior of the trees in terms of how they should be handled in their growth, in their treatment, in their development, in their execution, okay? So this is a really nice kind of wrap up, just in terms of that refinement component. Now, when we start to look from a distance, we see these as upright. We have this nice lateral, not rigidly straight out, nice drop, soft movement of the tips. And if you go to the redwoods, one thing that you'll see is you'll see this upright growth, and then you'll see the branches coming off of all of these sub-trunks, and they'll kind of drop down into their own spaces and light to photosynthesize, to accumulate moisture on their leaf surface from the coastal fog, which is redwood's primary resource for water uptake. I think I read somewhere that they take in up to 500 gallons of day from the condensation of the coastal fog, collecting on the surfaces of the leaves, being imbibed through the stomata, these holes in the leaves that allow for gaseous exchange to contribute to photosynthesis, where the carbon dioxide comes in, and that carbon source to create the sugar that is the food for the tree. But they also take in a lot of water, and that's what allows them to weather the drought. Now, the other interesting thing about coastal redwoods, the foliar type on the bottom of the tree, in the undergrowth and the under canopy, different form than what takes place 300 feet up in that canopy. Completely different leaf structure, different behavior, different shape, different habit. That's growing in full sun. This is growing in shade, and that shape allows for different moisture taken, different photosynthetic process. Now, this tree doesn't have it, obviously, in this constricted space. We're dealing with just one leaf type, but in the natural environment, that change and that shift in the physiology of the leaf, very interesting aspect of redwoods, okay? So now that we've kind of dictated the length here, let's take a look at what we've got over there in terms of length that we would like to start to tap into. Now, if we shorten there, our goal over here, obviously, has to be to elongate. So we're looking to try and tap into and maximize as much as we can the length of this structure over here, the length of this branch. That means that these big long pieces that are giving us this length, we're gonna go ahead and we're gonna wire these out to try and maximize that slight degree of asymmetry that we have on this side of the tree. Now, there's another opportunity as well to potentially shed these bottom layers so that we don't have this equivalence of length, long over here, same level, as long over here. We'll come back to that as we kind of view the whole tree, but let's really set sort of our primary length and tension down here and see what happens as we climb the tree. We may decide that we actually want our defining branch farther up in the canopy, more true to form for a redwood, might not quite be there in terms of the timing and the development of the tree as it stands now, but could be an iteration for the future. This is part of that constant shape evolution. So I'm gonna go ahead and get rid of the detail cam and just show this elongation. Now, when we wanna elongate a branch for design, that means that we're really gonna try and maximize and utilize as much of this as we possibly can. And we get into another aspect of redwoods when we start to do this. Now, you'll notice at the tip, are we in tight here? Josh, we in tight? Okay. We notice at the tip of redwoods here that we've got all this ramification out here and we see this big, long expanse of foyer mass here. When we come back to this second iteration, after that first structural work where this was all the growth that we had, all of this is a product past or after that initial wiring. Now that we've got this woody tissue, notice how this is brown and lignified. It's created woody tissue. It's not green. Okay, if we compare that to this green stem, I don't wanna be cleaning the old leaves off of this green stem. The stem is not yet durable enough. We would tear the tissue and we would destroy this stem. Once it starts to lignify and become woody, we're gonna come in here and we're gonna start to pull these old leaves off, okay? Being careful, we don't wanna pull back and tear that tissue, still very terrible. So I'm pulling straight down or I'm pulling towards myself to get rid of these older needles. And when we start to do this, we actually start to create, we expose that woody structure that we utilize to create that really solid branch ramification and that really solid branching that builds a good bonsai over time. If we don't clean this up, what ends up happening is these leaves stay on for a prolonged period of time. We reduce the amount of back-butting that will happen in these big, long expanses, but we also lose that structure of the branching in the tree. This is how we really push it towards that more mature, evolved form, by cleaning properly as we come back and do this second iteration. So I'm pulling all of these off. I'm also taking off some wire that wasn't necessarily functioning because these have clearly grown very, very strong over the course of the past year since Troy wired it and did a masterful job at that. I'm gonna come up in here and I'm even gonna clean back up into these regions where this still had needle mass and we left that needle mass on to effectively help with the process of establishment, growth, and recovery. Let's see here. There we go. Now I can come back with a heavier gauge of wire. I still have my structural wire here. Come back with a heavier gauge of wire using 14 on branches of this length. If I used a thinner wire, the phototropic, that desire to grow upright and upwards, the phototropic strength of redwoods next spring, if I used too small of a gauge, if I used 16 on these, because of the length, because of the strength at the tip, what would end up happening is it would grow right out of shape. It would just power through that wire that we applied. And I'm gonna carry this all the way out onto this tip, being very, very delicate as we wire redwoods, supporting. And then that last turn right over the top here. Oof, shorted myself on wire. Just a little bit. Just to give it that downward movement because it's naturally pushing upwards. Okay, I'm staying out of any indentations that the wire created. This grew a lot. So it makes sense that the wire couldn't support it. The wire that was on it was gauged appropriately at that point in growth. The structural wire is still very functional. I'm gonna stop right over the top there. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna prune that back. Okay, but I'm saving all of that length. If I need just a little bit cleaner, I can use my, scissors is leverage. And I'm trying to push this out. Trying to push this out into this length that from the front, now when we start to look at this, from the front, from your perspective, we see that elongation. We see that definition. We get that length that creates some of that asymmetry. And I'm going for a really nice, sleek pad. The pad triangular in form as an upright. Not big, round, wide pads that we would see on an in-form. Just a small upright tree. I'm going for that more neck-down version. Let me grab my shears. Big tree, I'm moving a lot on the stool tonight. Okay, and then I come back in here and I start to chip away. Chip away at these structural aspects. Anywhere where I've got too many buds coming in one location, I've got three. I'm gonna take this down to two. And I'm just cleaning up all of those places where I have structural flaws potentially starting to exist. Go ahead, Sam. Let's see here. So Jerry wanted to know, are you cutting back the long shoots to a bud for just cutting into the middle? That's the way the question's worded. I'm cutting back where I want to cut back to where I want buds to be, but not necessarily where I've identified a bud. And that's what's unique about this time of year and this pruning. Why do we prune now? Why is this the number one time to be pruning redwoods? When we see them putting on that adventitious bud, it tells us that they're prepared. So let me go ahead and show this to you again. Jesus, go ahead and zoom in right here on this big elongated shoot. Okay, so you see this? Okay, so notice I've got buds at the tip and I've got some new growth at the base. I don't have any buds along this entire run. I want this to be slightly shorter to give me that more sleek branch formation. I'm gonna prune it right where I want it. And because we're obeying and using the tree to indicate that it's ready to prune, I'm gonna prune it right where I want it. And because we're obeying and using the tree to indicate that it's ready to prune, I'm gonna prune it right where I want it. And because we're obeying and using the tree to indicate that it's ready to prune, based on all of these small swellings of buds, I have a greater chance of getting buds at that cut site or very close to that cut site because of the timing for that pruning right now. So Danny wants to know if you would consider a large elongated branch in the upper canopy to be more true to nature. I think so, I think so. And this is where, when we start to compress and condense this idea of this giant tree in miniature, we do have to use the structure that were provided. As this continues to evolve, will we be pinching some of these upper branches that have more opportunity to generate that more true to form shape? Absolutely not. We'll let those elongate. We'll generate some of that length before we start the pinching process. And probably in the future, this lowest branch probably comes off. This lowest branch here probably comes off. Maybe even tonight this branch comes off based on the fact that it's on the same plane. They both have that length. Maybe that's the move that we make. My bigger focus right now is just trying to improve the ramification, improve the structure of the branch, really do some of those things that we can do at this point in time in the phase of work where the tree and the shape of the tree is at to maximize its visual quality and set it up for further development and success, okay? So I'm gonna continue to just kind of prune back here. I'm gonna fix these structural areas. And I wanna make sure that we get through the whole tree. So I'm not gonna do this kind of detailed pruning through every single piece. I wanna come back and analyze formal upright design and really look at how we generate that length and some of those nuances that create an amazing formal upright. But let's kind of, we're kind of feeling it out. One of the things that you guys see me do a lot as we're working with the stream is you'll see me put a lot of time in on the bottom branches. And I don't know if you guys notice that. I don't know if that's something that you've keyed into. I try to dialogue about it a lot. But this is really, every single tree has different design opportunities. Every single tree is giving us something different, even if it's the same species. Maybe one is a bone type form. Maybe one is a formal upright form. Maybe one is an informal upright, a cascade, a wind swept. Maybe we shift from redwood to pine, to juniper, to deciduous. It takes a minute for you to adapt your concept, your awareness of the shape, your awareness of the species, your awareness of that phase of the tree's development and growth. You've really gotta just kind of get your hands dirty, understand that tactile, tactile notion. That starts to open you up to what the techniques that need to be applied are, how we handle the growth, where the shape of the tree is growing, what phase of development it is. And once we start to get that feel, we start to feel that sort of flow and that naturalness come into our work, that's when it's time to start addressing more of the shape. So I'm literally, as I'm dialoguing with you guys about the techniques, these are accurate techniques for this current phase of this tree. However, what we're gonna do to the rest of the tree, is we're gonna have a hard time doing that to the tree without taking this time to just kind of work my way through the current status, state, and process of where this tree is at. So I'm informing my bonsai mind, I'm informing my bonsai hands right now. So Grant wants to know, can buds still form where the needles are cleaned off? Absolutely, and in fact, with that availability of sunlight and those old spent pieces of growth gone, you'll actually see buds form on that woody structure more effectively, more efficiently by cleaning it off. That's one of the important things that we can do, okay? So as I'm moving up into this trunk, I wanna show you guys this again, because we're continuing to get really good examples of how these redwoods start to grow. Now this was the original wired branch. Can you see this, Jesus? We good, Josh? Okay, this is the original wired branch. Now notice, I have a back bud back in here, but I've got this huge, huge, huge, huge, huge, huge, huge, huge expanse without ramification, okay? Now this branch that I'm folding down, this branch grew. Naturally, it was more compact, more vigorous, more healthy, more ramified. This grew from the same junction as this originally wired branch. When we wire a redwood initially, we keep those big, long fronds, we keep those pieces of growth, because we don't have any other branches in those areas. But once this tree starts to really take form and start to take off and gain strength, it starts to produce much higher-quality branches in behind it. We come back, we unwire this piece, we take that piece off, okay? And then we use that wire on that better, more compact, tight, healthy, ramified piece of growth, and we replace it. And this move right here, at this point, the second working of a redwood, is really where we start to see that improvement of structure. Now we were pinching this tree. This tree has been pinched. That's what started to create some of this interior growth. It's what started to compact. Some of these pieces to be a lot more available and a lot more high-quality in terms of development of ramification. And so that is a product, but we've also got to know the follow-up work to that scope of pinching. We have to come back in and manage the growth. And this is where redwood, in this second form, this second iteration, this is the big scope of work right now. Because if we do this correctly, we come back in, we take the time to make the right prunes, to clean up the structure of our branch, to cut out these pieces on the shoulder that aren't necessarily higher quality. So I had this piece, I had this piece growing towards the inside. I've got this big, beautiful branch with great staggered ramification. Boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. All the way through it, I've got tight interior growth. I don't need that shoulder growth. It will zap energy from this really nice, ramified branch. I take that off, and all of a sudden, you start to see this piece being cleaned up. Now, up in the upper canopy here, I've got all of these smaller branches. I've got some of these big, long branches. I'm gonna take these off. Even if they're in a good position, take them off, or I can come back in and prune those to the desired length if I wanted to shorten that. And I have a strong likelihood I'll get buds right around that cut site. But I wanna make sure that I'm making decisions to compress and shrink down this apex. Upright forms have small apices. They have small, kind of conical, not rounded, not big, dome forms. This is informal, upright, bone side. This is other forms. This is cascade, semi-cascade. This is an upright tree. We've gotta show that upright direction in the branches. We've gotta show that triangular tapering to give that directional insinuation. This is a change that we have to make in the formal, upright form in order to be able to execute it well. So Bill of Bill's Bayou says that he has seen too many bald cypress styled like alpine formal uprights. So what is that? What is your opinion on using material with an iconic formal upright shape and styling it to look like some other formal upright species? So I think, I have seen this too, Bill. And there's, again, we've got a stream coming that's just gonna really speak to your heart in terms of the topic for the stream. But I've seen that too. Now I think we have to be very careful because not every redwood can be a formal upright redwood, right? Not every bald cypress is gonna be a formal upright redwood. It's gonna be a great flat top bald cypress. I think the material has to really guide our process. Now can we grow any redwood into a formal upright redwood? Sure, they're gonna naturally grow that way. They're gonna send out big shoots. But sometimes that material is better as a bonsai form. Sometimes it's better as that abstracted sort of formal bonsai-ish proportion that we take from Japan. But a lot of times, and this is where I think we sort of have this notion, you have these prominent figures in bonsai that say, I create naturalistic bonsai. I create Japanese-style bonsai, right? And they draw these lines in the sand, like this hardcore, how dare you form bonsai like that? You shouldn't form bonsai like that. Why can't we do both? Why can't we do both? Why can't we let the material be the guiding light that tells us what that tree is capable of being and needs to be in order to maximize its quality as a bonsai? And that's where I think we need to read the material to be able to maximize every tree that goes on our turntable. And again, there are redwoods at Mirai that are great bonsai trees. They're great bonsai trees. They look like the same thing like a black pine or a juniper in Japan would look, because the material was short, it was stout, it was compact, it had interesting movement in the trunk. It was not gonna be a formal, upright redwood. And I think those moments, we create a bonsai. That's what the material is giving us. But this tree, if I said, oh man, I'm gonna chop off this trunk and cut it down, and make this short, squat, bonsai-looking form, I think you messed up. I think you had an opportunity to create a redwood, and you turned it into a bonsai. And so being able to do both, understanding the aesthetic decisions that are being made to execute both well, when you see somebody who can do that, that's somebody that's talented and skilled and has put a lot of time and energy into investing into the thought of, what am I trying to do with this? What is the whole purpose of this, of this art form? And they've clearly come to the conclusion that it's to take the material and do the very best you can with it. So Pabio has a redwood that he put structural wiring on in September, and it has pushed out significant growth since. So he's guessing it's healthy. Would this pruning be applicable to it? Absolutely. If the tree, gosh, dang it, what do I got here? Do you have any problems there? No, I think, I was like, well, Eve had all the fruit flies earlier, so I'm like, I got fruit flies in my business or something. They're everywhere in here right now. I don't know what you guys did. You fruit flied the studio. Maybe it was all that cake the other day. Cake, yeah, that's right. So as long as the tree is giving you the indications that it is ready and the timing is right, this is the move to be made on redwoods at this point in time in the season. This is the perfect time of year to really come back to our redwoods and address a lot of these pruning decisions, a lot of these, a lot of these pruning decisions, a lot of these, a lot of these, a lot of these, a lot of these developmental ideas. And if we apply the knowledge well, we set that tree up to be an absolutely outstanding, outstanding iteration or rendition. Maybe it's a bonsai form, maybe it's a formal upright natural redwood form, but the timing, the timing and the methodology. Now, if, if the tree is not in a state where it's giving this kind of ramification and growth, maybe it's still recovering, maybe it's still developing, maybe it's still elongating, right? We've gotta be able to read that because that's, this tree is in this position. Go ahead and come in close to me here on the inside. Okay, I had a branch, a really weak branch that naturally died back. One of the beautiful things about redwoods, that lost its strength. We had this really wonderful branch that came in its place, okay? So we can always just replace these. Redwoods are extremely forgiving. But when we start to talk about the knowledge of really, really good bonsai practice, we're meeting the tree where it's at in its developmental process. And for this tree, this tree is overgrown. The canopy is not representing a really stellar redwood anymore. It's representing a more symmetrical bonsai form. So we're coming back in and turning this into a redwood, improving the quality of the branches in the process, okay? So let me just show you where we're at here. Just so we can start to see and understand the difference, you can see how thin and how sleek and how much space we've opened up in here. Now look at the other branches on the right side compared to this region right here where we have all of this. And then what we have here is this. This is what we have over in that region where we've got all of that growth. This is how we go through this process and really take that growth, wire it out, replace the bad stuff with the good stuff, take out the unnecessary stuff, fix the structure of the secondary branching and the ramification, and really start to tap back into that upright form, okay? All right, so now that we've seen this, I feel like I've got a pretty good vibe for where we're at with this tree. I wanna start to come in and really look at some of these shapes that we can start to pull out to create space. And I wanna start right here on this side of the tree because we've got these big, elongated pieces of growth coming from all the way back into the interior. Jesus, can you kind of focus me in right here, okay? Now, we're talking about compacting and compressing some of these areas to really give length. We're talking about removing some of these pieces so that we have foreground, background, and accomplishing that depth. So when I see this big, elongated, piece here, right, the structure of this is never gonna be valuable to the design. I'm not necessarily considering this, do I want the length right here or not, because even if I want the length here, there's gotta be other branches since we've achieved this uniform silhouette that can give me length on this side. And if the structure is this flawed, okay, and again, when we look, we see the compaction of that interior branch happening right here, I'm gonna go ahead and just say, cool. Do I have any wire? Yeah, I got wire. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna take this wire back to that new tip, okay? So I'm gonna unwire back to this new leader that I'm gonna form. I'm gonna cut back that big piece, okay? And now when that comes off, I've automatically compressed and compacted, okay? Now, I don't want to go through and do that same pruning on every branch because I wanna talk about the totality of the holistic design, and that's gonna involve us really pushing hard to prune this whole thing in the time that we have, but I want you guys to see the natural design of this tree really come out over the course of this stream. So I'm gonna do some of these redirections, but the real cleaning, the old needles, the ramification pruning, you have all of that here to really study. Let's go to aesthetics now, all right? So I've compressed that. Now, I have a similar thing happening here. I've got this branch all the way on the interior. I've got this big, long push. I've got great compact growth here. I've got buds on the interior already. Can you see this? Can you see that plethora of buds present right here? You see that whirl of buds? We there, Josh? That's the kind of vigor that we get in a redwood with this type of growth at this time of year. I mean, there's seven, eight buds right in that singular region. Boom, I'm gonna prune back to that. Let's go ahead and tap into that. And if I start to see these outer pieces, I've got fine interior pieces of growth here. I can start to take off stuff off of the bottom. I can take stuff off of the top, and I can lay this growth out laterally, okay? I look here, and I've got this big, elongated piece. I've got a bud at the tip. Are we there? Josh? Okay, I've got this big, elongated piece. I've got a bud at the tip, but I've also got this really beautiful, compact shoot here. Now, maybe I need this length to create that pad. If I need this length, I can pull it out where I want it. I can come back, and I can prune, and there's a strong likelihood I'm gonna get growth in there. Or I could cut that whole thing off and start again with this tighter bud on the interior and build that compact growth. This is the versatility of pruning at this time of year is we can make those decisions based on what we're trying to accomplish, okay? Now, in the shoulders, this is a beautiful, lignified branch. I'm gonna take out this really young piece here, okay? I have these sprigs that are forming on the interior shoulders of those branches. If the branch is functional, if it's lignified, if the structure is good, if it's compact, I don't wanna leave these growing out of the shoulders of the branch because they'll zap all of the energy. They'll suck it out of that branch. So we take those off to be focusing the energy on the pieces of growth that give us the highest quality. And I've got a lot, I've got a lot of pieces on this that are gonna come off, okay? So now let's take a look, let me rotate here. Let's take a look at this branch. Notice how long this is, all of this interior stuff here. And we're looking at this and we're saying, boy, that is not a beautiful, structured branch. You are correct, you are absolutely correct. This is really poor structure for a branch. However, when we look at the spacing between this lowest branch, are we in tight here? When we look at this spacing and then we look at where the apex is, there's not a lot of branching in this area. Now I could cut this whole thing off, but then I open up this big line. Sometimes that's okay, sometimes it's not. I'm gonna say I'm not quite ready to make that commitment. So what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna clean the needles, these older needles off, this first portion of the trunk, or of the branch, lignified, really nice and strong. And I'm gonna go ahead, I'm gonna go ahead, and I'm gonna leave, I'm gonna take off the bottom growing pieces just to clean it up. I'm gonna leave some of these on the interior. I'm gonna cut this thing back to a point where I think I want that length to be. Now will this bud? Maybe, maybe not, because we're cutting back into very, very weak growth, right? We've had other pieces that have grown far stronger. However, if it does bud, we get that branch. If it doesn't, we were gonna cut it off anyways. This is how we can utilize this timing to maximize our potential for getting buds in that piece of growth, okay? I'm gonna go ahead and come back into here and prune back some of these elongated pieces. These are growing quite long, quite aggressively. Now notice where I'm at here. I've got this really nice, tight, compact piece. It's got a bud right there. It's gonna continue to ramify. Directly opposite of it, I've got this big, long piece. Weaker, does branch out here, but definitely doesn't have as many buds. Could I cut this back in here? Yeah, is this a higher quality piece of growth that I know is gonna behave? Yes. Do I need to select one or the other to clean up my structure? Absolutely. Now, after pruning off that bottom, now I come back to the next junction. I see I have one on the right side, one on the left side. Well, I left the one on the left side here, so I'm gonna take this off right there and go boom, boom, stagger my structure. This is what allows us to continue to increase the quality of that branch, that ramification, okay? Now, as I come down into this region, I've got some really young sprigs. Let me rotate here so you guys can see. Can you see into here, Jesus? Okay, I've got these young sprigs growing off of the opposite shoulder of this beautiful lignified branch here. I'm gonna take these off. I don't want those sucking energy from here. I also have this nice compact piece growing right in here, right off of the bottom of this shoulder. When I start to look at this, I've got all of this length, but notice all of the interior tight, compact buds I have here, and I've got this wonderful two scale. Notice how much thicker this is. Lignified, thick, strong. Shows that position more maturity. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna sacrifice this younger piece off of the shoulder. I'm gonna keep that more mature, prominent, thick branch because it gives me an idea of age and scale, and then I can come back into these pieces of growth and I can start to shorten these big, long runs. I can take out these more spent pieces, and I can really start to enhance and improve the quality of what I've got here by selecting down to good, strong, new pieces of growth that have tight interior ramifications. This is redwood work. This is exactly what we need to be doing at this time of year, okay? Now I've got a beautiful branch that I can wire out with really good, tight, compact growth. I sacrificed a little bit of length. We want to narrow. We're perfect. So Sharif wanted to know, when is the timing for pinching redwood? So next spring, as all of these buds that have set up over the fall season start to elongate, that's when we come back and we start pinching to stop the elongation, and really enhance that ramification. When we pinch that tip that's elongating on a redwood, all of the buds that are set up behind it, they start to be pushed into growth based on the elimination of that auxin at the tip. In addition to that, when we pinch, what ends up happening is we stop that elongation, and it buds at that pinch point, and we get ramification right there. So the less that we let redwood elongate as it's starting in the spring growth, and the more sort of on top of things we are with the pinching process, the better the quality of the branching is gonna be. Let's stay in this region right here. Okay, now when I come up to the apex and I look at what I've got, notice how old and spent all of these apical pieces are, okay? This side of the apex, we have some good, healthy stuff out here, but basically this whole piece of the apex is really, really poor in terms of its quality, okay? So I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna take this opportunity to start to enhance what I can do with the structure of this, based on that lack of quality, all right? And I'm gonna just kind of crudely get myself back to the wire here. I'm gonna take this wire off. Now, notice the branch next to it. Notice how tight and compact and beautiful this piece is. We see that. So I'm taking off that really rugged sort of spent piece, and I'm gonna come back in and replace it. Even though it's gonna shrink down the width of this apex, we want a narrow apex. This is a formal upright, right? So we continue to come back to these principles, these ideas that are guiding us. We're guiding our aesthetic, and we're saying, gosh, I don't know if I want to cut that off. It's kind of creating a bigger apex. Cool. Do you want a bigger apex? Is that what we're looking for? No. If we don't want a bigger apex, great. Let's take off that crappy apex. Let's cleanly cut that knuckle. Let's clean out these needles right here, and let's wire this better, more tight, compact, smaller, reduced apex to tap into that formal upright form. Boom. I'm gonna reapply this wire right over the top here, okay? If the wire gets too hard, don't be afraid to cut it and add a new piece of wire to it. This wire, Troy is very proficient at wiring, so his wire is very, very soft, so I'm able to reuse it. Probably can't reuse it twice. I got one application out of it, and I'm reusing it a second time. Probably this is the last time I'll be able to use it. And also, this tree is gonna continue to keep growing and getting stronger, so eventually it's gonna bite in anyways, and it's not really gonna matter. Now I come to this tip. I'm gonna prune out the weaker stuff. I'm gonna prune out the structural flaws. I'm gonna prune out the threes down to twos, and all of a sudden we have this wonderful, wonderful, small, beautiful, sort of bowed down apex in that piece. This is really starting to take on that shape. Now let's take a look at how this looks in terms of the overall reducing the length on this side. And I'm gonna come out here with you guys. So now we start to see some of that space open up, right? These branches, this one in here was all the way out here. We push that in, and now we get this space. I'm gonna come into this region. I'm gonna do a little bit more cleanup here. Just shorten these back to where I want them to be, making decisions based on the quality of the branching. I see that I have a very poor branch here. I'm just gonna take this whole piece off. That's not really giving us anything of spectacular fashion, okay? Up in the apex of this, we've got these big, long pieces of growth. I'm gonna reduce this. I'm gonna cut this back to interior, tighter, more compact growth. Take these pieces off of the shoulder. Take these pieces off of the shoulder. Really starting to select and delineate what portions of this are gonna represent this eventual tree, the sub-trunk of this redwood form. And we start to see space. And we're seeing space. This is just objective branch elimination, more than design. This is objective branch elimination to enhance the quality of the tree, okay? I've got some compact pieces of growth in the apex. Can you show me this, Jesus? Okay. So I see these more compact pieces in here. I've got some longer pieces. But I've got this big central stem. I don't want that apex to be huge. So I'm gonna take that back. I've got some nice, small buds in here. I'm gonna take that back. And I've got this big, long piece that's kind of growing at the shoulder of this old, spent piece. I've got buds at the base. I've got buds at the tip. I'm gonna take off the spent piece to eliminate that structural issue. And I'm gonna go ahead and cut this back to the length that I want. Now, I'll come back and I'll clean off. All of these older needles off of this woody, lignified tissue. Open it up to better interior budding. And all of a sudden, we've rejuvenated that apical region. Oh-ho-ho-ho-ho. It's getting narrow. Narrower. Okay. Let's keep going. All right. I like what's happening here. Okay. I'm gonna take these pieces off of the trunk. Have some pieces growing in here. I'm gonna rub out any of the buds I see forming on the shoulders. This will give us a leg up in terms of that spring growth next year. Okay. I've got these big, long pieces here. Now, this is where we start to get into, okay, here is this upright growing branch that's existing in this canopy. Very redwood in form. I've got a downward growing branch here. I've got an upright growing branch here. And this is how they grow. This one goes up. This one might go down. So we get these verticals interacting with these laterals. And where we choose to take a branch vertically or down laterally, this starts to be a big design process, right? We'll come back to that at a later date. You guys are gonna witness a lot of these styling decisions in a stream in December. But where we're at now is deciding, do we keep this length? Do we keep this space here? We definitely probably don't want it to be as long as it is. I'm gonna start to reduce just a little bit, just into the compact growth. I've got buds on the interior. I can clean out these older needles. I'm gonna keep a little bit of length here. Now, if I keep this length here, I can come back into this big, long piece where I've got this nice, tight bud. Can we see that? Okay, I've got this nice, tight bud. These are the ones we're taking off if this branch is of value. If this branch isn't of value, I'm gonna keep that bud and I'm gonna take that big, long branch off. That's not giving me anything, okay? This big, long piece here, it's growing directly in line with the apex of this smaller trunk. Can you show this, Jesus? Josh, can you show that to them? Okay, we've got this big, long branch here. Notice they're on the same plane. If I wanna create that movement and I'm gonna save this length above it right here, I can take out this big, long piece right here. I don't have any buds on the interior. I've got better branches around it. I'm starting to open up that negative space in the design. Terry was asking, what's the lowest temp that redwood can be at? Right, right, yeah. I mean, this is the question, right? How cold can redwoods endure in terms of that temperature? I mean, I think it depends on the gradient and temperature extreme. And I tend to talk about this a lot from the perspective that I've seen redwoods tolerate two degrees Fahrenheit outside, okay? I've seen redwoods die back or completely die at 32 degrees Fahrenheit. So when we start to talk about what is their tolerance, largely unknown, probably tree-by-tree specific. If in doubt, or if we're gonna experience really cold winter temperatures, the best possible action is to bring them in because there is a strong chance that redwoods cannot tolerate really, really cold temperatures. And if we've spent a ton of time on a tree, really refining a tree, building a tree, doing this kind of work, the worst thing we could do is leave it outside and just watch it all wither away. All of our effort, all of our time, all of our passion that we've put into that tree, watch it disappear or evaporate. So I would say err on the side of caution. I wouldn't let redwoods freeze. Can they tolerate more? Yes, sometimes they can. Have they died with freezing temperatures? Yes, they in fact have. So the threshold is very, very difficult to estimate. So Grant wanted to know, could he apply this wisdom to Taxus and could that be a hardier alternative for a colder climate? So Taxus, you can apply. Now the pruning for Taxus, when we get this big overgrown piece, we can cut Taxus back hard and it will push buds into the interior with tremendous vigor. So we absolutely can apply that to Taxus. Pruning style, a little bit different in terms of when we cut Taxus back really hard, that's for a tree that we're trying to generate interior growth to build branching with. So this is a tree that we've already styled, it's grown out, now we're replacing and improving the quality of the branch. It's very almost deciduous in nature the way we're handling this tree. But Taxus can be pruned at this time of year, even if it's in a refinement phase, we can prune it with this kind of detail replacement strategy and it will respond positively. And if you didn't see or haven't seen the Taxus stream, we did a stream on Taxus and Taxus pruning and styling last year. That tree will be repotted this coming spring. It looks brilliant. It back butted profusely for us from that work that we did. It was really an outstanding response as we had planned and, oh my gosh, hoped it would be, right? And I just posted a link to that Taxus pruning stream in the chat for anybody that wants to check that out. Okay. So now we're getting into this area again. Go ahead and bring me in tight here. Okay, we've got this really ugly tip. Notice the tip of this is extremely, extremely ugly. The big, thick wire over the top of it did not perform, but look at how all of the growth on the interior has performed. This is a no-brainer. Okay, we're going to come back in, we're going to cut this big, heavy structural wire. I don't want to do or I don't want to try to repurpose that. I've got enough structure up to the ramification to be able to remove that. Okay. Now our goal in terms of this, and let me go ahead and prune out some of this really vigorous growth that's happening around it just so that we can get into some of the interior aesthetics. Okay. Now what we've got to do is we've got to come in and we've got to select, right? Now you can see how strong this shoot coming off of the shoulder is. Are we in here? Okay. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take this off because, again, I've got a lot of light, compact ramification, lignification. I'm going to take off that big, green shoot. That's going to suck the energy out of this and I've got two of them. I had one on top. I've got one here growing over some of the ramification on the rest of that branch. I'm going to take those pieces off so that I generate and direct all of the energy into this quality piece that I've got really taking on that lignification and ramification that I'm looking for. I'm going to cut back this structure again and I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take this knob. Notice this knob that we have here. I'm going to take that knob back. I don't want to compromise the structure of the branch by cutting it back too much, so I'm just going to take it flush to the branch right there. Really take away some of that big swelling so that it's a nice transition that will heal very well. Redwoods are very, very aggressive in the way that they heal. Extremely durable, extremely capable. You won't even know that was cut off, okay? I come back in here. I've got two branches at the same site. One of them is this big, ugly one. I have a tight, compact one there. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take off that big, ugly one. I've got some pieces growing off the bottom here. I'm going to take those out. I've got an area here that's got good. Let me rotate here. I've got an area in here that's got this old, weak piece. I've got an area here that's got this tight, compact piece. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take that weak, old piece off, leave that tight, compact piece, and then I'm going to come back to the tip of this branch. Now, this is where we get into design. Do I want to leave this long, occupying this space here, showing that depth, or is the length creating that symmetry in the silhouette? We have to step back to make these decisions. Am I in the way of the...? Okay. Hmm. So if we take it off, we really narrow that base. If we take this back in here, then we're starting to generate length here, and I'm not opposed to that because this branch is actually oriented to give us the length here. This branch that's generating this length is actually on the opposite side of the trunk. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to follow that real beautiful order of operations that the tree has set up for itself. I'm going to take that off. Okay. Now, notice again the space that that gives us over there. Notice how we're just shrinking down the width, and then notice how this branch, and let me go ahead and wire this so that we have that in place, and we can really appreciate the length that we've achieved, the sleekness that we've achieved. Get a few of these ugly pieces off. Get these trees too stinking big. There we go. Did I say that? It's not too big. It's the perfect size. Any questions, Sam? Yes. I will let Berg take the next one. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Pavi was wondering if repotting is needed after pruning like this, when would be the best time? So, good question. Now, when we prune like this, the last thing that we want to do, even though redwood are very, very durable, okay, the last thing that we want to do is come back and then expect the roots to behave. Now, would it bite the tree to be repotted? Probably. Probably not. Can you guarantee it? Definitely not, particularly if we get into a repot where we have to do more than we had anticipated. So, the last thing we want to do is do this kind of pruning and then come back and repot the tree not knowing whether or not we're going to have to do something gnarly. So, then you start to say, ah, well, I need to repot, but I also need to do this type of pruning. Okay. Cool. Cool. No problem. We can do this same work after the first flush of growth has hardened off. Now, will the response in terms of back buds and growth exactly where we want it, where we prune happen if we do that kind of work at that time? No. It will not be as effective. Will it be close to as effective? Absolutely be close to as effective, right? So, knowing that there's still the ability to manipulate that and have success, not to the degree we can have now, but if we need to repot, we're going to leave the foliage on, we're going to repot, we're going to let it push out, we can pinch and do all that stuff if we repot, but we don't want to be doing this kind of work of pruning and then repotting in the spring. We can come back after that first flush hardens late May, early June and do this same type of pruning. Okay? So, again, I'm getting up into this canopy now and I start to see some of these back branches forming again, these really long, really crummy pieces of growth. I'm going to take these off. Now, notice how this branch is growing straight into the apex of this upward-growing trunk here. I love this trunk, okay? Jesus, kind of focus right in here and give me that. Just so that we can kind of see the shape that some of these trunks take. Now, these trunks are growing out to find that light and then they skyrocket straight up. This is very redwood in form. When we start to have this, to maximize that and utilize that, this is a structural flaw in any other bonsai. In a redwood, this is totally organic and very, very appropriate for the growth habit and the nature of the tree. Now, we've got to be very careful how often we use these things and how much we start to tap into that growth habit because in the miniaturized form, if all of our branches are going out and up like this, it starts to lose its significance. Some branches do have to come down and occupy that space. Some branches do have to go sharply up. Some branches do have the ability to have some length. This is where the exploration over the past five years has been for the redwood form at Mirai. When do we use it? How much do we use it? How much is too much? How much do we bring them down? How long are they when we bring them down? How do we execute this aesthetic? You guys are literally watching this regain its redwood form. That was the purpose of tonight's stream. Okay? I'm going to rotate to the back here so that you can see how far out these pieces are and understand some of these decisions. Now, I've got this big, beautiful, brand-new piece of growth. No wire, compact in form, right? Extremely high quality here. Now, this one was wired, this one right next to it. Notice how weak this is. Very, very common and they occur at the same junction. Cool. If I have my opportunity and choice to replace a poor branch with a good branch, it's a no-brainer. Even though it's wired and we're like, oh my gosh, I don't want to wire the whole thing. Cool. You kind of are going to have to accept the fact that you're going to sacrifice a lot of branches in this next step of the process. Okay? Now, when we get to the back, we don't want the back to continue to get huge and elongate. So, when I come back in here, I'm going to start to compress. Notice that strong tip and notice these beautiful fine pieces here. Okay? Notice that strong tip and that bifurcation. Compact. It's been pinched. Boom. Okay? I'm going to shorten that. I'm going to push in. Narrow all sides of the tree to start to get that up and out feel. Now, this is a beautiful illustration of how redwoods naturally behave. Notice this piece of growth. We've been talking about this. This piece of growth comes directly off of that shoulder and shoots straight up skyward. Now, this has, when they go vertical, their inner nodes become very, very long. This is going to be difficult to get back budding in for two to three years because it's so green. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to keep the more woody lignified structure that I have around it. I've got buds on these pieces. I've got interior growth on these pieces. I can shorten some of this, get rid of that weakness. I can really start to compress this and once I open this up, I'll get buds along this woody site. So, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take off a lot of this spent older stuff. I'm going to take the pieces that are giving me the potential to create a good branch and I'm going to take a bunch of these and I'm really going to work with those. I'm going to focus on them. I'm going to work with them. So, Leonard wants to know, I think this was from a little bit ago, when you talk about the growth on the right of the tree, do you prune to establish negative space to represent the scale of the design? So, negative space, we've got to be very careful in the formal upright form, right? We're pruning definitively to open up big sections of negative space but that negative space must have a branch in the back. To be insinuating that depth and opening up. So, let me do this in reverse. We pull this piece out. I need something back here. When that's gone, this piece in the back is shorter compared to the foreground length. Negative space is gained to give us movement in the silhouette but your eye does not move all the way through the tree. The worst thing I could do is cut all the branches off of one section and when you guys are looking, you see straight past the trunk into just daylight, right? We always need something in the back holding your eye in the design. That's how we maintain that concept of depth, that concept of design continuity with our branching but in the removal of that foreground, when we create that negative space and we remove that length, that background and that shortness gives us that oscillating out, in, out, in and into a branch in the back, not into the trunk, into a branch in the back to generate that movement. So it's just a matter of whether we do it in the right direction or it's very random. Those like it. Let's go now to you, Ryan, shelf comment. So we had a question a little bit earlier. Do you think we'll make it to the top apex tonight, Ryan? We're rocking. What time is it? It is. We're about an hour and 23 minutes in. We're going to try hard. It's okay. Marcia, she said that that's the thing she struggles with. Making look natural. This is for you. We also had a comment earlier that you could do a month of streams on this tree before we get to the apex. Listen, this is a big tree. This is a really big tree. And there's a lot of conversation to be had about this tree. But when we start to dive into these subjects and the depth that we've become, I think, you guys have become accustomed to. And we've become proud of the depth that we explore these aesthetics in. The beauty of the stream is that we can always show you the progression of that work at a later point in time. Really making sure that we solidify the concepts is important. Now, I hear what's being said here, and that is, dude, apical help, right? Apices are still the bane of everybody's bonsai practice. And until we conquer that, we're not going to be able to focus on, oh, I start off by getting the feel for the tree and feeling so good. I understand where you guys are at. So let me kind of push a little bit here. And really try to get up into the apical region. And I can very easily make that happen. Marsha said she's patient. Cool. So Leonard wants to know, he's in Michigan, and will bring the plant in. I think, yeah, he'll bring his plant in to prevent it from freezing. Good idea, Richard. Leonard. Leonard. In our winters, it is very cloudy as well for weeks. Should he be thinking about grow lighting as well? So I would say, yeah, in Michigan, I would definitely recommend. That you bring the plant in. I don't think a redwood's going to survive Michigan winters. So I think that's a good plan. And if you're going to bring it in, keeping it as close to 30, 35 degrees, kind of in that dormant, not super powerfully active range, is going to be the best possible scenario. If that's not possible and it's going to be warmer, it's going to be 40, 45, 50, then a grow light would greatly increase the tree's ability to endure that form of winter treatment. So that it doesn't exhaust all of its sugar starch storage. And that's really the key. If it continues to metabolize over the winter season in cold storage or in wherever you have to keep it to provide that tree with what it needs to survive, we also need to make sure that it doesn't burn out its stored sugars and starches that are the fuel to generate growth next year. So that's, I think, a grow light under temperatures that are driving metabolism, 42 and above. We really need to be supplementing. And on the Q&As, you know, the idea of winter storage and how do we handle these trees that can't tolerate really intense freezing conditions, one of the continual things that I'm trying to drive home for you guys is there's a way to winter anything. And just because it isn't ideal doesn't mean that you need to create this idea. You don't have to build a greenhouse. You don't have to do rafters. You don't have to do radical things to make sure that your trees survive winter. But we have to understand the physiology to be able to compensate for every single situation that arises. And that's where those temperatures, it's not going to be very cold. I don't have a choice. I freaking live there. You know, I'm not going to exist in 36 degrees so my trees can survive. Cool. All right. Grow light. Grow light helps it continue to produce energy so that it doesn't tap out its stored supplies. Oh, okay. Cool. That was easy. Yeah. It is easy. It's just bonsai is one big problem-solving scenario. We've got to be thinking about what do we have, what can we provide, how do we maximize our ability to do bonsai well without it compromising our lives. Or in the case of Mirai, totally compromising our lives. But is it really compromising? Isn't it enhancing? It's totally enhancing. Otherwise, we wouldn't do it. Thank you, Sam. You're welcome. Thank you for pulling it back into the positive. You know, always the optimist. I love it. I love it. Love it. So I just kind of, you know, I've been walking you guys through that pruning scenario. Now you see the space that I'm creating. And again, we're giving scale. We're cutting back to compact interior pieces. When this is all wired out, it's going to have the exact same density. And we want to create that uniform density. This is part of that evolution from development into that secondary tertiary starting to accomplish that well-distributed mass of foliage. But one thing that you should be noting, I'm shortening all these branches on the interior. So they're not extending to these exterior pieces. I'm following that process of taking off those spent tips and getting back to ramified tips or better pieces of growth that grew at the shoulder of the original pieces of growth. It's the same strategy. I'm just applying it in a lot more rapid manner because I do want to get to the apex for you so that you can kind of watch this process, right? But if you guys have any questions, Jesus has that detail cam. And if you just kind of focus on these areas, you're able to see. You're able to see the change in quality. This spent piece that has no ramification. Boom. Coming off. Got this better piece around me. I've got this junction. This one doesn't have as compact a growth as this. I've got this branch that's going to exist there. Cool. Boom. So Danny from Oxnard wants to know if you can discuss how you would develop the apex on a collected tree that has a pretty straight chunk chop at the top. He has two shimone collected redwoods that have flat cuts. Uh-huh. Yeah. And I mean, this is so number one, that flat cut needs to be not flat, right? So we've got to do the deadwood work necessary to transition that flat cut into what is naturally a redwood. Now, one thing about redwoods that we know is redwoods have their tops blow out in storms. This is an iconic aspect of redwood. Almost every old growth redwood, if you go to any grove along the Pacific coastline, doesn't have a straight upright top. That's a young form. They get decimated. They get cut in those storms, okay? So doing the deadwood work, and the deadwood work on redwood is tough because it breaks. You've got this stump cut. We don't want to, it's not going to be a juniper, right? We go in, we start to break, cut, split, but they tear linearly, and they tear a great distance down the trunk. So we've got to be thinking about how do we give that broken, shattered look without removing all the bark, without tearing this all the way down the trunk. Lucky for you, we had to do it on five or six trees for one of the streams in December. And you'll see that work in how I handle it. Okay. And you'll see that work in how I handle that. But that would be your first mode of action. Now, this is also stump cut right here. This redwood was stump cut, and you're going to see. I'm going to get to the apex. Everybody just be patient. Be patient. And you'll see how I handled it in terms of the creation of the apex. But I'm going to tell you right now, for everybody that's like, oh, these upright, you know, Ryan's got this, I've heard this before. You know, he takes all these trunks up. It just doesn't look good. I personally obviously think it does. Whereas the limitation in creating these vertical as well as lateral branches, again, that's been my work with redwoods for five years now. Okay. And I think you're starting to see, oh, it actually looks pretty cool. It looks like a redwood. Actually, it looks like a redwood. All right. Cool. And if you don't think that, well, I don't know what to tell you. Right? But when we start to. Sounds like a personal problem. Oh, definitely. Super personal. Super personal. If you don't like it, don't watch. No. Just kidding. Okay. So I'm at this point here where we had this branch that was also giving length. Let me go ahead and rotate so you guys can see where I'm at. Okay. We're here with this branch that's giving length and giving a lot of mass. Right? And when I look at this and we're narrowing, you can see the whole silhouette has narrowed. If this is going to be my length down low and maybe in the future, we said maybe we even shorten this and have more length up here. Cool. I don't need this either way. Okay. I want to go like a bonsai. I want to shrink this down. I want to start to compress this. I'm going to take these vertical pieces that are growing up, doing what a redwood does. Very predictable redwoods are. Right? They're going to do the same thing over and over and over again. Geez, I'm getting healthy. I'm going to grow. Right? So really starting to take that energy and that length and direct it. Big part of this second working. Okay? I'm going to take this branch down here. Now again, I've got this branch down here. It's growing right next to a more highly ramified branch. Boom, you're gone. Okay? And I've got this big piece right here. Fairly long, although nice structure at the tip. Not as great. I've got a better branch to replace it with. Boom, you're gone. Okay? Objective. Really objective in terms of how we're handling this. I'm not getting super attached to any piece. Oh I love that branch. I'm going to do it again. Why are we can do well? You guys are Mirai Live members. That's what we teach you. Okay? And now we've got to start to look at design wise. Apical height. Okay? This is one of those things. We've got all these sub-trunks. We've got all these apices. Now, I've got an apex that exists here. Nice and low. There's just some anomaly. We can pull those anomalies into interesting design. We get into this where we've got this big organized scenario of upright apices. Maybe we start to apply some of the guideposts of letting that natural sort of order of things take place and guide our design decisions. Right? So I'm going to go ahead and say, okay. If this one occurs above this one, then I want this apex to be taller than this. Now I don't want this apex to be taller than these interior pieces that are actually occurring above this one. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take this back. Now, how far do I take this back? I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take this back to a point where I still have ramification. So I'm going to cut out this big, strong, elongated piece. I'm going to leave these laterals. And again, our apices, when we get to the top, we go vertical and we just bow over that top piece. Fan those out and that starts to create that conical form as we pinch and as it gains density and as it evolves. Okay? It's higher than this. It's lower than these pieces. We're in that realm, okay? Marsha wants to know if this tree has two fronts because she likes this side, too. You know, this tree, so the best part about good trees is there's always so many options. Now, we chose the other front because the trunk is more impressive. You've got a better display, and the tree bows towards you. Let me show you from the side, okay? Notice how the main trunk is bowing towards us a little bit. In a formal upright, if you stand it straight up in terms of the trunk and you look at it in front of it, it'll actually feel like it's leaning back. A formal upright, if you're looking at it from the side, always needs a slight forward bow, even to feel as though it's standing upright. And that's where we have this because when I rotate towards you, it doesn't feel like it's leaning towards you. It feels like it's dead straight, right? But when you look at the quality of this stuff and you look at the way these different trunks originate, you come back here. This is interesting. Don't get me wrong. I looked at it. I love the roots crawling over this. Very redwood. You see this in the redwoods all the time. You have some of that detail. All of the trunks, really interesting back here. Toss-up, you know? And we went with the other side, but I see where you're coming from, Marsha. I definitely do. Okay. So let's just touch base with each other real quick. Let's kind of break down where we're at. All right. We see this openness here. We see the exposure of line. Really have some beautiful out-in and back-out play. In particular, this branch feels extremely important now, right? When we talk about coming out, maybe this gets shortened as it continues to compact, and maybe we open up this space. This would be one of those situations. Leonard, this is just for you, okay? When we start to look at this and we look at coming through this canopy, if we want to open up negative space, we've got this piece that's giving us length. If we pull this piece up, we've got this piece that's giving us length. If we pull this piece up, we've got this piece that's giving us length. If we pull this piece out, you're met in the very back of the tree with the apex of this sub-trunk right here. So we don't cut it back all the way to the trunk. You're not just void of branching, but we come out, we push back into this apex, and we come back out with these other branches. This is that out-in-out movement that we're talking about. Now, this doesn't have any other branches. Actually, I've got a nice little shoot here. You know what? Let's go ahead and cut that, baby. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. There we go. There we go. Out, in, out again. Love it. Love it. Love it. Bonsai. Kim wants to know if you're using any preservative on the burl. No. This is another magical piece of redwood. Now, will it rot? Absolutely. Absolutely. Quickly? Definitely not. Definitely not. Redwood and the way that, particularly because this tree, and we talked about the age, how old is it? Speculation. Speculation, but probably quite old. And redwood, what made redwood such a valuable timber source? All of the sap locking in all the toxins, all the tannins that provide that preservative to create heartwood, that red, dense interior core of wood makes it resistant to rot, resistant to insects feeding on it, structurally sound to get that kind of verticality. That same material is also injected into the base. To preserve the roots so that the root base doesn't rot and create a point of instability and the tree falls over. So this base, where this has been created, that burl, very, very strong. Now, there are soft sections. Jesus, go ahead and come right in here. Okay? So I've got really nice hard wood here, but I've got these softer sections, right? And when we start to tease out these softer sections, this was sapwood. This is wood that doesn't have that injection of all of those elements. We can come back in and we can pull out this pithy wood. And we can actually, really open up really beautiful pieces of negative space and create even more dynamic in that deadwood, just by pulling out those portions that are softer and don't have that same loading up of material. But I very rarely, in fact, I'm going to say never, I have never actually preserved or treated the deadwood on a redwood. Not to say you shouldn't if you have a really valuable piece that's deteriorating, but I personally have never had that. Not to say you shouldn't if you have a really valuable piece that's deteriorating, but I personally have never had that. I haven't had that happen. Okay. I need a little bit of length here, but I need to clean this up a bit. Bang, bang, bang. Oh man, look at this apex. This apex has just gone crazy in here. This is this tiny sub-trunk all the way in the interior here. Really gone wild. Has growth. Growing towards the interior. Okay. Big, elongating pieces getting to the exterior. Take those off. Compress that growth. Get back to that tight interior, compact area. Take off those elongating tips that are growing too strong. Really build that structure. Don't be afraid to build that structure. Okay. Shrink it down. Create that formal upright canopy. This is the goal of this work. Don't be afraid. Don't become attached to that rounder. That more bonsai-esque canopy. That's not what this is. We've got to be fearless in our objective decision-making about the structure of these redwoods. And we've got to adjust our aesthetic expectations to be able to meet the tree where it is. Take advantage of the indications for timing of work, but really be sure that when you're making these decisions, you're making decisions not based on your fear of losing something that you've gained because we're seeing this thin out. And we're probably all like, Oh boy, it looked pretty good when it was really dense. Oh geez, what's going on here? This is the process. This is the process. This is the work. This is what we signed up for when we started growing this redwood as a bonsai. We build it. We take it in and improve it. It builds again. We take it back less and improvement. It builds again. We're now refining and really making small tweaks. This is how we've created it. If you guys have ever seen Mirai's really iconic formal upright redwood. That tree. The path. The paths. All of the structure is right. All of the ramification is right. All of the growth is tight and compact because we built it. Took it back and improved it. Built it. Took it back and improved it. Built it. Took it back and improved it. And now we're just maintaining it. And it just grows a little bit. We have to annually do this kind of work. But the amount of cutback because it's been worked so well. We don't have weak branches. We don't have big long internodes. We don't have overly aggressive areas. And it's really gotten into that pace of refinement that we're looking to get our trees into. Okay. I'm going to pull out some of these really weak branches along the trunk here. These are just space fillers now. They're not really doing anything for the design of the tree. I'm going to continue to cut out some of these longer sections and these sort of multiple apacy areas. I'm going to take out these spent pieces. These are just objectively coming out. They're not going to make a good tree with these branches. Lose that attachment. Hmm. Hmm. Nice. Okay. Now let me focus on the front of this for a little bit. Just to kind of open up the space so we can see what's happening over here. I've already. Let me show you guys again. Okay. I've already opened up another. Out. In. Out again. You see that. That opened up. Just objective removal of this branch right here. Open that up. And when we see this. I'm looking here and I'm saying boy. That length right there. That feels great. This in here. I've got sort of this grouping of really, really strong branches in a whirl here. Let me show you guys this on the detail. Okay. Right in here. Jesus. I'm going to lift this up. Okay. I've got this big long piece here. Kind of rivaling that length. I've got this more compact piece here. I'm going to cut this back. Boom. I'm going to come in. I'm going to take that piece off. Bang. And I'm going to go ahead. I've got this big branch that's growing into that space as well. Gajing. Loving the sound effects tonight. I like it. This is my. This is like my comic book. I know. Ka-zing. Pow. I wish we could have that. Pow. Yeah. Like comic book. Like boom. Pow. Okay. Now we're starting to see that out. In and back out. There's more space over there. Okay. We'll come back. Obviously this trunk needs to be rigidly straight. We're going to have to rewire some of these pieces. You see where they're starting to move towards the light and overwhelming the wire. We're going to make those straight. Okay. I'd like to put that one in a comic book bubble as well. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Now these branches in the front here. Jesus, go ahead and focus me right here. These branches in the front, just the same as I compress this piece. I want to compress these pieces. I don't want the front getting super long. Now what that means, all of these that have grown out. Oh my goodness. Just aggressive. In your face kind of growth. Boom. We're going to take that off. Boom. We're going to take that off. Boom. This one's spent. Get that out of here. Got this junction right here where we've got a whole lot. And if I take away this branch, I get to that primary line of the trunk. And I want to see that straight line. I'm going to go ahead. Might be a little aggressive for the concaves. I'm using old spent tools to cut through the wire on this tree just in case you guys shouldn't be cutting through wire with your really nice bone side tools. But fortunately at Mirai, we go through a lot of tools. So we've got old spent tools. And it works out quite well. Okay. So I want to see. I want to see that trunk. Now here, I've got this beautiful branch coming out towards us. I've got this sucker growth. I'm going to take this off. I don't want that. I've got a good branch already right next to it. Okay. That piece comes off. That piece comes off the top. Get out of here. That dead branch comes out. And now we start to see. Oh, man. That length. But look at that ramification in there. Yes. Yes. Boom. Okay. And all of a sudden, we start to open it up once again. Once again, we get in. Okay. I've got some aggressive pieces here. We'll have to come back and decide if we want these just sort of cutting that visibility of the trunk so that we sort of shade it. It's a little bit, you know, it's a little bit hidden, a little bit seductive. But there's sort of some nuance to those decisions that we're not going to tackle tonight because we are starting to get close to the apex. But pulling those back, it lets us into the tree. And where you are looking from, if you're looking from that camera kind of viewing into this, you guys get to see that transition. As I reduce these branches growing in the front, you're seeing this tree just suck back. It's allowing you back into that design. So it's a little bit of a Mmm. Yummy. Yummy, yum, yum. Okay. We've got some overly aggressive stuff here. Let me go ahead and take this back. You're noticing that I'm really pulling out big, big branches, big decisions being made. All right. This isn't work where I'm trying to figure out what I want to go ahead and do with this. So I'm, this is a tree. the tree is at a point where I can be like, I'm going to save all of this because I like how dense it is. Trust me, I like how dense it is too. If you don't make this move now, next year it doesn't improve. Year after that, it doesn't improve. We're building on faulty bones. We've got to be disciplined about setting the bones of this tree, really taking these steps at this point in time. Better branches up in the canopy behind these. Better branches around these. Junction where there's too many. Nice tight compact growth on the interior. Get a little bit more spacing on that upright form. Really beautiful piece here. Long spent piece there. I'm going to compress that piece at the tip to get it nice and compact. Starting to look here. I've got this kind of elongating growth here I'm going to take out. Boom. Let's get that out of there. Let's get that out of there. Let's compress that. Let's really maximize that compaction that we can achieve through that pruning. Now we're at this piece here. Let's go ahead and take that out of the inside there. That piece giving us length there. What do I have here? Let me go ahead and shorten that. Save it though. That looks like that's usable. Take that vertical piece growing off there. Really setting that foundation for those apices. Again, we're going to have to adjust. We're going to have to adjust the position of a lot of these pieces based on the pruning and the decisions that we've made. We've got big, elongated pieces growing through here and here. Really nice compact area inside there. I'm going to lower this. That didn't lower as much as I would like. It's very tall. Now you can start to see the lines of the tree. Look at the difference now between the bottom. Look at the space. Boom, boom, boom. Right? The space. Now we can see this. We've got a few more pieces. Maybe this comes off. We've got kind of a close junction here. In fact, let's go ahead and do that. You're gone. Now we see that. We're going to go ahead and do that trunk. Not totally, not totally open. We didn't, ah, see the trunk. It's like, ah, here's the trunk. Remember me? Okay, this branch is important. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to leave this branch as it is. This branch gives us that out. I don't want to rush through making decisions around this, okay, except for maybe just improving its quality. Leaving its length, this is something I'm going to have to come back and very, very delicately handle because that's a pivotal part of the design. Okay. But I can shorten some of this stuff up in the middle. Okay. I'm going to go in the upper apex here. Yeah, it's a good thing I got warmed up on redwoods before doing this. And Redwood City over here. It has been, it has been red. We've been going redwood hard. Yeah. Going redwood hard. It's been Redwood City. Yes. Yes, it has. Yes. I don't know if John, but I have some ideas for it. That's where we all live now. Yeah, that's, this is, now, this is, we don't call it Mirai any longer. I was going to say, is that the name for the forest planting outside? Redwood City. Wow, wow. I think I just named for the trees. That just, that just happened. that just happened. Redwood City. Any long-time Mirai student's ears just perked up. What, what, what? Redwood Forest? We've been, we've been- We've been looking for ourselves. We've been so-called serve the Ricky's punishing boldness. We've been dropping tiny hints, so let's not give them too much. Ooh, Endor would have been a good one, too. Oh, that's way better than mine. That's what it's called. Wow. That's what it's called. Can we get a tiny Ewok action figure and put it in there? So Aaron Packard from the Pacific Bonsai Museum is a huge Star Wars fan. And occasionally on the Pacific Bonsai Museum's Instagram, you will definitely see a Star Wars, a hint towards the Star Wars. A lean, if you will. Okay, I've got this area up here again. And let's just come back and look at it from the front. So I've got this big, long piece. And notice how this big, long piece is kind of interacting with this apex. Now, let's go ahead and prune this apex just to make sure that we feel good about where we're at. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to reduce the height of this. Again, I want to be very, very careful in these areas that are dictating sort of this length play that we're existing in. But I do want to be making accurate decisions to replace long, long pieces of growth with higher quality, more compact pieces of growth. Nothing changes there. Okay, but let's make sure that we feel very, very comfortable. I like the length that we have here. And like is a dangerous thing to have because that length there still feels a little bit long. If I take that back, it starts to magnify the impact of that. Let's make sure. I need to be careful with this. If we go in too far there, we kind of lose that out in and back out. I'm going to leave this. I think we need this. I think we need this. Objectively stepping back. That's that's valuable. So now, knowing that we need this, that allows us to make some more educated choices as to what we do up in the top here. Okay, so I like the fact that these interact. I think this is interesting, but we need some space and we don't want that rival for length. So I've got some shorter branches in here. I've got this big longer branch. Let's take out that big longer piece in terms of this apex. Let's go ahead and drop that back a little bit. Just so that it's not so con. Densed and compacted and compressed. Give it a little bit of room to breathe. Nice and tight. Nice and tight. Okay, coming out of these crotches, giving ourselves a little bit of space here where we've got multiple pieces of growth. Taking those big long pieces back. Got a stronger piece there. Boom. That feels better. That feels better. Let's keep going. Okay, so now I've got these pieces again coming to the front, coming to the front here and take these back. Let's keep reducing here. I've got a little bit of density in here that I'm not super big fan of. These have to coexist together. Multiple apices. They grow. We've got to really handle and push that sensation, that one trunks position. One trunks presence is what pushed another trunk, pushed another foliage mass to be what it is, to exist where it exists. That's really where we need to be looking. How are these things influencing each other? This is formal upright design. Even outside of a redwood. How is one branch influencing the other branches around it? How is that dictating and changing? How is it enabling? How is it creating the space? How does the removal of one open the door for another? That really becomes a big part of formal upright design. Leonard wants to know what types of steps you would take to miniaturize and scale back the foliage leaf size to give even more scale reference. This is bad. I mean, when you look at, so, hey Zeus, I'm going to put one in here to this because this is this is a good indication. Okay, notice the original leaf size here. Okay, notice the leaf size of the growth this year. And this is an intermediate. So we've got the big original, not many pieces, not many branches, not much ramification. Got this intermediate and then we've got this really fine growth. That was sort of the last push of growth this year. Putting a redwood in a nice tight pot. Most people say, ah, redwood needs water. I'm going to put it in a huge pot. Just doomed yourself to gigantic needles, a horrific amount of pruning, a horrific amount of pinching. And if you fertilize on top of that, you're just totally in the tank in terms of managing their strength. They are too strong. Nice constricted container. Do you have to water more? Yes. Does that allow you to have shorter needles? Yes. If you're pinching correctly, holding back on spring fertilization, once we start to refine, you can't feed that beast. It's too strong. Really holding back on spring and summer. So we're going to have to do a lot of fertilization, light applications in the fall, and redwoods thrive in that. But if we start pumping them with fertilizer, oh my gosh, you'll never be able to keep up. But the constriction of the root system, as in bonsai of any species, is how we reduce that. As the foliage expands, as we pinch and get ramification, as that energy is distributed, we're limited in terms of how much of that root mass can take in that energy, how much energy can be stored. That's how we start to distribute it across more and more ramification to get a finer and finer needle and tree. August wants to know if you're using all Akadama for these? Solid Akadama. Solid Akadama for these for multiple reasons. But again, coming back to that leaf size reduction, you've really got to get the root system to scale if you're ever going to reduce the foliar size, right? So that Akadama, self-scaling as the roots grow, they break up the Akadama active decomposition, okay? And if you guys want to see or hear about that, we did a soil stream from bees. That is a huge resource for the behavior of Akadama. We also did a soil stream at Mirai to supplement the information we gave at that beesop meeting. Those two resources help you understand the behavior of Akadama and why we use it, why it's such a cherished soil component, okay? All right. We're getting up into the upper canopy here. And this is where, again, I'm going to stay pretty much focused on you guys for this. Hey, Zeus, if you get these side shots in detail, and Yves, obviously, you've got some shots too, but let's go ahead and keep this sort of frontward facing so we can see how this all breaks down. Okay, now I'm going to reduce some of the length that I have over here because I've got length in these other pieces. Pulling this back, reducing the length in the front, okay? But we've got this massive piece. We didn't have anything on this behind this. So now we're going to go ahead and take this back as we've built interior pieces of growth, stuff coming from the crotches. I'm going to incrementally do so. I'm going to do a reduction to there this time. Take off this big, long, obscene piece here. Take off some of these pieces that are growing. That shrinks that down considerably, okay? So now we're up into this area here, and we see this is also starting to just explode. And we really want to shrink this down. This apex needs to be small. It needs to be sort of conical in form, and it's just big and . So we're going to go ahead, continue to pull that strength out. Continue to pull that length out. Continue to compact. Same principles apply, okay? So these big shoots, I'm going to pull those out. I'm going to take out these big, obnoxious pieces. Create that space. Really create that space. I can't sound like a broken record tonight, but it's just the same strategy from bottom to top is applying to this tree. Create that space. Really change that length and that dynamic, and it starts to really generate the aesthetic. So watch this transform, okay? Now we're up into here. I've got some of that compaction that I can further achieve here. I can pull out some of those strong tips. Boom, boom. Okay, I can pull out this piece on top. Come on out of there. Pull out that piece on top. Come on out of there, okay? And we see that if I start to reduce here, when I start to hold back that length, it pushes. This length is the last real piece. Now, careful. Careful at this point in time because still, if our flow is coming this way, working with this based on the movement of these trunks and that natural gradient transition, we do need something up here that gives us the out, in, out again. This is where we step back from the design process and we really start to consider, if I reduce, if I further reduce this apical region here, and I see the opportunity to do so by pulling that branch back and potentially pulling this piece back as well. Let me pull back even a little bit more. Okay, we pull that back. We get this piece coming out here. Now you see how valuable that is. That length in terms of generation of direction. This is an important piece. I'm going to leave this. I need to do so with this intelligently, slowly, really sense it. But this is that piece that we go out in here and out again. Now I see this branch right here may be a branch that eventually comes out and gives me clear transparency and access to the back. There's a reason that this branch was kept, however, because in the length of the trunk, this whole right side of the trunk is void of branches until we get to this. If I pull that out, I've got that whole trunk on the right side exposed. Would it allow me access to this trunk in the back and make the design, boom, grow in depth? Yes. Would it compromise the quality of the tree to not have any branching engaging with all of these sub-trunks around it right there? Yes. So we're going to keep this. We shortened it. Here's our length. And all of a sudden, we're back on track to keep rocking. Now I do see this piece right here as being extraneous. I'm going to take this out. Bada-bing. Okay, it was also at a junction with another branch here that I do find to be important. That little piece of space helps a lot. Okay? You see this length here. I like where we're at there. Do we have the step stool up in here? Cool. Do you want my, here. Step back with you guys for a sec. Mm-hmm, mm-hmm, mm-hmm. Let's push in over here first. Everybody's been waiting for you to get on a ladder all night. So you'll see, and I keep hinting at these streams, you'll see I'm spending a majority of my time on this step stool. It's become my best friend. So Kim wants to know how many years go between repotting redwood. You might have said that earlier. Yeah, that's a great question. So I'm actually testing that right now. We have redwood that have not been repotted in five years. Starting to push the comfort zone, starting to push my comfort zone of percolation and the capacity for the redwood to be able to get what it needs with that kind of prolonged length in between repottings. So I want to be careful. I don't want to try and push too far, okay? I'm going to come back, and then I'll come back to that subject again. Okay, this length right here feels like it creates this homogenous movement. I'm going to pull that out, right? And we're going to start to now change. This is where we dive into danger zone because now we're starting to change where we're really going to oscillate and push that apex in a different direction. This is where it gets uncomfortable because we had that and it was like, oh, it's a pretty good apex, you know? This big round mop, this is going to be broken up into sub-trunks as well. It's not going to be a uniform apex. That's not how redwood grow. So when we go through this and we start pruning this, it's going to change. And this is really that sort of testing ground. This is that moment where we say, are we really willing to do this? Are we really willing to... You really want to do that? Are you sure? Oh, yeah. We're sure. Because when you see the final product, and I feel like this is where five years has paid off in terms of the effort we've put into redwoods. This is where it pays off because this is not easy for me either. This tree looks pretty freaking good, you know? Like, it looked real nice, and now it doesn't look as nice. Now, when we go through and we adjust it all, is it going to look nice? It's going to look even better. It's going to look even better. But you have to know that. You have to see it and you have to know that to be willing to take these kind of risks. And I say risk, but to actually just do what you're supposed to do to actualize the aesthetic of redwood. You've got to know what's going to happen. It's a good thing that you have Mirai Live. It's a good thing. It's a good thing. So we've got some questions about Akadama. Do you want me to just hit you with all of them? Yeah, blast me. All right, so Kip wants to know, when you were talking about Akadama, I think in the soils stream maybe, you mentioned high-quality Akadama is hard to find. Where would you rank the Akadama found at BSOP meetings if, quote, great Akadama is hard to find, where could we find it? Oh, that's a good question. So I don't know, because every manufacturer, right, of Akadama right now has a different grade. A lot of Akadama not nearly what it used to be. Typically people go, people that import, one thing that you have to understand, and this is not to blow up any importers, but this is to say, as purveyors of Mirai Live, you guys should be educated when you go to buy soils. An importer makes their money off of buying Akadama cheap and selling it for expensive because it's a limited resource in the United States. This is one of the reasons I think we have to, at some point, find a transition out of Akadama. Not there yet. Getting closer. Always closer. So what happens is you buy cheap Akadama in Japan that really isn't even the Akadama that has the soil qualities that we're talking about. It doesn't have that tubular structure. It's basically just dirt that's red. And we're like, oh, it says Akadama. Sure, yeah. I mean, they could sell you guys whatever they wanted to. If you can't read Japanese and you don't know the nature of the soil, you're kind of screwed. And that's the basic pretense for a lot of the poor qualities of soil that are being sold and existing in North America. It's tough to know. And it's a great place to get taken advantage of trying to buy bonsai goods in Japan. I mean, that's no knock on Japanese. They're just selling you what you're going to pay it. We'll sell it, you know? But the way that you guys tell just a real simple, quick, quick and dirty way to tell if it's high quality Akadama, when you flip the bag over, is there a ton of dust that's accumulated on the low side of the bag or not? Because if there's a ton of dust that's accumulated on the low side of the bag, it means it's a soft enough Akadama. You don't want to plant your tree in that. If there's not a lot of dust that's accumulated, chances are it's an Akadama that's hard enough at least to withstand sort of the beating that Akadama takes in the importation process, which is a significant beating when it's moved around and it's thrown and it's tossed and it's stacked. And so if you've got still a really high quality structure after all of that sort of thrashing that it takes, then you can be sure that it'll hold up in your container at least to a degree that you could feel comfortable planting your trees in it and banking on them being able to scale it by themselves and not have it passively decompose on its own. So that's your little litmus test. That's your little litmus test right there. So there's some follow-up questions on that. So first Kip says define a lot of dust. Like if there's a lot of dust in the bag, like you were saying, like how much is a lot? A little bit of dust is acceptable. For example, when we look at the bottom of the bag, if the whole bottom of the bag is covered in dust and you can't see soil particles, that's too much dust. If you've got a little patch of dust in the low bottom corner, that's not bad, right? Some of it's going to break, Akadama breaks no matter how high quality it is. So I'm going to say if you see a small accumulation, if you see just a portion of the bottom of the bag has dust, you're good to go. If the whole bottom of the bag is just dust, don't buy it. Okay. And these two questions kind of tie into each other. So Leonard asked since Akadama is a limited resource, are there any alternatives? And then Kip mentioned that you had mentioned diatomaceous earth as being the next answer and that Mirai was doing some studies with it. Have we done that? What happened? What are the findings? Trees are still in it. And this is the whole thing. We started talking about diatomaceous earth last year. It has great plant available porosity for water, right? It has a great cation exchange capacity, two things that Akadama also, two characteristics that Akadama also has. When you plant a tree in diatomaceous earth, is it going to survive? Yeah, absolutely. No problem. It's going to survive. Do you know if it's as good as Akadama can replace Akadama? Is the end all be all for soil substrates so that we don't have to shop in Japan? That's going to take, I need to know, what do the roots do? Do they scale? Do they, does it create a solid sheen? Is it capable of giving us the level of refinement? Because the only thing that we're missing in any soil outside of Akadama is can we create the same compact refined growth? That's really what we care about. Anything, we can water anything, anything can promote healthy growth. It's not about the tree surviving. Can you get this, reduction in needle size, expansion and ramification, short, compact, tight growth as a result of the roots causing that self-scaling of the soil particle? And that's where the test is. And the only way to do that is four, five, six years in a container before I'll have an answer for you guys. And that's a bummer. I know that's a bummer, but that's where we're at. So I don't know. All right, one more Akadama question. When you say it's in 100% Akadama, that's including the aeration layer, correct? Aeration layer is just the larger particle size of Akadama. That's right. And, yeah, Kip is wondering what particle size that might be. Quarter to half inch is our aeration layer. Kip, you know this. And 1 16th to 1 quarter is our interior. So it's exact same behavior of soils as we talk about with the 1 1 1 pumice lava Akadama mix. That's very common. Most people know that. They know of that as the boon mix. Exact same size and sifting of the aeration layer and that interior layer to promote that really fine root growth and really fine ramification. But it is good. I appreciate you checking in, Kip. I didn't mean to chastise you for that. Leonard would like to know, with the lack of branches on that one side of the trunk, would that open up a possible deadwood feature? So I would never go back in and think that I could create deadwood that would look as good as what this tree has created on its own. So I would be very careful, very weary, to create shari or anything like that on this side of the trunk. It's never going to show what is matched in the rest of the tree. Notice how that's shrinking down. And now notice how prominent that branch is out there. We're kind of leaving something out there. We're kind of leaving some length on that side. I really pushed in on the left side. And now we're starting to see that push in that direction, that asymmetry, formal upright, rigid, straight, yet we have flow to the right. This is that quality. We have out, in, back out on both sides, right? Both sides, out, in, out, in, out, out, in, out, in, out. This is the kind of style that generates the interest. Notice how much less symmetry we have. Notice how when we pushed in on this side of the apex and we left some of that length on the right side, it's really directing that growth. And the question of apices and how do we handle these redwoods, cutting back to that tight, compact growth, consistent application of that. And you guys are seeing that bowing of that, that cutting back to that tight application, and then narrowing. That process is consistent across all of our trees and how we handle them in terms of this formation, of this particular apex. This particular apical kind of continuity and style. And now you're starting to finally see, you're getting that taste of that consistency and what it gives you in terms of the tree. So Rafi had a design idea slash question. He said he would remove the lowermost branch to the right that's symmetrical to the one on the left. He said that you said you'd probably remove the one on the left, but it seems like it would be nicer to keep the one on, to keep the one on the left. Well, it depends. Is your flow moving to the right or is your flow moving to the left? I'm pruning the apex to move to the right. And again, that staggered multiple apicy, if I have all of these and I have to compress all of these and generate the length to the left, let me rotate this towards you, okay? You've got all of those trunks over there. You've got length coming off of those trunks. If you have to compress there and elongate here, you start to create this really wide composition. And we said a formal upright, narrow, to maximize that verticality. So if I'm going to compress here and elongate in strategic points over there, we still have narrow with that play in length because it's already wide based on those multiple apices moving out that base. Again, if we leave all of those and we try to cut those short and elongate here, we're going to get this wide silhouette because you still have this over here and you're elongating over here. We lose that verticality and that insinuation, right? And so that's where the decision comes from. We know we want narrow to increase vertical. We know we need asymmetry, compression, elongation. If we compress on the short side, we elongate on the far side, we can still get this while having that play in length. Kurt wants to know if you're going to work the chopped top down. So this chopped top, and one thing I've recognized about these redwoods, this top is very, very young. So where's Zach chopped the top? And you'll see this. We actually got some clips of this from the recent filming that we've done. A lot of times it'll decay on its own and it creates this magical, really, really beautiful sort of hollowed form in these upper chopped sections. Now I do work some of them, but this one is already buried inside of all of these trunks growing up and around. There's nothing to be worked because all the growth has already surrounded it. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to leave it. I'm going to say that I'm happy with where it's at. I'm happy with the character and style and nature of the current top. I'm not going to try to do anything to it on this particular tree. But if it were a tree that had less development, fewer apices hadn't rolled over that yet, then I absolutely would work it. Yeah, you bet. Chris asks, what is the risk of repotting their redwood two years in a row? If they repot properly with Akadama at the right time? I would say it all hinges on how strong did it grow this year after the repot last year? Because if you got really robust, strong growth, and this again is just sort of touching on the fact that redwoods are extremely, extremely vigorous and extremely strong. And if it didn't skip a beat from the repotting last year, then I don't think it would be a huge issue. Okay, so I've got this branch over in here. And I've got this structure in the apex where I have one branch here, one branch in the back, one branch on the left, and one branch coming forward. Now the branch coming forward is the apex. The branch on the right here gives us that flow and that insinuation. But it happens to be smack dab in the middle of the other two branches. And so I have to take it off or else that turns into a big knot. Now that I did that, it's going to start to change my branch consideration, structure and design over in these other apices so that I don't open this hole in this area that I want to be directing that flow of that apical movement. There's a lot of discussion in the chat about what you should do with this apex. What do you mean? Well, I'm going to tell you about it. I was just prefacing my comments. Oh, okay. So beginning with Nick wanting to know if this tree will always retain all those trunks in the apex. Ah, I don't know. That's a good question. There's thoughts. Kim thinks it should lose at least two of those top four secondaries. And then there's lots of talk about if you would consider putting a gin in the apex. I would consider a gin. Will it always maintain these? Good question. Don't know. At this current stage, I don't see it being favorable to remove any of them. Let's see. Taking it down to two. Ah, so this is where you, well, let me say this. This is where I want to be as authentic as possible in terms of the way that redwoods grow. And this is where when, and this comes back to the conversation that Bayou Bill asked earlier where he said, hey, listen, does it make you cringe when you see certain trees turned into a bonsai or a formal upright form when that's not really how they occur? And it's like, well, some trees, you know, might be better with that, with that more artificial form depending on the characteristics of the material. And some trees really benefit from the execution of that natural form. And this is a tree that I think benefits from the execution of the natural form. And having said that, that's where we've got to understand, okay, cool, what does a natural redwood apex look like that's lost that central leader? So when I'm, when I'm making these decisions about how many of those do I leave, I'm looking at what am I given in terms of the structure? What am I, what is possible and what best represents a redwood in terms of how it would grow if this were in fact a natural tree that had this scenario? And from all of my research, all of the trees that I've looked at, the photographs I can get my hands on of that rare form of the canopy, which very few people see, this is how they would respond to that apex being knocked down or knocked out or torn off in those storms that smash into the Pacific coastline. As these thicken, as this tree matures, is that space in the top going to become constricted? Yes. We just saw today how this tree had put on all of that growth and we started pulling out big chunks of branches. I mean, the floor is, is covered in branches. I mean, literally covered in branches. Eve, can you show that? I mean, it's, you know, this is no joke. I mean, there's a lot of branches in here. So, when we start to look at that, we've already done one of those big pieces of elimination. Now, is it time with the current development of these upper apical regions to be pulling out two of them? No, no. I want to use those to perpetuate and propel growth of the ones that are going to really be the champions of that and when I lose that space, that's the moment. That's the moment. And I think we try to pursue design before the tree is ready very, very often in our bonsai creation. Either we've read we can't do that. We're, we're told that that's not appropriate. Or, you know, this process of bonsai evolution and the creation of this shape and the eventual sort of actualization of this aesthetic is not something that we understand the totality around. How do we actually get to that point that's in our head? How do we get there? How do we actually make that happen? And this is one of the things that I think and this is one of the things that we're focused on at Mirai. This tree was roughly wired. You guys have seen a roughly wired redwood and you, and you got to see it again come back into the studio last year. This tree followed that path. It was, it was wired for structure. It was created. It grew into a symmetrical form. Right time of year we come back in and we prune. We're playing on the ideas of how do you create an interesting formal upright but we're also really taking you through the process of that second working of a redwood. We'll come back and we'll do a third working. We'll do a fourth working. Right? And then you'll see that building process and probably in those workings those things that we're talking about probably some of those will come out. We'll probably make some of those decisions. Not time right now. None of them are thick enough, big enough, dominant enough, well ramified enough to be able to pull that out and still have the tree move forward as fast as it can in the developmental process to get to that final really high quality image. But I think it's valid points. I think the idea is the question's all really, really great. Where I want to focus your attention on is where we are now. Let's not make those decisions quite yet. It's not quite time. We're not quite there. So I think we've... I think that's it. Yeah. We... People have asked their questions. People want to see before and afters of this so we'll make sure to get that. Do we have? Don't believe so for right now. Not right this second. That looks... I meant for the forum. I meant I was going to say the forum later. When this is fully wired out again we're obviously going to have to show you guys because it would just be a crime to not share that. This is a huge chunk of work and again we're wiring our faces off in terms of Redwoods. So this will probably be more like a end of December, beginning of January kind of finality to the composition as a whole. Obviously now you understand we've been working on this new website so you maybe understand some of the lack of whatever it is we have promised to do and haven't quite gotten to. But I think that's what we're trying to do and haven't quite gotten to it. We're trying to get through these big projects because they're impressive and they will have an impact on your experience with Mirai Live. But I'm speaking with a lot of passion about Redwood right now because I've had to tap into sort of what catalyzed my move into this theory about bonsai being something that can look different as practiced in different regions of the world based on the influence of that native environment. Redwoods really started that for me and they've continued to be a passion. They've continued to be an experimental project that have educated the rest of my bonsai approach. And I'm deep, deep in a Redwood composition that's very close to heart right now. So I'm feeling the vibes of Redwoods really driving Mirai to be what it is. But anyways, I hope it wasn't overwhelming tonight. Boom, bang, pow. I think it was normal. It was normal? Yeah. It was normal Ryan discussion. Oh, cool. Not too overwhelming. Cool, cool. Good. We're good? We're good. All right. We got something out of this. There's a lot of information thrown your way. Developmental timing, how to create or maximize a beautiful formal upright, the characteristics of asymmetry and flow in this very rigid design, handling of the apex, how we prune a Redwood, second iteration. I mean, that was dense. That was a dense amount of information that was covered. Thank you for hanging in there. I hope you guys enjoy the new website. It will continue to build and grow. As always, we're never going to stop. Couldn't have done it without you. Again, thank you so much for your support. It's driving us to be better at what we do. Have a great night. We'll see you guys on Thursday at 3 p.m. Pacific Standard Time for the live Q&A. And if not, we'll catch you guys next week. What's next week's stream? Next week, we've got literati design. Ah. Let me, there's a third word there. Evolution. Let me figure out evolution, yes. Literati design evolution. A previously designed and overgrown. How do we bring it back to literati? Next week. Looking forward to it. Remember, guys, if you can't make it to the live Q&A, there are still spots left in the forum Q&A. It's in the new Apex Pro forum, which you should all have access to now. So if you can't make it this week, post your question there. Boom. Jan Kulik's box is opening tomorrow. If you want a slab, tune in, please. Thank you guys very much. Appreciate you like you cannot imagine. See you on Thursday or next week. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. 
