What's going on everybody? Welcome to Wednesday's mini stream. Got a good one for you today or at least one that needs to be addressed and we need to further evolve our knowledge on and that is the subject matter of root aphids. Phylloxera, very common pest that is becoming more common occurring in the natural environment, having some population booms and just in general becoming something that we need to be more aware of and how we go about the process of reconciling and solving the issue. Nothing to be afraid of, nothing to be frightful of, definitely just an insect, another one in our repertoire that we can learn to combat and we're going to show you how to do that today through education and knowledge. Eve is on the chat today and Josh is producing the mini stream from afar. I can see him, I can feel his presence and Jesus is with me, brother in arms in the studio. Boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. If you missed, if you missed last night, hey Josh, hey, I love it. If you missed last night, you're going to want to check that out, the Cryptomeria Repot. Big deep dive into, I would say, nursery grown, field grown nursery stock, bald and burlap stock, how do we handle the repotting process, maximize our opportunities, Cryptomeria as a species, design nuances, it was all there. It was a really solid stream and if you weren't there, we also just gave a moment to thank you all. We rolled over the beginning of our fourth year of Mirai Live last night and the community has been so incredibly supportive and so incredibly dedicated to this project that it's given us a tremendous opportunity and we understand we couldn't do it without you. So thank you very much from the bottom of our hearts. We have big things in store, tip of the iceberg, we're ready to rock and roll and today we're going to dive into root aphids. Okay, so I have a Rocky Mountain juniper here and first, just talking about symptoms that would encourage us or allow us to understand that we might be dealing with root aphids. Okay, first and foremost, you know, when we talk about conifers and I'm just touching this and Jesus, if you just want to focus kind of here on the surface, these are green needles that as I just barely touch this, I've got green growth, I've got new tip growth that's falling off and you notice that it falls off in quite an abundance with just a light amount you see how much is falling off there. Okay, and when we start to look at this, I have what appears to be Phomopsis, a tip blight. I mean the tips are browning. Let me just point this out. I've got a green tip next to a brown tip here. You see the tip is browning, random branch dieback, healthy branches around it, but even when I look here there's random pieces of these small ramified branchlets and needle mass that are browning and starting to fall off and you say, gosh is that a little bit of a problem. Well the difference between Phomopsis and some of the issues that we experience with root aphids is almost impossible to identify. Now we could take this sample off. We could send it to a laboratory and the laboratory would say yeah, you probably have Phomopsis and you would treat for Phomopsis and you would never be able to stop the Phomopsis on this tree and you would say well Phomopsis killed my Juniper, but in all actuality what root aphids do is they exist inside of this soil system and they consume the sugars and starches in the soil and they're able to in the roots, they open it up to pathogen infection, and it starts to build this system of decline in the fine root mass that pulls all water and nutrients in to help this tree thrive and survive, and it disables the tree's immune system, right? Tree's immunity is sourced from the root system, okay? So whenever I start to see phomopsis issues, my first inclination, whenever I see dothostroma issues on pines, whenever I see foliar pathogen issues on deciduous, first thing that I do is I check under the hood. I look under that top dressing, just kind of pull up some of the top dressing to see if I can find some fine root colonies, okay? And more often than not, when we start to look and investigate trees that are heavily diseased, and let me just swing that. See that little cottony mass right there? Just that little cottony mass, and that's a real obscure one. I can see it, there's a lot of it in the soil here as I kind of scrape away the soil. You can kind of see these cottony bundles of white. Okay, those are the cottony masses that are the overwintering eggs of root aphids, all right? And if I looked far enough, some trees at this point in time, early spring, daylight length is increasing, temperature is increasing, therefore sugar starch productivity and water nutrient mobility is increasing, and root aphids begin to hatch because they are also stimulated by temperature, but more than temperature, the flow of nutrition and resources in the tree. And suddenly we start to recommend, oh my goodness, we've got to understand the life cycle of root aphid because we have been treating this for Phomopsis, it's something we have to do when a tree becomes weaker based on the root aphid condition, but I have to address the root aphids themselves. I see this disease issue, okay? Biggest indications of root aphid, general yellowing of the crown. When we have a global canopy-wide issue, general yellowing of the crown, if we're looking at pH, we're looking at nutrient application, and we're looking at a balance of water and oxygen, and we're seeing all of these things, we have fine root growth under the top dressing. We have water consumption. We are fertilizing. The pH of our water is reconciled. What in the heck is going on, right? We look underneath that top dressing or we find a fine root colony, there very well could be root aphids there. So general yellowing, one thing to think about could be several of those issues, all of them combined, or one of them, right? And root aphids could be that. High susceptibility to disease. Balance of water and oxygen. Do we have decomposition in our soil system? Do we have root aphids, right? And check under the hood. Let's see that fine root colony. Let's see if we have, do we have the cottony waxy substance, which is the eggs being laid inside of the matrix? Do we see small little white plump aphid-like adult bodies crawling around and specifically adhered or attached to the root, right? This is a big, immediate visual identification, okay? So global yellowing, high susceptibility to disease, or on a lot of deciduous, we start to get brown spotting. Yellowing of the leaf or needle and brown spotting. And this becomes another indication. Calcium deficiency lookalike in the yellow and brown spotting. Chlorosis, magnesium deficiency, just the yellowing across the entire tree. Maybe it is chlorosis. Maybe it's a lack of oxygen. Maybe it's root aphids, okay? So these are some of those immediate symptoms that we start to see. And on our junipers, specifically, root aphids tend to impact our native junipers, Sierra junipers, California junipers, Rocky Mountain junipers, California junipers, Rocky Mountain junipers, California junipers, Rocky Mountain junipers, right? They do attack Chimpaku as well. It's not that anything is free, but that high productivity of sugars and starches from the foliar mass, moving into that fine, fleshy root system that is the structure of the juniper root system, that is ripe feeding grounds. And right now, the eggs are hatching, okay? So I need to repot this tree. And I'm gonna walk you through some of the nuances of reconciling and rectifying root aphids because part of the system that makes it challenging to treat root aphids is a root-bound root system. Now, you're looking at me and you're saying, but Ryan, you say, leave it into the container, leave it in the container six to eight years. You want the container to constrict. You wanna facilitate the root-bound aspect of cultivation. Correct, correct, correct. This is a part of bonsai. This is why root aphids are becoming a bigger part of our bonsai cultivation as whatever is happening, whether potential influx of the insect from a plant, whether potential influx of the insect from a plant, whether potential influx of the insect from a plant, whether potential influx of the insect from a plant, whether potential influx of the insect from a plant, whether a plant that is growing in other areas, but we see them in the natural environment. And so we recognize actually root aphid are probably a global insect that's available. Randy talked on the podcast about the fact that insects show up. They're here for 10 years, you don't see them again. Or they embed themselves in the culture and in the ag production and you never get rid of them. Who knows what root aphids are? Who knows, we know that they attacked wine in France in the early 1900s and the phylloxera outbreak almost killed viticulture and that we ended up grafting wines onto american root stock for the vines to be resistant to phylloxera okay so when we start to look at the subspecies of root aphid that's attacking our junipers our conifers and bonsai and cultivation they're looking for that compressed root environment now here's why okay compressed root environment finer and finer smaller and smaller roots with a thinner and thinner outer layering that's easy to pierce and easy to access nutrition right we know roots produce sugar exudates that allow the microbial activity in the containerized environment to grow and develop okay and so that production is ripe along with the content of that fleshy tissue okay we've got a root-bound condition why do root-bound conditions favor root aphids root-bound conditions favor root aphids because our treatments no longer can contact the aphid right when we get a root-bound environment in a bonsai container we are constricted we are constricting the walls and the bottom and we're pushing everything to the center and water takes a path of least resistance right one of our biggest reasons to repot loss of percolation this tree has lost percolation and now i recognize it is suffering from a root aphid issue it has probably spent 12 months not having free and clear mobility maybe a little longer and it decreases sort of uh in a very insidious way over time all of those things led to short inner nodes and then we started having a health issue i'm probably one year too late in the repotting of this tree had i done it last year i doubt we would see this damage i didn't and now we're seeing it okay so i have to rectify this issue because we talk about how do you treat root aphids yes there are chemical applications that will kill root aphids here's the problem with the bonsai container the same thing that is facilitating root aphid occupation inside of the containerized environment small fine fleshy small fine fleshy small fine fleshy small fine fleshy small fine fleshy small thin roots that are easy to pierce high sugar starch productivity and we're going to go ahead and we're going to have ourselves a fiesta right those those issues right those same things when we start to um think about that right uh i just lost track here let me just get through this ah so when we start to talk about that we need in order to continue facilitating that we need to be able to have interactive oh excuse me here we go i'm back got it sorry got really into this repot i love this tree by the way okay fine fleshy roots this is what aphids want chemicals easily degrade those roots okay they easily burn those roots they easily cause the deterioration of those roots this is a scary thing in a bonsai container to drench with chemicals we have a microbial system we're trying to set up we have beneficial insects we have beneficial flora we have beneficial fungi and bacteria right we know and we recognize oof chemical insects we have beneficial flora we have beneficial syllable we are organically in a bag soi and bacteria and we recognize chemical thech we can get uh whatever we can find that we can get here a chemical disinfectant payback we can all the chemical you know we knowuna drench that's kind of like dropping a nuke and we lose control over the tree 2014 found out I had root aphids recommendation in the nursery industry treat with an organophosphate soak all the trees in it leave them in there for 10 minutes take them out you won't have root aphids anymore guess what I barely had a bonsai tree anymore it almost killed every tree at Mirai in 2014 and I'm not exaggerating right so we went on this quest to say what is a more sustainable way because in all honesty it didn't kill the root aphids they came back because I didn't know the life cycle and the nursery industry and chemical companies are really trying to push that product they're not telling you that these are gonna take flight again in the fall that these are gonna find you no matter where you go that this chemical reduction of this insect is a is a failed maintenance program to say the very least and in fact detrimental to your bonsai okay so what we ended up starting to do is look for alternative solutions holistic solutions where the tree thrives with the application of what we're providing and what we found was nematodes right beneficial nematodes now nematodes if we have a compressed root system are not going to penetrate that root system it just simply isn't going to happen because when we start to talk about the nematode the nematode is limited by where the water will flow in the roots okay so when we get this container bound situation and our tree reaches this height of refinement you're not in one year gonna lose all of that trees health to root aphids it's a slow insidious creep as they're growing and the number of root aphids is going to increase right the wreck the the way that we fix it is we have to repot loosen it up get water movement back into this tree and then we can come back with nematodes and other other methods of horticultural application to fix this issue okay so I'm just removing this from the container right now and once we get through I suspect that we're going to have a fairly prolific and robust population of root aphids in here okay now I'm going to share with you one more observation that has not a super limited scientific application but I would say is far less worked out when I see trees that are growing in a less than ideal circumstance trees that are staying too wet trees that potentially have some toxicity in the roots for example this tree I can see has red lava in it we had a batch of red lava that had too much boron in it and any tree that's in this lava has really had a compromised root system another aspect of trees in that particular batch not saying red lava is bad I'm saying this batch of red lava is bad trees in that batch have inherently inherently been far more susceptible and prone to root aphids right now what is that because the red lava seems as though it's impairing the trees growth habit I mean this tree isn't unhealthy but this tree also isn't thriving right and I'm gonna guess that we're gonna probably see that there's some real a real lack of health or a lack of robustness in the root system of this tree okay so when we see those kinds of hardships is that actually creating potentially a lower amount of flow that's more digestible for the root aphids at a pace that an insect that small can pierce and suck and manage that kind of quantity is it potentially preventing the tree from compartmentalizing the damage done by that root aphid based on a potential heavy metal accumulation with the boron being present right these are the kinds of things that I think we need to start thinking about and looking at in order to be able to understand how we deal with it okay now this tree comes out he's just go ahead and focus in on the interior of this container because this this is really where we start to see root aphid setting the tone for their location in the container okay go ahead and zoom in for me Josh notice those white spots against the bottom of the container okay there's also some white spots and let me tilt up on the on the go on the bottom wall has used to pan your camera down down down down down down down down down down down down keep going keep her going keep her going keep going past that hole keep going yes look at all those cottony white masses on the wall that's where the fine roots accumulate right and we see those cottony masses holding again holding the eggs in this portion of the reproductive cycle of the root aphid okay and if we come back and we look at the tree we see these distribution of cottony masses these white spots right and a lot of people say well what is mycorrhizae go ahead and bring me in tight please Josh what is mycorrhizae versus root aphids how can you tell the difference okay now if you focus in here go ahead and zoom in for me Jesus okay if you focus in here one thing that you will notice about these white cottony masses which when we look at mycorrhizal relationships fungi has a little bit more of a coating between the roots tends to have a little bit of a sheen to it when we look at root aphids they are attached to the roots they are actually physically attached to the roots they are attached to the roots they are attached notice that we have these pieces physically attached to roots right you see that it's on a red root right there and they're cotton they're dull right you might see an actual adult you might not take a look at the end that we have here that was against the wall right there very very prominent root aphid occupation okay and we're seeing these again in dense colonies of roots okay and there is a simple reason for it the nematodes and the application the balance of water and oxygen the strength of the tree because it has a little bit of space to grow are not there not contacting the root aphid not capable of managing the situation and so we have a tree that's starting to suffer now I'm gonna say this is less this is much less significant than what I suspected it could have been okay but let's go ahead and let's talk about the repotting operation as the first step towards allowing a tree to establish the kind of health that enables it to fight the root aphid issue okay I'm going to tape that confirmed root aphid issue at 30 to 40% so if you have a lot of rake planted plant to 15% of Warren Daz little bit of a pretty في off the surface layer and we recognize every two to three years we've got to be removing the surface layer in trees just as a general routine maintenance now that routine maintenance with the formation of moss i typically tend to pull back a little bit i like to see that tree with the moss and that organic accumulation really occurring but what you start to recognize here is we have that soil mass we top dress it it facilitates roots to grow right at that top dressing we fertilize on top of it those roots grow through the moss into the fertilizer boom into the fertilizer okay and on top of that fertilizer moss grows roots grow into the moss right we fertilize on top of the moss and roots grow into the fertilizer you get this rise of this surface layer above the rim of the container okay and you and what what happens is it turns into a very significant organic cake okay and that's not bad that's the good biology that's the mojo that gives you a hell of a lot of moisture and that's the mojo that gives you a hell of a lot of moisture right it's a healthy tree you want that process to occur right but there comes a point when the soil system has gotten extremely high and where the organic mat has built up to a point where not only does water not get in but the nematodes and the things that we're treating the root aphids do not get in and that's when we need to go back into this system okay now the question is how far do you need to go in a repot when you revamp or you come back and you readdress the tree how far do you go and when you clean off that surface how far do you go and the answer is we have to go and notice this this black layer go ahead and zoom in right here jesus because this is the crux of this information notice this black layer and notice that there's no real identifiable soil particle okay but as i continue to go it's almost like i blast through that layer okay and that layer changes color and it changes into the beige color of akadama particles still intact okay now when that cracks apart you see that layer you see that kind of cake together when that cracks apart when what ends up happening is that is the opening of oxygen and the opening of space for water to permeate boom right it opens up we see roots exposed we see those fine fleshy roots and we see see or hear the tree go thank you right because it's gotten so funky with all of that biology and that organic accumulation that it's slowly gotten a little bit you know it's like a good hug it's like oh that feels nice and then the hug gets a little tighter it's like that's wonderful and the hug keeps getting tired anyway that's really good it's good thank you so much i can't breathe right it's that kind of an insidious creep towards this susceptibility of a lack of of balance of water and oxygen which compromises new root production uh or at least continues to reduce the size of new root production but it also decreases sugar starch productivity okay and that is what the tree utilizes as its battery and if we cannot get to those root aphids to to provide some sort of checks and balances for their population when they are hatching in the spring season specifically then we are setting ourselves up for a population boom over the course of the year that could potentially push a tree into a really poor state of health all right okay so we're looking at uh at this cleaning of the surface as a major mechanism for health in the tree for the continued evolution of of the tree's uh containerized environment but also for penetration of oxygen that gives us an immune response as well as penetration of nematode applications which give us a sustainable methodology to treat soft-bodied insects including grubs and our root aphids inside of the containerized environment okay so you can see how far i'm dropping down here and i'm exposing a lot of finer roots you can see how much of the trunk this was all this all of this this was the original planting height of the tree here and you can see how much soil mass has accumulated on top of that this is where all of the all of the original major structural roots were that we would want to show as nabari or show as an aesthetic component of the tree they're all hidden underneath all of this organic matter on the very surface of the soil okay so let's regain that and again we're gaining and regaining the ability not only for the tree to have success but also for for uh the nematodes to be able to penetrate that root system now here's the natural response to this oh so then we don't really want to let a tree get root bound it's not what i'm saying okay this is where we have to be very careful right we see globalized issues in the foyer mass that suggests we have a problem with the roots right we look at water we look at ph we look at nutrition all three of those balance water we've got good ph or at least manageable ph we've been applying nutrition that seems to be functioning and delivering what the plant might need okay cool what else could it be and that's where the root aphid comes in as a potential globalized aspect what exacerbates root aphid issues the tree becoming slower and slower weaker and weaker as well as compression of the soil mass okay but but we have to recognize and what i need you to hear is what i said had i repotted last year first and foremost this is not a bad root aphid infestation okay this is a root aphid infestation that is definitely making the tree susceptible to pathogen right the pathogen is secondary it's the loss of sugars and starches the loss of oxygen penetration and the general loss of health in the root system that the root aphids are piggybacking on and the foyer uh fungi is piggybacking on okay so we have to cultivate that health and still had i done this last year i could have achieved a high level of refinement a high level of compression in the roots system and not had to deal with the root aphids never experienced a problem this tree keeps moving forward i missed it by a year and now we're reconciling it okay we still have to push for that degree of refinement that degree of root formation that degree of constriction that is what makes it manageable to cultivate bonsai right that's what allows us to control the energy in the tree but we have to just be aware and this is where root aphid knowledge is not hey everybody go out and repot every single tree that might be even remotely root bound no no it's hey if you see this you got time i'm going to give you the tools this is how you go about addressing this and here's some solutions that we can even take up in the interim if a tree doesn't need to be repotted but we think we might have a root aphid issue okay cleaning off the surface just cleaning off the surface right if we fertilize appropriately meaning we give trees the kind of nutrition they need in two to three years after a repot we should see a tree start to show a loss of percolation to a degree where we would potentially be encouraged to go in and clean off that surface okay only two to three years into it because when we develop really healthy growth when we develop tremendous foliar mass we style a tree for the first time we fertilize it aggressively to replenish the foliar mass and help drive forward secondary scaffolding and the evolution recovery root system etc right all of that foliar mass in the fall season generates vascular tissue and root mass i mean we can fill the walls in the bottom of a bonsai container in the bottom of a plant but there's no way that soil is going to surface within two to three years effortlessly but that sheen that takes time take away that surface now we have access we keep moving forward okay so just understanding that is a great way and a great motivation to invest that time last year at mariah there were a lot of trees that had root aphid issues we got through some of them repotting we we dealt with a lot of them via nematodes but the biggest thing that facilitated and increased success dealing with rude aphids is we pulled a lot of the trees into the reduce the compressed surface layer and replenish that. Okay, and again, we've done that. I'm doing it right now. I'm trying to give you a very clear visual as to how far you go, right? Getting through that dark organic mass, dropping that soil level down, and really opening up those solid particles of okadama, pumice, and lava as we're working through this, okay? But when we start to talk about this, it's just such a significant aspect of bonsai cultivation to be seriously considering that as a routine maintenance, and it made all the difference in the world, and I mean all the difference. We had a massive disease issue last year. We had a really, really challenging repotting schedule, and we had a big-time root aphid problem, and we've gotten on top of it to the degree where I've only seen root aphids on three trees this year. That is a monumental shift, okay? Are they gone? No, no, and I'm gonna continue working here because I wanna take this to a point where you saw the beginning of this. I'm gonna continue it until I feel like I'm gonna be able to do it. I'm gonna feel like this is a root system. I'm not gonna walk you through the whole repot, but this is a root system that I now feel confident I can go ahead and I can get ahead of the root aphid issue, and I can stop it, and I can get this tree back to a prime state of health. You have to understand how far to go, and I'm gonna walk you through the life cycle, okay? So last year when we started experiencing all that, we recognized, listen, we've got all these trees that have really compressed surface areas. This is gonna need to be much like cleaning the live vein of a juniper, a routine part of maintenance on an annual basis to go through the trees that are compressed and address that proactively, okay? Do not let that sit as a festering sore for your tree in bonsai cultivation because a compressed root system, although it will not often die, is slowly and insidiously losing strength over the course of time, okay? So it can stand it for years on end, but it's losing the ability to protect itself through that entire period of time. Major, major thing to understand, all right? When we're going about that process, okay, and we dig into that, we have to understand that springtime is an opportune time to repot. Springtime is also an opportune time to do that surface layer of cleaning because root aphids in the springtime are in egg formation or crawler stage, right? Now this is ultimate susceptibility. Crawler stage, soft-bodied insect, lacking a tremendous amount of maturity. This is when the nematode can do the greatest amount of damage to the aphid, to the eradication. This is when the nematode is most beneficial, okay? We work with Arbico. We have a video on how you apply those nematodes to deal with root aphids. Now we're starting to talk about the life cycle of those root aphids. Spring, egg hatching to a crawler phase, all right? Now over the course of spring and summer, the crawler feeds. The crawler may even, you know, there's different stages. Crawler may turn into sexually reproductive and it may lay an egg that turns into a flying root aphid. Or if it's a crawler that's turned into a feeding root aphid and gone through several instars, it will be actively consuming sugars and starches. Let's pretend most of the root aphids we see are actively consuming the sugars and starches in the tree. If that's the case, over the spring and summer, they go through several stages. They pupate, they mature, they get bigger, they feed more. They start reproducing and colonizing the system inside of your containerized environment. Okay? When they get to the fall, a select number of those reproduced aphids are gonna develop wings and they're gonna take flight, okay? At Mirai last year, one of the things that we developed and one of the things that we started implementing as a common practice in the garden, which is not a new idea to the nursery industry, but I don't see bonsai practitioners doing it, is we put out yellow sticky traps, purple sticky traps, and green sticky traps, okay? Purple and green sticky traps were borer sticky traps. To try and catch borer adults before they lay eggs. The yellow sticky traps are collecting aphids in terms of foyer aphids, but what we found is the yellow sticky traps were collecting root aphids as they were taking flight to expand, breed, and occupy different root systems. And we had these yellow sticky traps with hundreds, hundreds of small little black insects that in the past I would have said, that is a fungal gnat. That is a fungal gnat. No need to worry, fungal gnats are breaking down, decomposing organic matter. I've got fertilizer, there's any number of things, dead leaf matter, dead root matter, decomposing matter, no issue. And in all actuality, it was thousands and thousands of root aphids taking flight that I was actually catching. And so once I learned that, I started recognizing, holy cow, and seeing the reduction in root aphid population, I now recognize, listen, a spring application three weeks ago of nematodes each of those weeks. Boom, boom, boom. Spring application, your buds are swelling, leaves are starting to emerge, hit the root system. New soft fleshy roots are also present. Three successive applications in the spring of a nematode drench will completely and totally take out any soft bodied insect. If we need to clean the surface, we can. If we've just repotted and we saw root aphids, treat that tree. It's not going to hurt it. Get the nematodes acting on that tree. OK? Once we get into it, we're going to get into it. We're going to get into it. We're going to get into it. We're going to get into it. We're going to get into it. We're going to get into it. We're going to get into it. Once we get into the mid-spring and the tree's foliar mass is starting to produce sugars and starches, yellow sticky traps. Put them out if you have a root aphid issue, if you have trees that are susceptible, if you have trees that you're trying to reconcile root aphids, put out yellow sticky traps. And from that mid-spring through the middle of the fall, track the populations and capture the root aphids that are taking on a wing stage so that they don't get to other trees and start reproducing. Here already, we've horticulturally made a big change. But we've also talked about some of the actions that we take outside of the immediate tree to be able to reconcile it. And all of this is based on the root aphid stages of development and cycle of life. So we're starting to get there. We're starting to analyze and develop. So I've taken this down a considerable amount. I just want to show you how far the repot of an established tree needs to go to refresh the soil environment. And you can see there's a lot of contour. We've gone. We've gone down a very great distance. You can see right here, the soil mass was all the way here. So I've dropped almost three inches of soil mass. This is a moderately sized tree at best, OK? Big, big reduction, OK? Now that I'm happy with the surface, and I've opened it up, taken away that organic matter, down to the original level, and in fact, gotten into solid intact soil, I did not hit any clay. There's nothing to be done in terms of native field soil removal there. I'm going to shift my attention to the bottom. We saw it on the bottom of the container. But we also see that the bottom of that root mass, this is super solid with matted roots, OK? So fundamental repotting principles when we talk about this. But definitely, the notion of root aphids is demanding that we really be sincere and intentional about how far we go. And I've got to take out that entire mat, OK? Now I use the wine, or excuse me, I use the paint scraper just as a way to maintain a solid sheet of roots that we're remaining. I'm removing, knowing that that solid sheet, if I can remove that as a solid sheet, it keeps the angle that my tree has been designed at consistent with the way it was sitting in the pot. If you're redesigning a tree, then obviously you're going to change that, OK? And already, as I get into the bottom of this, I recognize, wow, OK? I take off that bottom sheet to crack in, and I say, wow, so much root growth happening here. So, so, so much root growth happening here. Lots of fine roots. And as I start to break in, I'm seeing these little white pockets, OK? These little white patches, can you see these, Jesus? Can you zoom in a little bit more? OK, little white pockets. We have them. They're on the tips of the roots right here. You see that little kind of glowing white? That's a root aphid sitting on the root. You see these white pieces. There's a root aphid sitting on the roots. I'm getting inside of this, and I'm starting to recognize, ooh, I've got root aphids, OK? I can see them. They're physically inside. They're not just on the outskirts, although the outskirts. make it effortless for them to colonize. Fine roots are growing there. They're also inside, because the sheen of this tree has been occupied. Now, am I trying to completely physically remove root aphids from this root system? Absolutely not. Do I want to soak this in a vat of chemicals right now with the roots exposed, because I'm so fearful of this insect? Absolutely not, right? The only thing I'm doing is I'm opening this root system up. And again, the bottom, much like the top, I need to go into the root system until I get through. That compressed area, until I see that I have Akadama, pumice, and lava in solid particles, OK? And while I'm doing this, I also recognize, oh my gosh, I have a ton of field soil in this. Is it normal or is it more common for root aphids to occupy the root system of a tree that still has field soil? You better believe it, OK? The presence of field soil, a tree that's been through an initial repot, or a tree that has accumulated a tremendous amount of organic matter, organic debris in the sheen of the tree, is absolutely far more susceptible to root aphids and damage via root aphids than trees that have been fully changed over into domesticated soil and whose sheen is really highly managed and healthy in terms of the quality of growth, OK? We talk about the sheen as the beating heart. It's the epicenter of health. When we see root aphids occupy the sheen of our tree, that is where the health issues begin. We recognize this isn't a massive root aphid issue that this tree has, but the fact that they are in the sheen is actually why I'm seeing disease. Because if they were just on the outer wall and bottom, I would not be seeing this tree suffer from pathogen at all. And that is really interesting. It could have them without having them in the place that does the most damage to the metabolic system and to the immunity of the tree, OK? So I need, in regards to this, to get that field soil out. Yet another motivation, OK, to go ahead. I'm going to take a second repot, be fairly diligent, right? Now, am I going to be able to get all of this out without bare rooting this tree? I don't know yet. I don't know yet. It seems like there's an awful lot in here. And I'm already fairly deep in terms of the removal that I've performed on the current root system. But I have this whole area of what appears to be really beautiful. And now there's a little bit more field soil. Let's chase it. Let's find and let's go ahead and extract to the best possible degree that we can. Let's see if we can get through it and can't get out of it, right, because this does definitely have a major health impact on the tree, OK? So I'm going to work on this sheen and try to get this sheen taken down to the degree where I feel like I've got all of that field soil, or as much as the tree can tolerate out, I've kept the domesticated soil intact, and I feel good about the work I've done on the bottom. This is, again, influencing penetration of water into our root system. This is opening the capacity for oxygen, for water, for nematodes, and for the immune system of the tree to catch back up, develop a solid significant root system, and give the tree the capacity to fight off the root aphids. OK? I'm going to have to spend some time working on that sheen, so I don't want to burn ourselves out on that piece of information. I'm going to move to the very last piece, OK? And the very last piece of this is the wall of this root system, OK? Now, once we come back in, and we've done the top, and we've opened up. And we've done the bottom, and we've gotten the field soil out, and we've addressed all of that, right? Now we have the wall. And by this time, because we've done the bottom and the top, the wall should really open up for us pretty effortlessly. OK? You see as I'm moving into this, and as I'm just working along that cusp of the upper surface and the wall, and I'm getting into a little field soil here on the surface, which is awesome, because I can connect that to the bottom. But that wall just kind of explodes open. Much like each piece of this puzzle, if we attack it from an, an objective aspect of knowledge, we recognize that the root system is sort of tied together in a very strategic way. We clean off that surface to allow water in. We take off the bottom to allow water out. We open up the walls to allow water to move, right? And when we see those three areas take on that clean, solid particle form, now we recognize we have gone far enough to allow for the nematodes, for the water, for the oxygen, and for the physiological action of the tree to function and move with the highest rate of mobility and the highest rate of efficiency. And that's how you beat root aphids, right? That's how you beat root aphids. It's not a magical chemical mixture, right? It's not a, it's not a quick fix where you dump some granules on the tree and you call it good, right? It is the process by which we cultivate a healthy tree, the same process by which we fight pathogens, disease, and insect-related issues in our tree. And you will see this become a consistency in your bonsai cultivation, okay? So I'm gonna spend the next hour or so really working this root system over because it is so dense, because it is so hard, because there's a lot of field soil, I do have a lot to work with and a lot of work that needs to be done or else I'm going to perpetuate the susceptibility to root aphids. I don't wanna do this, I'm uncomfortable, I'm afraid. Okay, well you get to deal with root aphids then, right? I have knowledge, I understand the system, I understand the life cycle, I understand the susceptibility, awesome. You're empowered to deal with root aphids, okay? We talk about, just to summarize, root aphids definitely fall in line with a global decrease in health in the foyer mass as an indication that they exist. A loss of balance of water and oxygen is a major, major access point for root aphids to establish a significant compaction or compression or significant decomposition. Root aphids tend to favor and find those sites to be most attractive. Tree is weaker, can't fend off the root aphids, root aphids get stronger and that is where a balance of water and oxygen allows a tree to develop a strong immune system. Spring, they're in the crawler phase, open up that surface area or perform that repot and hit them with nematodes. Three successive applications one week apart will do a dramatic, a dramatic, you know, travel a dramatic distance to improve the health of your tree. But those yellow sticky traps from that mid to late spring all the way through the early fall, that's gonna be how you cut down on, stop, or at least diminish the spread of the root aphid population, okay? Understanding phylloxera, understanding an issue is finding a solution for an issue. We've dissected the root aphid issue. I'm gonna go about the process of continuing this tree to a point of finality, I encourage you to utilize this season to do your very best to understand, to deal with, to prevent potentially, or reconcile the relationship that you have with root aphids, get ahead of the problem and give your trees the best chance of success. Have a great rest of your week. We'll see you tomorrow on the live Q&As. For the time being, I'm gonna keep repotting. Love you guys, thanks. 
