When we have major heat events occurring, we have to be able to take the steps and understand what's necessary to be able to protect our trees. Now heat snaps during the spring season when all of that soft fleshy growth and tissue is out without its cuticle to protect it as it elongates, we need to be proactive about protection. Here in the Pacific Northwest we often have a heat snap in the middle of spring that really can be detrimental and damage that new growth and we're taking the steps to bring all of the sensitive trees or any trees that we have concern about under the shade cloth to be able to protect them over this heat event. What you'll notice is the species that we're moving in are the elongating species, our deciduous trees that have extremely soft leaves, or any of our weaker trees or tiny containers that we might not be able to keep hydrated with all of that fresh growth being produced and no cuticle there to protect it. Understanding how to behave during heat events can be a key factor in protecting our trees. We want to make sure that we maintain the direction of refinement and make sure that we maximize that tree's ability to improve as a bonsai over the course of this growing season and this year of cultivation. If you don't have a shade structure, utilizing the dappled shade of trees on the exterior of your garden to be able to protect these trees that still have soft fleshy growth is a major tool that we can implement to be able to protect and make sure that that growth doesn't suffer from that heat. At Mirai we utilize a 30% strength shade cloth that's 10 feet in the air so we maintain air flow, but also so that we get the diffusion of the light with that height of the shade cloth to still get little bit ofท get that 70% of sun facilitating the continued growth even though it's hot. And just that 30% reduction has such a major impact on that soft fleshy growth that doesn't have a cuticle to protect it, that it's an imperative tool that we have to utilize at Mirai. Now you'll notice the trees on the exterior of the shade cloth are trees that can tolerate sun. We use pines, we have junipers, and some of our redwoods that haven't produced soft fleshy growth yet are on the exterior and can handle the intensity of the heat. Anything in the interior or underneath the benches needs a lot more coolness, a lot more shade, and a lot more presence of humidity around it during this heat event. We see our larches, we see our spruce with soft fleshy growth, and we see our deciduous trees underneath the benches or in the core of that shade cloth to be able to protect that new growth over the course of this few days where we're gonna have inclement weather. I hope this educates you on the actions you can take to be able to preserve the quality of the growth you're getting in your trees and maximize your garden's ability to protect from those heat events. Good luck, make sure that you err on the side of caution, trust your gut, and give the tree the benefit of the doubt in terms of protecting it, and move it back into that place after the heat event is done where it can continue to produce solid, strong, compact growth over the course of the spring season. Subtitles by the Amara.org community 
