everybody oh welcome to the studio man i i i do have to say these live sessions have taken on a novelty for me since uh we moved past super tuesday i always look forward to the lecture series i think about it all month long between lecture series and for this segment of the mariah lecture series the topic of speaking tree or speaking bonsai i think is something that i have tried to communicate to you over the course of the past decade of content that we've created and i don't you know it's so hard to learn how to move past the black and white of this is what i do this is what i don't do this is how you do it this is how you don't do it this is what you should be doing this is what you shouldn't be doing into the more evolved conversation of taking those skills that you have recognizing that they are not set in stone understanding that the baseline skill or knowledge is the foundation to grow upon and reading the tree and its mechanisms of communication whether it is health or aesthetics to be able to understand how do i continue to evolve this tree how do i respond to issues how do i know what's going on how do i know what's going on how do I identify and start to create a protocol to improve, advance health, aesthetics, maturity in the tree, and all of it comes down to when you get to a point where you have a significant foundational skill set, which I feel like we've provided an incredibly optimal platform to see a plethora of ways that the approach at Mirai is manipulated and evolved and sort of elastically handled to be able to satisfy and solve the riddles of each tree and what it brings to the table. Because we do have to understand no tree is the same regardless of the species. Even from a seedling, no tree is is the same. There will always be differences that make one tree behave different than another. Respond differently than another. Want one thing more than another. And in the aesthetic realm, every tree has a different opportunity to take advantage of the aesthetics that it is giving to maximize its potential, whether it's a ten-year-old piece of nursery stock or a thousand-year-old piece of Yamadori. In order to do so, in order to grow your skills and evolve to that level, we have to let go of the black and white. We've got to loosen our constriction of our of our mindset. We've got to be willing to lock in the knowing and we've got to be able to free it. We've got to be able to let it go, to take those skills and understand they always apply, but then to be malleable and evolve those skills. And this is what we start to talk about speaking tree. All right? So I thought about a multitude of ways to dig into this conversation and I think it needs to come from the health and the aesthetics, right? But I wanted to start at the very base of the tree in terms of breaking it down in the roots, okay? And from the roots, I want to first start to talk about health when we talk about speaking tree, the health component of speaking tree, because everything about the tree sources from the root system, right? Everything about the health of the tree sources from the root system. When and if we have a problem in the foliage mass, I used to think okay if it's if it's globally across the foliar mass, then we have a root related issue. If it's isolated to a pocket of fungus, if it's isolated to a branch that's experiencing spider mite, that is localized and that is an external factor acting on the tree. Even in an insect and disease issue, it still sources from the root system. Okay, now let's just establish our fundamentals of understanding the system here before we really get started to say, listen, we understand we're striking a balance of H2O and O2, a balance of water and oxygen to get ultimate health. And if you remember, this is taking you back a long time, I haven't talked about ultimate health in a very long time, even though it is a fundamental of speaking tree, when we see ultimate health, we have a tree that is resistant, resistant, a tree that is resistant to heat, cold, drought. Let's just say here in the Pacific Northwest, wet or a lack of oxygen. We have a tree that's resistant to disease. We have a tree that's resistant to pest. We have a tree that's resistant to disease. We have a tree that's resistant to acid. We have a tree that's resistant to sad Jelly and that's resistant to personally contaminated arbid plants. We have a tree that can tolerate the bone side practice in terms of being repotted, in terms of being wired, in terms of being pruned, in terms of being pinched right? We have a tree that because we've established that central origin of health in the balance of water and oxygen and the roots is capable of being turned into a bone side that only gets better with time. Now, we recognize the balance of water and Oxygen here, when we just talk about this, 85% of all water 85% of H2O is cooling, okay? But we talk about that other 15% as metabolic activity and that metabolic activity specifically is in the photosynthetic process. And I'm going through this quick because this should be a review. You should know this. You should be able to look at this and say, boom, water does this in a plant. Boom, oxygen is needed for this in a plant, okay? When we talk about photosynthesis, Mr. Sunshine always having a good day. That's a smile, all right? A little tongue sticking out. We got our happy tree here, right? The sun's energy is what's allowing water moving through the system, cooling, transpiring, releasing that heat energy into the atmosphere with the evaporation of that water molecule at the stomata or the pore of the needle or the leaf. 85% of it is gonna leave just in the form of cooling and releasing that heat energy with the evaporation of that water molecule, carrying that heat energy out of the plant but that other 15%, sun's energy breaks the molecular bond of the hydrogen and oxygen. We have three pieces of the formation of sugar in the photosynthetic process. The hydrogen from water is the hydrogen and sugar. The oxygen from water is the oxygen and sugar. And then we have that CO2 out here that enters the stomata. Sun's energy breaks the molecular bond. That gives us the carbon. That's the backbone of sugar. C6H12O6, the sequestration of carbon via trees and that O2 molecule off-gassed as an oxygen-positive contribution. Trees photosynthesizing and transpiring is the way we sequester carbon. It is the way that we bind that carbon into usable forms that feed, that nourish, that create fruits, seeds, any number of edible things that we depend on as organisms on this earth, as does all of the fauna that exists, in the forested systems across the globe, okay? So, when we start to talk about that, we know we need water down here, right? Water is of primary importance for cooling as well as metabolic processes, the creation of sugar. The sugar then moves down to the roots and through all of the places in the location of the tree. In the roots, that sugar is turned into usable forms of energy, okay? This is actually where the oxygen is most paramount, okay? People say that the roots suffocate. Maybe that's why. That is true. I'm gonna offer you a little bit of a manipulation. Could be hypothetical or cerebral, it doesn't matter. It helps you understand the system, okay? We need oxygen into the system. And obviously, we talk about particle size, we talk about soil composition, we talk about chop-sticking and technique, we talk about anchoring to create an established, stable environment for the tree to grow. All of those things, when we start speaking tree, I want a balance of water and oxygen. It creates resistance. What does that mean? When we start speaking tree, it means that the techniques we apply, the manner in which we go about repotting, the soil that we put the tree in to handle the repotting, the top dressing that evenly distributes the water across the soil column, stabilizes, hydrates the surface to prevent excessive evaporation that causes us to water too early. All of these things are the byproduct of speaking tree. Balance of water and oxygen is the vocabulary. That's the vernacular of speaking tree. When we're trying to establish health in the roots that feeds health, the rest of the tree. This oxygen, photosynthesis happening during the daytime, respiration happening during the nighttime or the dark period, the oxygen in the root system is what allows the Krebs cycle to take place, bind the phosphorus that's locked up on the cation exchange sites of our Akadama as the nutrient holding component in our soil composition, and turn with that sugar, C6H12, simple sugar, and the presence of oxygen, turn that phosphorus into ATP, which is long-term, storable, and usable energy. So let's just go ahead and hypothetically apply this. I repot a tree. I don't let an adequate amount of oxygen enter the system, i.e., after we repot a tree, we thoroughly saturate and hydrate the soil system, wash out all of the dust and fines that exist from the mechanical processes of repotting, right? And we say, after that first hydration, thorough hydration, saturation, complete washing and hydrating of the soil system and the tree's roots after the repotting process, the most important watering after that first one is the second one, right? Because the first one, we've got to make sure to thoroughly hydrate everything and wash everything out of the system. The second one, we've got to shine on our desire to give the tree something, right? Something that it does not need until it tells us it's ready, which is more water, right? So we're waiting and waiting and waiting, and that tree is staying wet for, say, seven days, eight days, nine days, and we're going, gosh, this tree has to need water, right? Especially in a greenhouse protected from intense light and wind, even if you have airflow in the greenhouse. I repot a tree. It will be, depending on the tree, the health, et cetera, for a lot of just average repots, it will be between, you know, depending on the tree, the health, et cetera, for a lot of just average repots, it will be between three and seven days before I water that tree again. Now, I'm not saying you should be waiting three or seven days. I'm saying you should be looking at the top dressing as your indication of whether or not that soil column has thoroughly exhausted the water supply that it needs. But the most important thing, I'm waiting for the drying of that, not to see that the tree is using the water, but to know that I've gotten oxygen back into the system. Because with the drying and the utilization, of that water in that soil system, we create the opportunity for oxygen to now move across that soil column. We've got our window on the bottom drainage. We've got our door on the top. We have that gradient of high concentration, high concentration in the center, low concentration. Oxygen moves across that concentration gradient to get into the sheen, to get into the core of the root system. We need that oxygen in the system to be able to turn those sugars, to be able to turn those sugars, to be able to turn those sugars, into usable energy. Until the sugars are turned into usable energy, we do not get growth. And we know that we want growth in a multitude of ways after a repot. We want the formation of callus at any of the cuts that we made on the root system. And we want from the formation of that callus, new roots to emerge and to grow over the spring season, so that we are able to build our water supply system for that tree to be able to tolerate the summer temperatures, okay? So when we start to think about this, the oxygen getting back into the system immediately after repotting, comes between that first thorough hydration and that second application of water. And we wanna let that tree dry out as much as we are comfortable with for the species. For a ponderosa pine, I'm gonna let it get pretty crispy. For a Rocky Mountain juniper, I'm gonna let it get pretty crispy. For a spruce, I'm gonna wait till I start to see dry Akadama particles through the top dressing. I'm not scratching my top dressing away. I didn't overly top dress so that I can see a little bit of that soil system. I start to see drier particles. I still see some hydrated particles, but they are of the lesser quantity. A larch, a spruce, a broadleaf, maple, beech, et cetera, I'm gonna be hitting it at that point where I'm seeing a majority of the soil drying out. The top dressing is dry. I still see some hydration. I'm not gonna let it become fully dry like a pine or a juniper. That second watering is what triggers that callus. That's what triggers that callus to produce roots. And the sooner that we produce roots, the sooner we start to build this system that's going to give this tree the capacity to be able to resist and tolerate the bonsai process. All right? So that oxygen, when we start to talk about balance of water and oxygen, speaking tree, trickles down into all of our soil decisions for particle size, all of our soil decisions for composition, all of our horticultural decisions, for how we go about the handling of that tree, post repotting process, right? Now let's just go ahead and say, I am seeing abnormal foliar drop, which in the Pacific Northwest, we see this on an annual basis because we stay so wet. The roots don't have enough oxygen, right? And I was gonna say this, right? It's not that the roots suffocate, okay? Because the lack of oxygen, we say, the roots are suffocating. They're drowning. But if we know that oxygen is necessary to create energy, and if we know that oxygen is necessary to create energy, and energy is necessary to create growth, the sugars that are created through photosynthesis are just the first part of the process of inciting growth. Those sugars have to be processed. They have to be evolved and tied to the phosphorus molecule to have usable forms of energy that incite growth. Well, when I start to think about this, right, and I see a tree whose foliar mass is starting to abnormally shed, we would say, oh, that tree's roots are drowning. I'm saying, oh, that tree is starving. That tree is starving. It does not have the energy. Because it lacks the oxygen over the dark period, it does not have the energy to sustain the root mass. It does not have the energy to sustain the foliar mass, right? If a tree cannot sustain, right, we say when you see growth, a tree is growing. It has enough root system to sustain what it currently has, an excess root system to be able to add. We know that the roots come before the foliage, right? The tree doesn't have a credit card. It always generates roots before the foliage. I see growth. Okay, I have the roots to sustain what it had and to add more. Add more what? Add more water supply capacity, okay? So when we start to think about this, I see a tree receding. I immediately go to the roots. Spring season, time to be able to adjust and adapt. I had a bad batch of Akadama three or four years ago. I'm having to repot every single tree that I repotted three years ago, right? Which is on top of what we already needed to repot, a huge workload at Mirai, but I'm having passive decomposition. I'm seeing the foliar mass shed on the tree. I've got all of the nutrition balanced. I still am not getting the kind of resistance that I need. I've got to go in and I've got to address the root system to create the balance of water and oxygen that gives the tree ultimate health. All right? So this is like a single phrase. Balance of water and oxygen. That has monumental implication for aesthetics, but primarily for the health. And when we break that down, the resistance of the tree, okay? Speaking bonsai, balance of water and oxygen, health is the biggie. And I'm going to come back to foliar mass and I'm going to talk to you about disease and pests and all of that. But I want to keep moving forward just because, let me grab a paper towel real quick, just because we've got so much to cover. Okay, now, the horticulture of bonsai is, I think, what we all find to be the challenge, right? Because we're doing something that's very horticulturally challenging. I remember working with a bunch of labs in the past when I was trying to figure things out. And their solution to the health issues that I was having was, he should just plant it in a bigger pot or plant it in the ground. And it's like, huh. But, yes, I understand that's how you make a plant more easily healthy, right? Give it more gravity column, give it a higher quantity of organic matter, better drainage, all of the things that a bonsai container creates the challenges for us to kind of work with, right? But that's not the point. We're doing this for a reason. We're doing this to manage energy. We're doing this to be able to reduce the proportions of the growth. We're doing this to aesthetically create a composition that recreates or represents nature in miniature. So that can't be the solution. We've got to dig a little deeper. That led me on the circuitous route that we're on, whether it's via apical, whether it's via biological, whether it's via searching for good Akadama sources, whether it's finding a substitute for Akadama, how we repot, the techniques that we apply at Mirai, the soil particles and taking the 16th out in a temperate rainfall, right? Like all of the things came from that sort of one notion that we don't have a lot of help in the commonwealth. In the horticultural world, because we're doing something that is completely counter to common horticultural knowledge. Okay? All right. So in terms of aesthetics, we weather the challenges of the horticulture because we're trying to create an aesthetic art form, right? So it doesn't mean that we neglect them. It doesn't mean that we, you know, sort of reluctantly tackle the horticultural challenges, which I will be honest, you know, over the course of time at Mirai, I have certainly been guilty of neglecting the horticulture to try and get to the exciting stuff, which is the first styling, the big bins, the big repot into the new container that, you know, we get to celebrate this aesthetic accomplishment. We get to see our vision actualized. And where I've come over the past five years in having to confront root aphids, which nobody wanted to talk about when I first started talking about them back in 2014, right? You know, the presence of birds and grubs, the evolution of minute cypress scale as a common insect in the bonsai practice, how we tackle the borer issue in the western United States and something that's becoming increasingly of an issue globally, how we deal with the containerized environment, how we deal with the gravity column, how we maximize aesthetics, right? I've started to recognize that that horticulture gives you another window to look at aesthetics from, empowers you to achieve aesthetics from, so you didn't know. And I've embraced the horticulture as the backbone as opposed to the side, right? The side hustle of bonsai. That horticulture is the mainstay of Mirai now. And what has come from it is exceeding what I could have accomplished trying to make the horticulture a secondary notion to the aesthetics. All right? I digress. Let's talk aesthetics and roots. Okay. Speaking bonsai, when we start to assess a tree, is not saying I like this, right? We talk about the objective, the objective assessment of character, right? The objective assessment of character. We know the selection of front is a product of trunk line, base, and special features. Okay? And from these people, these pieces, we find the best of each of those and sacrifice the best of any for the best of all. Right? So the objectiveness is saying, this base is better. This line is better. These special features are better. Maybe I get a little bit of the base. I lose a little bit of the special features. I don't have quite the right line, but I see the base, the line, and the features from here. That is my front, right? That is sacrificing what we love about the tree to be able to objectively, show the best of what that tree has to offer. Okay? But in terms of the base, when we start looking at that base, selecting the front of the tree is the first step in a very long process. And from the selection of the front, now we have the front. Now we start to say, okay, how are we going to design this? And we start to say the trunk, direction. The defining branch, direction. And the apical direction or the apex, right? And we know that this creates the way that these relate, either harmony, tension, or dynamic. Now we finally get into how the base starts to inform aesthetics. When we are speaking bonsai, the way that we determine the degree of asymmetry this particular piece of material can accomplish, the way that we determine how long the defining branch can be, the way that we determine the direction that the apex should face to either create harmony, tension, dynamic for aesthetic reasons, or to create harmony, tension, dynamic for physical and visual stability, is by looking at the base. Because we understand, listen, if I have a big strong root here, and then I have this tree that's leaning out and long, and starting to achieve this significant degree of asymmetry, right? If I have this base that visually and physically supports and sustains the design, then I have an almost unlimited ability to continue to push and engage in the harmonious direction of design. But say for example, I don't have that base on a juniper. I've got a little sprig of deadwood here. My live vein is on the inside. Can I push farther and farther aesthetically? If you're speaking bonsai, you automatically know that the counter of that deadwood or the lack of base opposing the direction of the movement creates physical and visual instability. And as a result, when we start to talk about the use of the roots or the base in the aesthetic formation of the tree, the base completely dictates and determines the length of the branch, the angle of the trunk, in addition to perpendicular parallel lines and all of the other things, right? As well as how we handle this apical region. Because let's just say the trunk moves to the right, we're out of parallel perpendicular lines, we've broken the lateral boundary to put this into a round container, all of the other information that we have. But because I lack that base, it lacks visual and physical stability. If you're looking at a tree and it feels like it's going to fall over, you need to acknowledge that fairy bonsai mother on your shoulder telling you your instinct, I just don't know if I have that stability that I need to really execute this well. Now maybe some people are saying, well listen, ancient trees look like they're going to fall over. Maybe you want to incite some anxiety in the design that you create. Totally fine, right? Those are all totally possible things. But again, I will say if you continue to come back to a single concept or thought when you're looking at a tree, you continue to revisit an area it means you need to fix it. It doesn't mean that it's a highlight. It doesn't mean that it's a positive point. It means that it has a problem that needs to be addressed. So if we continue to look at a tree and feel like, gosh, it just feels like it's going to fall over. It just feels like it's going to fall over. And there are degrees to comfort in this realm. And we look at the base objectively and we say, I don't have the base to support this kind of asymmetry, but maybe I only have branches all the way out here on my defining branch. And maybe I can drop that down, but I'm still going to have it be quite long. One of the ways that we speak bonsai in the roots is to utilize the defining branch, utilize the trunk, utilize the apical region to offset that instability or utilize the apex, the defining branch in the trunk to embrace that physical and visual stability. I've got the base. Let's push. I don't have the base. Let's pull back. Maybe that is what creates the dynamic use of design. Because in reorienting that apex back towards the base, we're no longer moving into oblivion. We regain some of that visual and physical stability. We have a super weak base. Maybe we've got to come up with a different defining branch, attention-based design, so the apex and the defining branch move against that base. But by doing the action that responds to the character of the tree, you are now speaking bonsai. And the biggest problem that we have in the bonsai practice is we oftentimes, and I'm not saying this is a good thing, I'm saying this is the challenge we have to overcome through objectivity. We enter a styling with a piece of material having fallen in love with certain aspects of it, having seen images in our data bank that we want to create with this piece of material, and we start to force the material into a position that it is not geared to facilitate or does not maximize its uniqueness and the character and quality that it offers. So when we step back out of that, you're welcome to have that moment. You're welcome to have those thoughts. But once you have them, let them flow through you, don't get attached to them. Yes, I like that. I want to do this. I want to do this. But is that the best base? Is that the best line? Is that the best special features? Have I objectively selected the front that takes advantage of all of them? Am I looking at the trunk direction, the defining branch direction, and the apical direction, and making sure that those all align with the visual and physical stability that that base gives me? When you step back and you realize, I'm trying to make this look like something that I've seen, but this tree is offering me something different to maximize its highest potential, now you've started to speak bonsai. Now you've taken the physical and visual clues of the tree, and you've started to take action on what it's giving you, not what you brought to it. Right? That is speaking bonsai on an aesthetic level. And the root system is, just like it's the epicenter of all health, it's the epicenter of all design decisions, ultimately, for how far we can asymmetrically push, how far and how long our branches are, how far we can lean in a trunk posture, and where that apex needs to go to respond to the presence of a strong base or the lack thereof. Right? And even in terms of the angle of that trunk responding to that base, even in terms of how we tease away the surface soil, how far we fill up the container to show that base as a visual anchor, all of us want to put soil over the roots, right? Because we say, oh, the roots are going to dry up, I got to put soil over them. And then we lose the visual anchor that we need to be able to justify the design we've chosen. Every aspect, every technique, every response comes down to speaking bonsai. The purest, simplest addressing of the tree's potential, what it's giving us, and how we respond to it. Okay? The roots. I feel like this sets the foundation for everything. We've broken into trunk and branches already because you can't talk about the roots unless you start to see how the roots tie into each other. How the roots tie into the system, impact our decisions, and start to inform how all of the other pieces of the tree exist around this fundamental pillar and backbone of the horticulture of bonsai, as well as the aesthetic practice of bonsai. Okay? All right. Now, I want to... Let's see here. I want to come back to that. Yes. Yes. Okay. Very good. All right. So let's go to branching. Okay? So starting with the roots, we speak bonsai. Big one, balance of water and oxygen. Horticulturally, the big one, aesthetically, do you have the base to support that design? All right? Okay. In terms of branching, first of all, let's start with the health again in speaking bonsai. Okay? Because one of the biggest things that we see horticulturally in bonsai that has been a mystery to us for as long as anybody's been practicing bonsai and only recently with the apical work and the new old testing, have we started to recognize what the heck is actually going on. Right? And this is where we see lower branches get weak. Lower branches get weak. Okay? Now, lower branches getting weak according to our common thought is that they're not getting enough sun. Right? So first and foremost, you do have to ask yourself, have I designed sustainably? Right? Have I designed sustainably? Because if a branch is not getting sun, it's going to be using more energy than it's generating. The tree comes back two times a year and addresses its energy system in the spring prior to the onset of growth and in the fall prior to the onset of vascular tissue. We see the most abundant branch shedding taking place in the early fall because now the tree is given all parts of its branching system the ability to generate and expand its photosynthetic material. And it's given that photosynthetic material the ability to either supply more sugars and starches than it's consuming or to consume more sugars and starches than it's generating. And for the branches that are consuming more than they're supplying or creating for the tree, they get the ax. Right? The tree says, I'm going to wall you off. We're going to move into abscission where we're going to go ahead and shed you. You're not clearly in our evolving system going to be a key player here. And in fact, you're an energy sink or an energy detriment to my total photo system. You're out. But here's one of the challenging things. What about if I do have a lower branch? That is sustainably designed. Right? And we start to look at that from the perspective of, okay, I have this tree. I have this lower branch here. Next branch that exists above it all the way up here. I've got branches for depth. I've got my apex here. I've got my pad here. Okay? And that branch starts to become weak. And you say, why is that branch weak? Or more commonly, I'm a field-grown broadleaf deciduous. I'm using a field-grown Japanese black pine. This branch is very, very small and spindly. I want this branch to elongate and get to a girth where it can be my number one branch. And it just never seems to get there. I can't get it strong enough. I can't get it to elongate. I can't get it to thicken. I can't get enough needle mass on the tree in that lowest branch. I've been doing this for five years. That freaking branch is still not giving me what I need. Why? Why? What is happening here? Okay? And this is where we start to say, listen, that presentation of the lower branches that are sustainably designed getting weaker is the tree telling you, hey man, or hey woman, I got a tree that has a significant energy imbalance. Okay? Because when we start to see the tree, actually let me just do it on this one. When we start to see the tree as a totality of nutrient balancing, we recognize the tree has two locations to shed excess toxicity. Now let's get into the discussion of, right? I've got calcium. I've got phosphorus. I've got potassium. I've got nitrogen. I've got magnesium. Right? All of the things that this tree needs on a macro level in the root system, bonded to the cation or anion exchange sites of the Akadama particle, we should be good, right? Everything's okay. But in addition to that, we've got aluminum. We've got manganese. We've got copper. We've got boron. We've got zinc. We've got moly. We've got all of these other things that are trace elements. Or, in the case of aluminum, not an element the tree needs at all. Or in the case of sodium, an element that the tree only needs a small portion of. Or in the case of chloride, an element that only accumulates during the heat of summer in high toxicity but can cause major detrimental impact to your tree. And so we've got this soil system filled up with all of these things. And the tree is saying, listen, I can go get this stuff, but this stuff also freely gets taken in by water, molecules that exist on that same surface and the porosity of that particle surface. And all of a sudden, the plant is taking in water that's loaded with sodium. Or it's taking in water that's loaded with chloride. Or it's taking in water that's loaded with aluminum. And so now all of a sudden, we have a ton of sodium. We have a ton of chloride. We have a ton of manganese with the breaking down of Akadama. A ton of aluminum with a little bit of root death because they starved because they didn't have enough oxygen. Now that's into the system of the tree and the tree has to do something about it. Now we know most trees that are long-lived have a heartwood. They use the resin and the sap to lock up toxicity in the heartwood so that the water can cool. We don't get too much accumulation of toxicity and all is good. But if the tree can't compartmentalize that fast enough and in a bonsai container where we're watering so much and this tree is growing relatively rapidly compared to how it would be in the mountain region where it was stunted or any of the conditions that created this small tree, we recognize we could have a lot of aluminum accumulating, a lot of chloride over the heat of the summer, a lot of sodium because of our water resource maybe being high in that particular element. And we get a ton of accumulation inside of the plant system. The plant can either shed that out of the needle tips by loading those needle tips up with a tremendous amount of toxicity and then abscising them, killing them off just like it did the freeloading branches that weren't sustainably designed. It pumps weaker areas of the tree full of toxicity and then it sheds them. Get it out of here. Right? First priority when foliage falls off your tree get it off of your soil surface because it's filled with everything the plant doesn't want. The second location that a plant detoxes is by creating the sugars loading those sugars and starches that are going to be moving to the root system up with that element and moving that all the way back down into the tip of the root where we see root death occurring. Now we thought that root death only occurred because we didn't have enough oxygen and not having enough oxygen caused it to drown. And I'm arguing that not enough oxygen caused it to starve because roots can exist in standing water. Roots can exist for prolonged periods of time completely saturated and wet as long as we just have 7-9% oxygen in the system to allow the dark period or respiration to occur where we turn sugars into energy. That's not necessarily what I think is happening there but one of the other reasons we get root death is because we have a nutrient imbalance which means we have toxicities and deficiencies and the toxicities are either being dumped out of the tip of the foliage or out of the tip of the root. Okay? So now all of a sudden in that journey down south into the root system of the tree which all sugars and starches have to make the journey to be turned into usable forms of energy in the roots before that is then put back into the tree and this is part of the auxin hormone exchange highway right? We can break into that some other time that's a conversation all its own. The last branch that all of that energy passes is the lowest branch on the tree. Therefore when we see weak branches on the lowest portion of the tree that is sustainably designed the tree speak learning to speak bonsai is oh my gosh I see those lower branches continuing to deteriorate I got a nutrient imbalance and all the toxicity in its movement south is getting dumped in that last branch. Before it gets to the roots the tree is shedding as much of it as it possibly can distributing it trying to hang on to everything that it possibly can so when you take an apiary so when you take an apical sample you take a quote unquote new sample from the apex it's not the newest needles it's just the highest point on the tree and you take an old sample from the lowest portion it's not the oldest needles it's not the second year or third year needles it's just the lowest branch on the tree what you're going to see is a completely different nutrient reading here than you see here and that is the most valuable information being able to balance a tree's nutrition across interior, exterior, top and bottom because every tree wants balance that's what they're seeking and that's what they're striving to achieve and as we've taken wild samples of trees in the native environment ancient trees of all species everywhere we've gone for the Mirai in the Wild projects what we have found is the longest lived trees have almost a perfect balance they've achieved almost a perfect balance a perfect balance of macros calcium to phosphorus to potassium to magnesium a perfect balance of micros iron to manganese to zinc to copper to boron to moly to cobalt all of our micros and when you start to see that it starts to make a lot of sense why their lower branches are surviving and healthy and why they're the same strength as their upper branches and you say well an ancient tree has more space to photosynthesize and you are not wrong if we're sustainably designing a bone size so that that lower branch has enough access to airflow and sunlight to be able to photosynthesize there's no reason the lowest branch should be weak I've got a weaker lower branch trees speak I've got a nutrient imbalance that I need to fix boom boom boom and a lot of people say well then how do we do that without the apical system I don't know because the apical system is what showed us that this existed the apical system is what's proven that this is in fact the case and the apical system is what's allowed me to adjust a lot of weaker lower branches on my trees to get them where I want to go to save the branch to gain strength to evolve the design to develop the thickening length and needle mass that allows that to be a primary defining branch in a traditional design right and let's just talk about the field grown Japanese Black Pine from Telperian tremendous nutrient imbalance in the lowest branch I wasn't getting the development and thickening that I needed we've reconciled that that lowest branch is as dense and thick and proportional as the rest of the tree now let's talk about the Randy Knight Trident Maple that we root grafted on the stream and came back and designed on the stream in the fall I couldn't get the lower branches to gain girth to develop to start to elongate they were always stunted little T-Rex arms in the upper canopy of the tree was crushing nutrient imbalance we balanced the energy now those lower branches are growing stronger than the upper portion of the tree I'm getting the developmental growth that I want and all of a sudden it's like oh my gosh the tree was thick it wasn't telling me what was happening I just didn't I didn't know how to take it in in the branching there is a discussion of the health and it comes from how that branch in those different regions is responding and the response is what we need to be interpreting okay that's health in the branches for me that's a big one in bonsai right there that's a huge one in bonsai because how many lower branches do you have that are weak on your trees and you're saying I oriented it south I even cut off branches above it I still can't get it to do what I want it to do to gain the strength to get healthy and I'm sitting here telling you there's a reason for that and this is why this is how you fix it that is how we speak bonsai okay I'm going to go ahead and take health off the table I want to move to aesthetics okay and the aesthetics are going to blend right there's never a perfect and this is kind of what I was saying when I said the horticulture has started to incite the design the horticulture has had a dramatic impact on the aesthetic to try and divide you know the horticulture and the aesthetics is a fruitless task because what you'll recognize is it becomes a circular cyclical conversation the improving of the nutritional balancing gives me the aesthetic achievements because I've horticulturally rectified the issue and now I'm getting the aesthetic byproduct and the aesthetic byproduct if sustainably designed should contribute to the continued horticultural success of the tree by the energy system continuing to be stocked with positive continuing to maintain that balance through the way that we handle hormones photosynthetic productivity of sugars consumption of carbon dioxide to generate that resource etc we see it all working cyclically so I'm going to talk about the aesthetics of branching but it's going to come back to the horticulture here okay aesthetics of branching we start to think about in the aesthetics of branching the management of the hormonal load that creates the aesthetic of each species okay so let's just go ahead and break into the concept that conifers are if left to their own devices going to form a pyramidal shape okay the pyramidal shape is a byproduct of auxin being the dominant hormone in coniferous growth okay especially with the elongating species these are tall trees we're talking redwoods we're talking cryptomerias we're talking hinoki cypress these are the tallest trees in the world we're talking doug fir we're talking larch we're talking subalpine right all of these very conical very tall trees and you say okay what creates that conical shape well we understand that auxin is produced both as well as in the tips of the root okay and the auxin that is produced in the tips of the root this is what creates your taproot the auxin dominant root that goes deep into the soil right auxin is actually completely allergic to sunlight so when we have auxin accumulating the auxin continues to amass and the auxin in the root is moving with water and it's being deposited where the highest amount of transpiration is taking place where there's wind taking away that water molecule leaving the auxin behind where there's sun using that water molecule for metabolic activity leaving the auxin behind so that the auxin can grow but the farther this auxin gets from these lateral buds now these lateral buds start to take on auxin so they start to elongate and they're suppressing lateral buds at their base right and this continues to elongate and these continue to elongate and suddenly we get to a point where now these start to elongate and they suppress lateral buds and we start to get this model because of that toxicity creates the conical shape of a conifer okay so we understand that with conifers that phototropic capacity or the response of a branch being bent down auxin when we bend a branch down settles to the bottom of the branch right at the base of the bud where it's being produced causing that to elongate faster so we play on phototropism when we lay the branches down which happens by snow which happens by weight which happens by breakage we design that auxin is now suppressed cytokinin comes into the system we get lateral branching until we get that phototropic response in the tip that starts to suppress our cytokinin again okay and we play on these mechanisms over the course of time to find bonsai right this is playing on phototropism when we say listen I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna do a primary styling which doesn't mean I only wire structural branches I wire everything out to form the pads to create photosynthetic efficiency and sustainability in design and and then I'll even wire out the next flush of growth which is our secondaries to get the phototropic results I might be wiring out tertiaries I might need to rewire our primaries because they didn't quite set in a vigorous phototropic conifer but I start to use less wire I start to pinch to direct growth I start to decandal a needle block on a multi-flush pine I start to post-flush hardened prune to be able to create the pad that gives us the density that defines the positive to negative space and starts to create that sense of scale and proportion representing nature and miniature this is the system of bonsai right so when we start to think about all of that if we're not cognizant of the fact that we can lay a coniferous tip down and in doing that we're not going to be able to create growth which encourages back butting to form lateral branching to start to exist and that starts to build out our ramification and our pad that allows us to reduce the scale and proportion then we are no longer speaking bonsai and we base all of this off of the fundamental primary concept that the conical branching mapping of the branching will be more transparent in the future and we can follow that across all our branches so that when we have previously conceived our developmental goals or reorienting it down so that we get cytokinin and oxin flowing equally billow. An informal billow forms from the presence of cytokinin. I should know how to spell this, but I'm just going to fudge it right now. Cytokinin might be C-Y, might be C-I, might be K-Y, might be K-I. Cytokinin, okay? Cytokinin is not responsible for apical dominance. It does not suppress. Quite the opposite. Cytokinin is responsible for secondary branching and ramification building, okay? Now, we talked about the fact that a conifer does not just have auxin. It has auxin and cytokinin, and they have a different distribution and different balance, and we can manipulate those through the aesthetic practice. Well, a broadleaf doesn't just have cytokinin because when it's a very young tree, it grows up vertically, establishes that central leader, or most of them do unless they're a basally dominant tree. Like a quince or something, like a Japanese quince, a chojubai, sometimes a ginkgo. You know what I'm saying? We have these basally dominant, an azalea, okay? But most of our broadleaf deciduous that are going to be big tree form trees have a tremendous amount of auxin in them as well, and that auxin concentration when they're young is what allows them to achieve that singular leader that starts to build this primary backbone for the handling of all of that secondary tertiary ramification. Okay, so we have a broadleaf that uses the informal billow, but we get to a certain height in that vertical orientation where suddenly we start to see this bifurcation. That is the end of auxin generation in the physiology, the leaf physiology, the bud physiology, and the vascular physiology in the roots as well as in the canopy of the broadleaf where the auxin starts to wane with the presence of cytokinin, okay? And you see broadleaf, inevitably, the branches grow like this, okay? And we'd say, wasn't that phototropism? No, and here's how we know. It's not phototropism because if you take that branch and you lay it down laterally like a conifer, that branch starts to become weaker. It doesn't turn back up like a conifer and form the mochicomi pad, quite the opposite. It starts to get weaker and weaker and weaker. So now all of a sudden when we take a broadleaf model that needs a little bit more help because it lacks the auxin dominance, and we know that by what a mature form of the broadleaf genre. would give us, now all of a sudden when we have this powerful trident maple that's been styled like a pine tree where all the branches lay down like this and we've got this, we have these long spindly branches that we're constantly trying to develop and they never actually thicken and we have more power up here in the apex which wants to always continue to elongate. And so we get this disproportionate thickening in the canopy of the tree that's an impediment to actually getting it to its full state of life. This is in the form of a gilded tree. So when we start to look at the trunk, we're going to go to the center to the head. This is a branch that we're going to take a bit further down the trunk and we're going to start to coordinate with it and then we're going to play with this branch to see what happen when we're done. So before we do any of this, how can we start to look at this branch when we're done? Well, first of all, we have to have an aesthetic actualization as a visual representation of nature in miniature. And the to expand and distribute that phototropism in a more minimal level across every tip on the tree. For a broadleaf, we can lay a broadleaf branch down, but it must come back up, right? And all of the finish on our broadleaf trees is always coming back up because we understand, listen, with cytokinin dominance, I don't need to disempower the auxin to allow the cytokinin into the system of a broadleaf. Quite the opposite. I don't have the auxin to give me the strength to regain that vertical growth. And this is not uniform. You know, a young tree will show that kind of vertical growth. It'll change its orientation. It does not happen like a conifer. If it did, then a broadleaf would be a conical form, but it's not. It's an informal billow because cytokinin is the dominant hormone. And in order to continue to drive cytokinin, we've got to give that tree a little bit of natural structure aesthetically, a little bit of natural help and not disempowering it, or we will continue to drive cytokinin. To see the branches of our broadleafs fail. Case in point, biggest illustration of this might be the traditionally formed trident that's styled in a pine form, but there's one better than that. The constant issue of developing branches on ume. Because everybody wants to lay an ume down. They're right. I want to, I have these big green twigs. I want to lay them. I'm going to put all this movement in and I'm going to lay them down. And that's my ume. And those branches die or those branches get weak, or we never get health built up in the ume as a result of that. And so we have to continue to see the branches of our broadleafs fail. But the moment that you take an ume and you end with the branch up, or you see a mature ume in Japan in the kokufu or in the books or in somebody's garden, all of the branches will be up. That is native state that allows the tree to generate that kind of energy. When we start to speak bonsai, conifers form a conical shape because they're auxin dominant. Broadleaf form an informal billowy shape because they're cytokinin dominant. And those two pieces of information, as you extrapolate how to cultivate aesthetically a tree that's going to actualize its best potential, you've got to take those into account to maximize that capacity. All right? Branching. Branching. And let me see what else I got for branching. Okay. I got one more for you. Now, everybody wants smaller needles and smaller leaves aesthetically to create the sense of scale. But we also have to understand that the sense of scale that you have got to earn the right to have smaller needles and smaller leaves. And some of us are saying, well, I haven't earned the right to smaller leaves and smaller needles. I've been doing bonsai for 30 years. Right? That's not what we're talking about. That's not speaking bonsai. That's talking about you. Speaking bonsai is speaking about the tree. Okay? Here's what we have to understand. This is not a new concept either. You've heard about this. Okay? We put trees into a containerized environment. We put trees into a containerized environment. We put trees into a containerized environment because the container and the tree look awesome. Right? We put trees into a containerized environment to control the amount of energy the tree has. And then we utilize horticultural techniques to distribute that energy across the different tips of the plant depending on what we want to accomplish. Okay? So we've got X in terms of the energy system. If we are ever trying to refine a tree, reduce the size of the needle, reduce the size of the leaf, and we have that tree in a giant pot, we have it in a box, or we have it in the ground. We have to automatically understand that we are not going to be able to refine that system because the root system has too big of a reservoir of resources to start to allocate that and dilute it across the number of branching tips. And you say, well, too large of a container is subjective. Well, if you can't get a shorter needle or a shorter internode, and you don't have the number of growth tips across that tree in that reservoir to dilute it enough to start to get that reduction, then it's in too big of a container, or you don't have the number of growth tips, or you don't have enough branches, right? And you say, okay, well, it's in a proportional container. Very good. Then we need to build our primary. We need to build our secondary. We need to build our tertiary. To fit, if that trunk and that root system need to be in that container, then you've got to build the hierarchy in your branching to dilute the energy across more and more growth tips so that each tip in that confined quantity of X, gets less and less of X, because we've got more and more tips, gets less and less of X to see the reduction of the internode length, to see the reduction of the leaf or the needle size, okay? So it can go either way, and you may say, well, yes, this tree is in too big of a container. Okay, if I want to refine it, I'm going to put it into a smaller container. Maybe I already have primary and secondary built up, but to get the tertiary, I need to put it into a more confined energy system so that I have less energy being diluted. So I'm going to put it distributed across the tips that are the appropriate proportion for this trunk size, trunk and base, guide everything, the appropriate number of tips for this trunk size to create upscaled and proportional design, right? So it depends on how you want to work with this, because I took the Randy Knight Trident Maple that we root grafted, and I put it back into a grow box to develop the branching. And I got, as I balanced the nutrition in the plant, got the branches to absolutely rock out. I now took it out of that box back into a slightly oversized bonsai container. Why would I put it back into a slightly oversized bonsai container? Because the apical branches gave me all of the scale and proportion that I need. I cut those back pretty heavily. I'm starting to build secondary and tertiary ramification there. If I'm going to build secondary and tertiary ramification there, I can't be in a developmental grow box anymore. But I'm still developing the lowest branches on the tree. I want one more year of thickening for them to come up to scale. So I can't put it inside of an energy system that only facilitates refinement. So I've struck the middle ground of a big box and a small pot. And now I'm in a slightly larger pot to get some of the development while I'm working on that secondary tertiary. But I know I don't get full tertiary until I go into the energy system reduction. As I build primary, secondary, tertiary growth tips, dilution, I'm going to have to shrink it down to get the highest level of refinement. I'm not quite there yet because I'm still developing. Now you see the system that we can utilize across our branching hierarchy of primary, secondary, tertiary. If we understand the way that we get to the ultimate scale and proportion, the way we get to the ultimate reduction of inner node, leaf size, or needle length is by confining X and distributing X across the greatest number of growth tips that we can possibly produce as long as that number of growth tips can be facilitated by the physical size of the trunk, which is the non-negotiable growth tip. And the result is that the final growth tip we have is no longer selectable in design. And you say, well you can thicken the trunk by putting it back in the ground or growing it. Yes, cool. We're talking about putting a tree into a bonsai pot, which effectively stops the radical thickening of the trunk. We're saying the trunk is where we want it to be, now we're bringing the branches up to it, okay? Speaking of bonsai, right? We've got auxin. We've got cytokinin. We've got conical, we've got informal billow. When we start to talk about branching in terms of primary, secondary, tertiary, and sub-sectoral branches, we're going to have to bring that branching in. So basically, we have to understand managing the energy system of the tree appropriately. What does it mean to put a tree into a grow box or the ground? It means you want primary development, trunk or branches emerging from the trunk. What does it mean to put it into an oversized bonsai pot? We want a continuation of some primary, primarily secondary development, and we want to start to restrain some of the tertiary in the strongest areas of the tree by confining that root space. What does it mean to put it into a fully constricted space that is proportional to the size of the tree, but we're now trying to get the finest refinement? We are distributing X across the widest number of tips with the lowest quantity of X possible to get that reduction. You have to earn it. You have to earn it to be able to get a tree to refinement. We can't go from primary to tertiary. You can't sidestep secondary. You can't fudge on primary and then suddenly have secondary tertiary without the appropriate refinement. You can't go from primary to tertiary. You can't fudge on primary to tertiary without the appropriate primary established, right? So the stages of development in branching are one of the great bonsai-isms that I still don't quite see people registering when you say, what stage of development is this tree in? Everybody freezes like they've seen a ghost because they don't want to say the wrong thing. You've got three options. It's not that black and white though. I need some secondary here. I can be in tertiary here. I'm working on primary here. Take all of that into consideration. That malleability informs your container decision, informs your root work, informs your branch pruning, informs whether you pinch or partially defoliate or prune or not prune or any of the other things. That one bonsai-ism, what stage of development is this tree in, answers everything about containers, about pruning, about pinching, about wiring, about every aspect of the tree. And we recognize if we don't have a balanced nutritional system, it doesn't matter, right? The horticulture is still the trump card of all. That was a good one. I really, I will tell you, I've learned enough in the 15 years we're entering our 16th year of Mirai starting in April, April 15th, right around the corner, a couple of weeks away. I have learned enough in the 15 years to know that although the spring is going to be a little bit more of a challenge than the spring always gives us cause to celebrate, there will be challenges that will come. Mr. Kimura told me this when I was an apprentice and I didn't understand. Well, there one spring I said, oh my gosh, the trees look so healthy. And he said, don't worry, it'll come. And I just thought, God, how about being a rain cloud over my little freaking parade here? I was trying to, I was also by myself at that time. So I was looking for validation. I was doing a good job. He did not give it to me. We then had a raging outbreak of phomopsis on all of the Toyogawa junipers. It was a total disaster. And I was like, oh my gosh, I'm going to die. I'm going to die. It was a total nightmare. Some of the spruces got rhizosphera. I think we put maybe a fertilizer concoction on the white pines that turned them into a kaleidoscope of greens from lime green to deep blue green and anywhere in between. Like that year was maybe the worst horticulturally at Mr. Kimura's. And I started out saying, this is going to be awesome. I know enough to not be celebrating right now, but I will tell you this conceptual understanding of branching hierarchy. I'm going to say that the tree has allowed me to build primary and secondary and tertiary structure in my broadleaf trees that I never dreamed I would be able to build. Just by working this concept and speaking bonsai and getting down to the essence of things. Okay. Speaking bonsai is to say, listen, the state of the trunk tells us a lot about the health system of the tree. And let me give you one example. And Peter Warren's spoken to this sort of, you know, with a random one-off as he was working on Japanese maples in one of the streams, I do recall, where he said, you know, when you see a Japanese maple trunk start to turn a little bit of an odd color. Yes, there's the accumulation of debris on it. It needs to be cleaned of algae. It needs to be cleaned of moss. But when you see the bark start to wrinkle, when you see the tree start to abnormally backbud in, you know, the concentrated areas of epicormic growth, that is a sign of water flow being impeded and a lack of health, right? And I had never seen that before. I'd never experienced that. But I have the three tree Japanese maple clump that I've styled and I've done partial defoliation on the stream before. And I started seeing buds popping out in these concentrated clusters in these random areas. And I started thinking, well, that's weird. Is that a great sign of health? Or is that something that's counterproductive to what I'm trying to accomplish? And I sort of noticed that the bark was turning. It wasn't that creamy, beautiful, smooth Japanese maple bark. It was starting to get a little, you know, algae. And I'm thinking, okay, that's a little bit of funk. But it was losing its smooth, straight texture as well. It was becoming muddled and sort of unsightly. And so I thought it was in a great state of, you know, root health. And I go into the tree. And what I realized is in the first tree pot, I didn't fully bare root the tree. Out of its original soil that it came to Mirai in, long-standing cultivated bonsai, because the tree wasn't super healthy when I got it. So I did a, you know, minimal repot. I wanted to repot it last spring. I did not repot it last spring. I didn't get to it, which is what I'm trying to avoid this spring because I've experienced this on a number of trees where I didn't get to it because the quantity was too much. And I paid the price over the course of the season. So that tree had big, long internodes this past year. And I did a lot of repotting. And I did a lot of repotting. And I did a lot of repotting. And I did a lot of repotting. And I did a lot of repotting. And it was so refinable. And it has all of these epicormic, these bunches of sprouts on the trunk. And then the bark is deteriorating. And I go in and I just repotted it three days ago. And it took me four hours to get all of the native field soil that has been in that tree for a very long time, but wasn't in that tree in such a shallow container under the constraints of refinement to achieve the highest level of bonsai. And under that pressure, remember, ultimate health, balance of water and oxygen equals resistance. Refining a tree is the ultimate pressure that you put on the energy system because you're always taking energy away to get energy and hormones to be distributed to cause more and more growth tips that get finer and finer. But if your root system is not in a good state of health, it can't keep up with that constant scaling of the branching system. And then I started getting this lack of clarity in the trunk. So four hours took out all of the field. And then I started getting this lack of clarity in the trunk. So four hours a year I would just tie that tree up and put it down at the biz because I knew that it would never regrow withinis it just wouldn't get any stronger. A lot of wood crop taking more time to retire than it does it before I can call it pro . For 20 years this has had to go back or and a lot of things have went wrong. And that's letting people down especially way early in life. The reason actually is it's getting much stronger. Right now, it's starting to get a little better. make that happen, right? So when we start to talk about trunk health, let's just understand that when you are dealing with, there's a big difference between a rough bark tree and a smooth bark tree, okay? Because a rough bark tree has a cambial system called the cork cambium that gives rise to dead cells from the beginning. So that rough bark is going to accumulate lichen feeding on the dead tissue. It's going to accumulate moss decaying the dead tissue, right? It's going to have a little bit more biology in the system. We can't necessarily say if you've got lichen growing on the rough bark that you have an unhealthy tree, but that same tree with rough bark is going to have juvenile portions that aren't rough bark yet, as in the upper canopy of the tree, right? And I'll take my Quercus gyriana, the Oregon white oak, very thick rugged bark. Lichen, moss, although I try to keep the moss off of it, I try to reduce the lichen on it, it's going to grow on that bark. But in the longer, smoother branches that haven't barked up yet, I have the presence of Spanish moss, right? And you say, well, Spanish moss, you know, is it bad? Is it good? You go to the Carmel River Valley, you know, down in coastal California, outside of Monterey, and they're saying the Spanish moss is killing the coast live oaks there. But what we've found, and this is part of going to understanding a lot more about the horticulture and the physiology and the tree speak of the olives, the groves that were the most heavily hit by Xylella also had the highest quantity of lichen on the tree. The trees that are the most, that are suffering the most from climactic shifts will have the greatest amount of Spanish moss. So it's not the Spanish moss killing the tree, the Spanish moss is responding to the presence of a toxicity in the tree that is coming from an unhealthy root system, which could be a result of a moisture shift or a temperature shift or a weather pattern shift that has now altered the quantity of the nutrients that exist inside of that system in response to the changing environment. And this is what we're seeing in forests across the globe, these incremental shifts that accumulate. But coming back to when we look at the trunk, when we look at the branches, when we start to see accumulation of lichen, mosses, and degrading clarity of vascular grain, right? Which on a hornbeam, that muscling starts to deteriorate. On a satsuki azalea, we start to see epicormic growth and a lot of algae accumulate, right? These are signs horticulturally, this is the tree saying, hey, hey. I got a problem, right? Now, if I just looked at water percolation in my Japanese maple, if I looked at the presence of back buds as an indicator of health in my Japanese maple, I wouldn't have repotted this year. And if I didn't repot this year, I probably would have lost that tree or lost significant portions of that tree over this growing season. I would not be able to catch up and rectify what was happening, right? In the junipers that have borers, okay? I have a juniper that has borers, I automatically know a juniper has borers. I automatically know a juniper has borers because it is loaded with aluminum, right? And so, if I can detox that aluminum, I decrease my potential for my trees to have borers. So there's these aspects of the trunk in the health component of things that we can be looking at and speaking tree to say, Hey, Spanish moss. You shouldn't be on a tree! Hey, Spanish moss. You shouldn't be on a tree! my Oregon white oak or my yatsubusa elm. Had two yatsubusa elms, one had Spanish moss, one did not. Nutrient panels showed a higher amount of micro element toxicity, i.e. metals, which a lot of times when we see lichen and these kinds of things feeding on the trees, they're feeding on salts or they're feeding on metals, okay? So something to keep in mind in terms of the trunk, all right? Now, let's go to the aesthetic and then we're going to finish with foliage and then I'll open it up to questions. Okay, the aesthetic of the trunk. Now, we did say something in the previous about stages of development where we say, listen, you are trying to create a proportional quantity of lichen. You are trying to create a proportional quantity of lichen. You are trying to create of growing tips appropriate for the size of the trunk, knowing when we put a tree into a bonsai container, we are saying we accept this trunk, this is our reference, and now we're designing around that central primary piece, okay? Yes, the tree will continue to thicken, but it will thicken proportionally. The branches, the twigs, the secondaries in the trunk and the nabari, all of that thickens proportionally and evolves over time. That trunk is not going to show suddenly it's this big as opposed to this big and now all of the branch has to change. That system will change together the moment you put it into a bonsai pot. That is your reference pillar primary piece for the proportional branching with height, quantity of your design, okay? So, when we start to say aesthetically, right, the trunk has to respond also to the base. We say, listen, I have a strong base here. That means I can lean out here, okay? I don't have a strong base here. That means that we would alter the trunk line to come back here. Everything about our trunk, our central piece of the design is creating a believable image and reference point for the rest of the tree to be built around. So, when we start to say masculine or we start to say feminine, okay, and we say masculine, angular, and thick, start to say feminine slender and curvaceous and this is not a value system of human beings everybody chill out i'm just talking about art speak in terms of these characteristics okay we recognize that to be fully masculine as a bonsai or fully feminine as a bonsai literati being the farthest right and then the informal upright black pine as the dominant masculine illustration that those are the extremes those are the polarities most of our bonsai exist in this middle ground here right somewhere in the gray area of i'm angular and curvaceous i'm slender but i'm angular and slender i'm curvaceous and thick right or i'm not thick i'm not slender i'm somewhere in between i've got angles i've got curves i can't i can't don't have a definitive one or the other. Now we get into this gray area in terms of the aesthetic, right? So then we start to say, okay, in this gray area, because let's just follow the trickle down here, masculine, our structural response is to compress in design. For feminine, our structural action is to elongate in design. When we compress, we widen the branches. When we elongate, we narrow the width of the silhouette and the branches. When we form our branching, we combine and increase our pad size. When we form our branching, we divide and reduce our branch size, right? So we have these value systems that are applied to this concept, of these characters that guide our actionable items in the design of these trees with these features. And then you get into this middle section where you say, okay, well, what the heck do I do here, right? Well, maybe I don't compress as far. Maybe I just compress slightly. Maybe I elongate a little bit more, or maybe I pull back in and drop it down to narrow the silhouette. We start to strike these differences. The tree speak is, listen, the trunk determines how much of the tree is going to be compressed. So we start to strike these differences. We start to strike these differences. The tree speak is, listen, the trunk determines the tree that we are building around it. And the trunk character has to be reinforced by the actions that we take on that central pillar of design once that tree goes into that bonsai container. That is tree speak informing your decisions. How many times have you designed a tree where you wanted to do it one way, but you looked at the character of the trunk and you thought, okay, I'm going to do it this other way. How many times have you followed the trickle down of this information and design to rectify, right? And I'll give you a really great example. Did a demonstration back in 2015 at the unbridled exhibition, Portland Japanese Gardens, where I had the massive telescopic structures. And it was this literati Rocky Mountain juniper. We sold it in a tree sale. It exists in Nebraska now. Beautiful tree, okay? When I designed it in this demonstration at the Japanese Gardens, I had these ladders on it. I had these ladders on it. I had these lateral branches, right? It was like this literati tree. It was so beautiful. And then I had these kind of lateral branches here. And for some reason, I kept looking at it and I was like, it doesn't look good. What am I missing? It looks so boring or blah, right? Something doesn't fit. And I actually referenced this feminine design. Did I elongate? Yes, I elongated. Feminine design. Did I narrow the structure? No, I didn't narrow the structure. I brought that tree home. And I dropped all of the branches down, down, down, down, down, even in the apex, down, down. And I created this type of a tree. And all of a sudden, boom, there it was. There it was, right? The characteristic of the trunk told me what to do. And the tree speak of that was, if you're creating an elongated feminine design, you've got to narrow the silhouette. And if you narrow the silhouette, you've got to do something. You've got to divide and shrink your branch pad size. And if you divide and shrink your branch pad size, you've got to reduce the amount of ramification to keep it visually light, to keep it airy, to keep it proportional to the characteristics of your primary backbone of design, the trunk of the tree. Use that information. Still, when I work with long-term students, we have a piece of material and they say, I want to move the apex over here. I want to do this. I want to do this. And then I'll say, tree masculine or feminine? Yeah, it's masculine. In masculine tree, do you really want to move the apex there? Because that's elongating the design. Oh, yeah. What if we move the apex here? Oh, move it there. Branch goes there. Now we have, oh my God, it's an amazing tree. And it was just that, that tree speak. Look, what's the trunk giving you? What are your actions? Then you respond to it. Okay. The gray area of this, that's the complex zone. That's where we start to have to make sacrifices. We start to barter a little bit with our different actions. I'm going to compress a little bit, but not too much. I'm going to pull this in, but I still need a little bit of width. I've got angular and slender. I've got thick and curvaceous. I'm going to start to fight and work inside of this system to strike that middle ground. Okay. That's all I got for the trunk. Foliage. Last one is foliage. This one's quick. Ooh, I like this conversation. At some point, you know, we've been talking, obviously, Andrew Robson and I talked about judging and we had that really great two-part podcast that a lot of people, I've gotten a lot of feedback from that, you know, and I stood my ground and sort of planted my flag on judging and I will not show. And I still stand by that. You know, that hasn't really changed. The nature of bonsai when I came back from Japan, let me just help you orient. Rocky Mountain Juniper. Junipers were thought to not be capable of being bonsai. Ponderosa Pine Needles could not be reduced. These things, that was 2010 when that happened. We're in 2025. My, how things have changed. Rocky Mountain Juniper might be the best juniper in the world for bonsai now. Ponderosa Pine, one of the most coveted species for their character and quality in bonsai now, right? So we kind of blew that out of the way. We had all of these dogmatic practices, right, of the orthodox model, left, right, back branch, apex centered over the base to achieve balance. Everything goes in a round pot, right? These are all of like this, these sort of misunderstandings or dogmatic beliefs that we've sort of dispelled, not maliciously, but because there's a higher level to be achieved out there. And there's a reason that Europe is achieving these high levels. There's a reason that Japan achieved them and continued to perfect them. Even if you say, well, Japan created the orthodox. No, no, no, no, no. The orthodox model still has the ability to be interesting and asymmetrical. The left, right, back was really a product of post-World War II bonsai in the United States. But when you start to think about that, this conversation right now, the conversations that we need to have are conversations that are evolving the discussion. They're growing our understanding. They're saying it in ways that has not been spoken about before. And I think that's what resonated with the Andrew Robson podcast because he's a very cerebral thinker. I try to be. I think I probably am in the bonsai realm, might be limited to that. That's cool. I aspire to be a master of one and not a jack of all trades. If I'm good at bonsai, I'm happy, right? But this conversation right here is not about giving you a black and white thing to abide by. It's about showing you where the fundamental treeisms, the speaking of bonsai, the reading of health and aesthetics has the capacity to give you the tools to create something you've never created, whether it's healthier, whether it's more highly ramified, whether it's more refined over the course of time, whether it's a design you've never thought about when you entered the system and started listening to the tree speak. And all of a sudden what comes out is a tree you never imagined, but the materials maximize. It gave you that gift. It gave you that gift of saying, hey, you can do this too. I showed you how, right? Like that's the goal of bonsai evolving because I think we've all had the concept that trees are going to get more and more branches and they're going to get more and more refined. And I hate to break it to you, but we're probably never going to be able to do it more than Japan, right? We're probably never going to be able to refine a tree better than the Japanese have. They've kind of hit the mark, but there are aesthetics that are different. There are approaches that are different. There are contexts that are different to be able to utilize bonsai as a tool to create more natural representations, to create more context-rich compositions, to have success where we've failed and maybe didn't know why. And that is really, I think, what this is all about. Okay, foliage. Big one here. And I'm going to talk about health first in terms of foliage. So we already talked about if a tree is shedding foliage when it is not supposed to be. It does not have enough to sustain and add. And in fact, it does not even have enough energy to sustain or roots to sustain. We're seeing a degradation of things, okay? So when we start to look at the foliage, we're thinking, what kind of foliage do we want? We want foliage that is tight and compact and ramifying, okay? So on the Japanese maple, I had these blown out internodes. I have this epicormic. I have this growth, which is, you know, these tight clusters of buds occurring on the trunk. I've never seen that in that tree's life. You don't see it typically on Japanese maple, period, unless they are in peril. The foliage is telling me I'm losing my ability to sustain. I have short needles on a ponderosa pine. They blow out. They're not short because I repotted last year and now I'm fertilizing aggressively and they blew out. They blew out because I've handled it the same every year. And all of a sudden, I started getting apically dominant roots and apically dominant fruits. So I had to repot the foliage and those two apical auxin generators caused the refinement to explode out of refinement back into development, right? It needed to be repotted. So there's like all of these communication devices in the foliage that we're thinking about. But in general, we say if there's a global issue, or we have said this before, global issue is root related, okay? And we've said if there is an isolated issue, i.e. pest and disease, isolated issue, this is abiotic, meaning not of the biological form. That is incorrect. Let's just understand. Whether we have a global issue, global issue does point to a sheen related issue under the base of the trunk causing a health problem. In the case of the Japanese maple, globally seeing epicormic growth, seeing all three trunks starting to change their condition. Turns out that the field soil under the base of the tree was, I mean, it stunk. It was like stinky enough. It stunk up the greenhouse stunk. It was bad. Was degrading. And that bad biology was bleeding into the rest of the soil system. The same thing happens. I've got a collected tree. Root system coming out of the pocket. Highly dense organic matter. Can't touch it. Put it in pumice. Let it recover. Stays in pumice two years. We maybe style it at the end of the second year, beginning of the third year. Now we have to wait until the fourth year. We've occupied all pumice with fine roots. Now that biology in the center there. We're. Fine root growth has moved away from that into domesticated, higher oxygen quantities in the pumice. And that bad biology starts to permeate the pumice. We see phomopsis and disease start to spread through the tree. Okay. Global issue. Certainly root related. Isolated insect or disease issue. Definitively root related. Okay. Now what this tells you. Isolated issue. Global issue. Decomposition and abandonment. When I say abandonment. It means that roots are no longer growing in the sheen. They may be secondary or primary roots crossing through that organic matter. Abandonment of the sheen. When we start to talk about isolated issues. This is passive decomposition. Passive decomposition of Akadama. That starts to create the release of. Right. This could also be over fertilization. Which will also cause passive decomposition of Akadama. By throwing off your carbon nitrogen balance. But typically passive decomposition releases the worst of what Akadama has. We get high metals. We get high salts. All volcanic soils have good and bad in them. Right. And when we have the right water conditions. We have the right nutrient conditions. None of those bad characteristics are expressed. But when we start to see something. A chink in the armor. Over application of insecticide, fungicide, pesticide. Too much watering. And an imbalance of water and oxygen. Over fertilization causing a biological breakdown. Or a low quality of Akadama that passively decomposes. And releases all of that toxicity. These things will lead to an insect or disease issue. Okay. I've had this increasing problem of minute cypress scale. On a few junipers that are incredibly healthy. And I'm saying why are these trees suffering from minute cypress scale. When I go into the tree. I have a. Highly compressed root system. Highly compressed root system. Lacking oxygen. Can't necessarily feed itself. Which means then I get a little bit of root decline. Because it can't keep up with the energy production. And if it can't keep up with the energy production. Now it starts taking in toxicity. It takes in aluminum. Takes in manganese. Takes in a high amount of sodium and chloride. And the scale is just telling me. Hey you got a problem downstairs. Right. The scale isn't. I used to think. Ah this fucking spider mites. I'm going to kill you. And the scale. I'm going to kill you. Now I realize. Ah. I see you there. I see you. And I know you're telling me something. I need to listen to. And do something about. I got scale. I got phomopsis. I got spider mite. I got an issue that I need to deal with in the root system. Because that's where all of this gets solved. Right. Okay. So thinking about. And just altering what we've said. Global issue. Root related. Yes. Specifically sheen related. Isolated issue. Root related. Root related. Potentially. Passive decomposition. Inappropriate fertilization. Over application of chemicals. That can throw off. Or cause that rapid breakdown. Right. These things are real in bonsai. And we've kind of handled the foliage as like. If it's green and growing. We're good to go. Well there's a lot of green and growing trees. That aren't good to go in bonsai. And when we test the resistance system. That's when they fail. Had a limber pine. Knew I need to repot this tree. This year. Right. I knew it. It's well overdue. I've been avoiding it. Because stability is hard to achieve. With this particular tree. And I know I'm going to need a lot of hands on deck. To get it done. And looks beautiful. Nutrient balanced. Everything. Like. And you can't balance a tree. That has that unhealthy root system. By the way. You just keep chasing the carrot. Until you fix the soil system. But anyways. I've been working at it. Rec specific stuff. Has helped it. It's very very beautiful color. It's producing new growth. First sunny day we got. All of the tips of the needles turned brown. Right. That first challenge to the energy system. The first challenge to the water supply system. Major chink in the armor. Pulled it down into the greenhouse. Repotted it. Found that 90% of the container. Was overly compressed. Still had a tremendous amount of native field soil in it. And I had 10% of the container. That had live viable root. Take off that 90%. Really treasure. That 10%. Trees already producing twice as strong of buds. Within 7 to 10 days of the repot. Doesn't mean it's going to continue. I'm probably going to have to battle this year. I'm going to have to really watch the balance of water and oxygen. I'm going to have to monitor and manage sun exposure. Because it clearly is susceptible. Nevertheless. It's a lesson that is constantly reinforced. That those little keys. And those little clues. And those little pieces. They all come back to the exact same thing. Which is. Do you have enough to sustain? If you have enough to sustain. Do you have enough. To add. If you don't have enough to sustain. And enough to add. How do you fix it? Improve the balance of water and oxygen. And now we've come full circle. And now we've come full circle. All right. I'm going to open it up to questions. So first question we have is from Manos. He said a little off topic. But how does that black pine from Telperian look now? It's one of the most live stream trees. I'm just curious. Yeah. Right. Right. I think that tree will be being wired. In the next week or two. And then we will definitively capture that tree. In the studio. The Ponderosa Forest is on our Instagram this morning. So Josh has been taking some of the trees that were evolving. And doing studio shoots. And I think the Telperian black pine will be one that everybody wants to see. Tree looks phenomenal. It's amazing. It needs an even bigger pot. I put it into a bigger pot last year. It's already ready for a bigger pot yet again. And that is just because the tree has been. So much photosynthetic capacity. It's getting bigger on a continuum. But it's amazing right now. And again the lowest branch proportional dense ramified. Like we got the whole tree to a singular state of refinement. Which was the goal of all of our actions. Cool. And a question from Cole. For lower branch health it was discussed about the tree dumping its toxins into the lower branch. If we have this issue where we can confidently say the tree has sustainable design. What steps can we take. To resolve the issue. Of course a balance of water and oxygen. But I'm curious if there are other steps we can take to resolve the toxicity. Yeah. Yeah. So the only way to know what the imbalance is Cole. Is to take a new old sample. And again a new meaning foliage from the apex of your tree. Old meaning foliage from the lowest branch on the tree. And maybe the lowest branch isn't the weakest. But maybe there are other branches that are low down on the tree that are the weakest. Take a sample from. A stronger area of your lowest branch. That new old sample or or apex lowest branch sample from Apical will tell you everything you need to know. It's literally the only way that I know to be able to say this is the problem. And oftentimes you think you know what the problem is. And then you get a sample and you say I never would have thought about that. Calcium magnesium ratios flipped. Irons below manganese high aluminum sodium through the roof. Chloride is astronomical. Ammonium is you know. Outweighing nitrates and and oxidized nitrogen forms like there's so many things. But I would say in general all of our bonsai typically tend to be very high in metals and very high in salts. And those are the key ingredients for insect and pest issues and lower branch weakening. So Apical sample send it off. Let David in the lab test it. Get the rack. You can treat it. It does mean you. Have to embrace the apical system. I just got to tell you anybody who doesn't embrace the apical system at this point for the amount of money time and resources we put into bonsai. And if you're a beginning hobbyist you might say I'm not quite ready and I totally respect that bag of bio gold is good. When you get into elevated trees and you start dealing at the highest end of bonsai I would never go back. I would never go back. Is it a lot of work. Yes. Does it cost money. Yes. Are my trees better than they've ever been. As a result beyond a shadow of a doubt. Cool. And actually on that topic Ralph was asking from Germany what he could do about testing imbalances of nutrients. If there's if you know of any local laboratory I think is what he's pointing to here and if not what what what are alternatives. And I don't know if he'd be able to share a ship from Germany. Yeah I mean this is so since we've started talking about the apical thing I just talked with David on the. On the phone a week ago he said man we've got people from Europe reaching out we've got people from Japan reaching out we've got people from Australia and New Zealand reaching out and he's like we're trying to figure out how we can facilitate these systems. There are a few European species that apical can process and has the Fido import permission to bring in but like I think they had no idea the can of worms that they were opening and I don't want to. Punish them for opening it but it's also giving rise to how do we make this something that is more globally available I don't have any solutions yet there is a lab in the Netherlands I'll see if I can get the name of that just to give our European subscribers a little bit of a resource they will give you the test results but they do not offer product recommendations to fix the issue and there are good ingredients in Europe but putting those together is something that. Really does sort of expose David to liability as a consultant without him being in control of the ingredients in the system so we're kind of trying to figure that out but I'm glad that you brought it up and I will see if we can start to formalize we're working on incorporating apical into our app we're working on smaller batch quantities of the apical resources so that it's not as expensive and you don't have massive gallon or five gallon containers. So we're like we're actively working on the apical system to make it more accessible for the bonsai community as we speak and we're just functioning at the pace of apical in the industry trying to keep up with the innovation that that lab is doing which is phenomenal so keep your keep your ears open I'll see if I can get you a name of a lab that can at least tell you some things about your plant resources and then finding solutions in Europe and other areas of the globe that want to use the knowledge that's something that we're going to have to do. To tackle next and I'm going to need your help with that. Cool question from treebeard Steve must the branches of a must the branches of a broadleaf be oriented upward at all points or is it enough that the tips are turned up how much of the branch needs to be trained upward even if at a shallow angle for the branch to do well yeah just the tips honestly just the tips so if you go back to the primer I did that on the native native eastern plum. Right and. And I dropped those branches way down and then I brought the tip pronounced right I didn't I didn't bring it straight up like you know I wasn't like hey that's my tip right it was had some sexy curvature and whatnot but it was pronounced up that tree this year best I've ever seen it best I've ever seen a plum respond to the bonsai practice period lowest branches are just as strong as the upper branches it's in phenomenal shape it proves out and I have several little stumpy umes that I've been. Wiring out that have historically shown a lot of dieback if anybody is aware of Muranaka in Nipoma California. Mr. Muranaka had a flowering ume pink flowering ume in his yard that he would plant the seeds of and grow these short stumpy little awesome ume and everybody always said they don't flower and people have constantly dealt with branch dieback I've never seen one Muranaka ume become a world class tree because everybody wired them like a pine I've got a Muranaka ume. Mr. Muranaka ume one of the old vestiges of that growing facility in Nipoma I love the Muranakas they're such good people so good to me in college and now I'm finally getting a Muranaka ume to both flower dependably as well as build branching primary secondary and tertiary I'm super psyched I'm super psyched and it all came from that change with that understanding of hormones again speaking speaking tree all right another question from Cole he. They ask for distribution of X I have an American larch that is mostly in development and I have left a pretty crazy amount of branching on it over the past two years I've owned the tree are there any nuances to this with larch my general strategy for the first few years has been to have as many active buds as possible on the tree to widely distribute X. Yeah so if it's in development. If it's in development then you're not necessarily. Trying to widely just distribute X. If it's in development you want to focus X on the pieces you're trying to develop right you want more of X going to the pieces you're trying to elongate thicken expand for your mass heal wounds right etc so you your best when you see like an initial styling on a tree and you see like the structural flaws taken off and the unusable branches taken off and the overly long branches taken off. You realize there's a fifty sixty maybe even seventy percent branch reduction on an initial styling when a tree is healthy and ready to become a bonesi. The other thing that you need to register beyond the aesthetic accomplishment of that is that now the energy of the root system is focused on the pieces that you want to use either to build the final tree or you're using to get the pieces you want to use for the final tree to where they want to go. But if we never commit. To focusing. focusing x on the pieces that we're trying to develop then we never get the development the primary development the thickening the elongation etc we never get that accomplished so on large it's of paramount importance that we simplify as much as we can knowing we'll continue to reduce branching as we build other pieces right but we simplify to direct the energy so we're capable of accomplishing that developmental primary structure all right and last question another one from treebeard steve uh you've mentioned a bad batch of akadama a couple of times uh what was wrong with it if you don't mind and what might we watch out for ourselves yeah um had a so for first indicator you got bad akadama is there's just a very large quantity of dust in the bottom of the bag right so akadama when it's shipped gets shake all the dust settles down if you pick up a bag of akadama and you've got a heavy quantity of dust you should already be concerned um the color was chocolatey brown when it was dry right akadama should be a beige uh even a light beige when it's fully dried when you see a deeper brown akadama dry that is not a tubular structured akadama that is probably on the outskirts of the good vein starting to become that plate-like structure of akadama which ultimately will passively decompose along that plate-like structure fracture lines um and when i was repotting and chopsticking i'm you know i'm very cognizant of over chopsticking from the very beginning in japan but i used to use such a hard akadama it really wasn't an issue for us when i was chopsticking this stuff very minimal chopstick action the rim of my container was covered with broken down akadama so when you start to see those three things the color is wrong the dust in the bag is there and in working it in the repotting a minimal amount of work causes a maximum amount of dust and breakdown uh you know you're in for a ride and it doesn't mean that the tree can't be healthy in that akadama it does mean that you're going to need to repot it sooner to be able to keep it healthy because it probably has about two years which is what we look at for any organic component pine bark or peat or sphagnum that we're using in the in the containerized environment it's like that now you've got a two-year window before you need to take it out again i did it three years ago i you know now i know i'm working through it it is what it is i'll give you one more when you have a tree in a soil system and it is not doing well uh the surface will break down and cake up so you're going to vacuum clean that top dress it try to protect it to the best of your ability but when you look at the drainage screens when you have passively breaking down akadama you'll start to see almost like a mud or a clogging of the the akadama finds sifting and sort and sort of falling through the soil column and accumulating on that drainage screen all of those things bad things to see not necessary to panic balance of water and oxygen with that kind of decomposition you're going to have a higher water retention so you're not going to be watering as much try to clean the screens to the best of your ability with a vacuum clean off the compacted surface top dress right try to balance the nutrition knowing you're going to have a little bit higher release of some of the bad elements of akadama and then you got to repot as soon as you can which is the next appropriate season all right and that's it speaking tree baby let's do it i got a lot of trees telling me repot me now or hold your peace for the next 12 months and deal with the repercussions of that so i'm gonna go get busy i got people here i got master studio starting on wednesday uh really looking forward to having an advanced group in we're going to be doing a lot of big time design at mariah that you'll be seeing future love you guys thanks for tuning in appreciate all your support as always more to come all right we'll see you guys 
