What's going on everybody? Wednesday mini stream. Hey, hi, how you doing? Hello, live and in studio. Today we're going to be focusing on the mull's eye, the dreaded, the derogatory, the often sort of discounted and poorly thought of initial representation that so many of us entered bonsai with. And I have a little bit of a special place in my heart for the mull's eye, not because I ever bought one. I was influenced and informed. I saw a mull's eye at a local county fair, right? Procumbens junipers with the sort of single swooping arc, the mud man, right? My container currently has broken in the frost, which is a little bit of an unfortunate circumstance. My pool where the fisherman fished is gone, but we will be repotting it and we're going to bring the mull's eye back to its former glory of containerized wisdom and class. But I feel like so many of us start out in this place. I have this tree. What do I do with it? How do I handle it? And maybe how do I look at mull's eye and really see if we can improve it? Okay, so the goal today is to sort of establish what can we do as a general care and practice with mull's eye after we've cleaned it up and sort of maximize the current form. What is possible with a mull's eye to move it into a higher state of existence as a bonsai subject? And I forgot. This is a friend's tree who I'm doing this for. And so I have to take a before picture. So let me get the before picture. Yes, perfect. Okay. All right. So first things first. Most mull's eye that we see, Procumbens junipers, typically the familiar species of choice. I'm going to put my mud man underneath here. And Procumbens junipers, when we get to this time of year, hardened off growth, energy positive, showing a tremendous amount of vigor, I like to come in and just take off the bottom growing pieces of the major branches. Common when we talk about sort of the preloaded response of how do you maintain a juniper, I take out crotches, these pieces growing in the crotches as that new soft small branch emerges from the greater longer branch. Okay, so I'm going to be removing crotches, opening up that first quarter to eighth inch of the shoulder of that branch, very, very important in terms of having the space within which to be able to work. I'm going to take these pieces off of the bottom, bottom of what I'm going to be doing is I'm going to be removing that low, that horizontal line, right, that kind of forms that plane of the bottom of the branch. So I'm cleaning crotches, I'm cleaning off the bottom pieces. And what this does is it just starts to open up opportunity for me to be able to conceptualize design and start to see the space in the tree to maintain airflow, oxygen, light penetration, all of the things that a tree needs to be able to photosynthesize and survive, right, because we're saying, listen, light allows the energy of light captured by chloroform. So I'm going to be looking at chlorophyll or the green pigmentation, gets excited, breaks the molecular bonds of water and carbon dioxide and reforms C6H12O6 or glucose, simple glucose. Okay, these weak interiors, these are the pieces. So we're saying again, bottoms, crotches and weak interiors, first eighth to quarter inch of crotch. Okay, but when we start looking at weak interiors, these are skinny pieces, maybe losing color because they've been shaded out. And it's been difficult for them to photosynthesize without the kind of airflow that we're talking about. So I'm going to be looking at those pieces, how much they need to produce that sugar and starch. And so we see these kind of leg year portions of growth, it doesn't have any ramification, right? It has potential, maybe, but if we already have ramified, if we already have branches, that instead of one singular stem, have secondary or tertiary multiples of stems, let me just show you these compared, okay, we start to see this has multiple stems right there, right? This is a piece we can use. This is a weak interior, As we define them, non-ramified interior growth, linear, losing color, and not contributing to the tree. So we're cleaning off to open up and start to see the opportunities in design. We're cleaning off those weak interiors, those bottom growing pieces that create that muddied sort of lower horizontal line. And we're cleaning out the crotches where those branches emerge from their greater counterpart. And we talk about branching the trunk and the branches that emerge from the trunk. This is primary branching. Branches that emerge from the primary branches. Branches emerge from the trunk. A branch emerges from that branch that emerges from the trunk. These are secondaries. And the branches that emerge from your secondaries, these are tertiaries. Branches that emerge from tertiaries are a secondary form of tertiary. So we start to have that hierarchy and that step-down effect. But before we can do anything in terms of design, we just really want to clean this. We want to clean this up and open up the space because if we're just talking about nothing more than maintaining this tree in this shape and circumstance to the greatest degree of health, this is exactly how, on a seasonal basis, when we get to the summer season, we go about the process of maintaining our tree. This allows us to maintain health. This allows us to see spacing and open up the canopy to a degree. This allows us to avoid insects and disease. And that's really where we're kind of talking about general understanding of bonsai care, okay? So I'm going to go through this, top to bottom, and I'm just going to clean this up. And this is going to answer a lot of our aesthetic questions immediately. Now some of you might be saying, well, if you're going to redesign the tree, don't you want to sort of set the line of the structure, et cetera, and then redesign the tree? And the answer is, yes, if I definitively know I'm going to redesign the tree. I'm going to give it a different shape. I'm going to reconceptualize. I'm going to push this tree maybe into a higher position. I'm going to give it a higher degree of bonsai aesthetic or appreciation. Then we absolutely could set that structure. Because when we set the structure, we might be reorienting the branches. And if I'm cleaning off the bottoms of the branches here, and I know I'm going to reset the structure at some point in time, I might end up flipping this branch over. You know, maybe this branch goes in this direction. Now I've cleaned off this entire side. Go ahead and show that to me, Lonnie. Cleaned off this entire side here, and that becomes the top of the branch. So in cleaning this first, just to show the maintenance of a bonsai, so that we perpetuate its health if we appreciate the form that it is in, we're recognizing that we are creating a necessity to maintain that branch orientation. So if I take a branch up here, I can't fold it over and expose that. I may have to bring that here and actually rotate that to maintain the orientation of that foliar mass. So I am complicating this for myself a bit. But again, having the clarity of how we maintain health in our first bonsai, how we manage it, and what season we utilize to manage it, in terms of this summer season, tree isn't an energy positive. It produced a lot of foliar mass. If the tree is healthy, we're watering it well as we're supposed to. We're fertilizing correctly. We're keeping disease and pests at bay, or at least observing them and educating ourselves. This is the summer maintenance of our bonsai to be able to perpetuate its capacity to photosynthesize, maintain strength and energy distribution, get rid of the pieces that aren't contained. Those weak interiors, those bottom growing pieces. Not as much access to sunlight, not as much capacity to contribute to the sugar starch system of the tree. Okay, great. Let's get them out of there then. They've done their job. They filled space, they occupied, they empowered the tree. At some point, every piece of foliage mass on this tree was and has been a positive contributor. But new branches continue to form, strengthen junipers, exist in the foliar mass, and in particular in the foliar mass, the freshest pieces of foliar mass are the pieces of foliar mass that are going to be the most photosynthetically contributing, and the most productive, also the most significant in terms of the tree's perspective and distribution of strength. Okay? And already, just in cleaning it up a little bit, we start to see a lot of potential. We start to see a lot of different design opportunities. We also start to see a lot more space and a lot of clarity in terms of what we possibly could think about doing, should we want to evolve this. Okay? So I'm going to go through and I'm just going to finish up this small cleaning on the front. I'll continue to clean the back, but I think some of these branches are going to be lost as we conceptualize design. Because here's the thing about mozai. Just because this starts out as a humble form in a lot of our beginner experiences as bonsai, does not mean that this tree is worthless. It has a good base, a relatively decent base. Okay? It has great trunk movement. In terms of, you know, a really nice transition of line. And that transition of line even has some significant wobble as it moves out into this space. I start to think about, right, if we are going to evolve this design, how do we want to evolve this design? I would like to see more. Inevitably, I would like to see more of the trunk line. Because when we talk about sort of this form and you have our little figurine giving us scale and proportion, there is like a nice, I understand. I understand the sellability of this. I understand the draw to it. Right? I didn't necessarily have it as a bonsai beginner because I very rapidly moved into looking at Mr. Kimura's work. And I was like, oh, that's bonsai. But for so many of us, this is where we enter and we're like, gosh, I like this. See, he's sitting under the tree. And there's a little pond here, had it not cracked in the frost. This tree lived outside all winter at Mirai. Had it not cracked in the frost, he had a little pond here. That's adorable. That's cute. If that's what you like, if that's what you're into, awesome. Awesome. Embrace it. Love it. Enjoy it. We're going to talk about maintaining it at this time of year. If we want to hold the shape back, we're going to be pruning back these elongating tips to a strong, secondary growing shoot. Okay? So go ahead and zoom me in here, Jesus. Alani, bring me in tight. Here's my elongating shoot. If I want to go ahead and I want to maintain the shape, I want to maintain the direction that it's headed, I'm going to prune back to a strong, secondary growing shoot. And I'm going to terminate that cut with these two pieces. One elongating tip to two pieces pushes the strength back to the interior, stops the elongation. I can prune that back as far as I want. Okay? So if we're thrilled with this theme, yes, let's go ahead with this. But here's what's going to happen. We're going to dig into bonsai. We're going to learn more. We're going to experience more. And you're going to start to look at this and you're going to start to say, gosh, the fisherman used to be cool. The pond used to be cool. The tree used to be cool. But I keep seeing these pictures of really neat bonsai. And can this be one of those? And the answer is that's the right question. That is the right question because, yes, yes, this can be very interesting. We just have to be creative. Okay? So now we start to objectively analyze the merits. And I say, okay, well, I've got a pretty good root system here. I've got a nice buttressing root right on this side. Let me go ahead and show that to you. I'll just tilt it out. You notice the buttressing root right here, strong base. That strong base gives rise to the ability to push the design in the direction counter to that base. Okay? So let's just say we're looking from right here. Strong base is on the left. Look at the movement that we see through this. Any time we're picking out movement, we're looking for changes in angle, spacing, and planes. As I look here, this little wobble right here, that little change, that's a unique, sharp piece of movement. If we look at it from the other side, let me just go ahead and rotate it around. It's actually a flaw. It's like a big knob. Okay? But we're using that knob to our benefit when we select the front. Because from over here. It forms a really acute bend and a really nice feature. Now as we move up into the upper canopy. And I haven't cleaned off all of these pieces in the back. So it is a little bit hard to see. I have a continuation of subtle lines up through this trunk piece right in here. Right? And this is where I'm starting to say, okay. I have this great base. I have the ability to push asymmetry. I have this nice wobble. But I have a relatively stagnant line right here. This is where we start to take action. That's where our anticipation and our notion of what we can improve begins. Okay? Because with that simple line. That simple line is in contrast to the base that we have. The initial angle out of the soil that we've achieved. And this wobble right here that creates the first point of interest inside of this design. Let's carry that movement forward. Okay? I'm going to back in with 6 gauge to change the line of the trunk. Because I'm going to want to. And when we think about redesigning trees. You know. We always look at what is the characteristic that's guiding our process. For this piece. Trunk for the height of the tree. For the width of the tree. For the size of the canopy. Is relatively small. Relatively slender. And when we have a slender trunk. Typically we think about elongating the design. Because a slender trunk. When we compress. That compression is trying to give that trunk a bigger piece of prominence in the design. It's trying to make it look bigger. By reducing the height of the plant to the width of the trunk. To the width of the trunk ratio. If this is small. There is no degree to which I can compress this canopy. And have that trunk look any bigger. I'm going to embrace it. And I'm going to elongate this design. Okay? And there's no. There's definitely no telling. Whether or not the fisherman will still fit when we're finished. But let's give it the best try of being the highest quality bonsai. We can possibly create. Very, very fundamental work this is. This is fundamental bonsai. Okay? Now rarely. Rarely on a Mirai stream will you see me wire a trunk. Because we typically are starting out with so much more established material. But when we wire a trunk. We always want to be thinking about. Where is this wire. Where does this wire need to hit? Okay? And when I have a bend this big right here. I automatically understand. My wire has got to hit the inside of this bend. If I hit the outside of this bend. It's going to be both hideous. It's going to be functionless. And I'm going to apply way too much wire. So I've got to start this. At a point where I'm going to intercept the inside of this with my turn of wire. Okay? Start over the top of the base here. Nice and penetrated down into the soil. Go ahead and drop that down. Perfect Jesus. Yes. Nice and deep into that soil lodged in. I get my angle. Same angle. Same spacing. No gaps. Okay? We're going to enter that first piece right there. I'm going to keep that nice 55, 60 degree. Notice how wide my turn is. As we come up this trunk. Okay? We don't want to take thick wire and wrap it around the trunk really, really tightly. So that we have this incredibly spring loaded application of thicker wire. That is when thicker wire stops working. Believe it or not. When we wrap it too tightly on the trunk. Suddenly that wire is already pre-work hardened in the application of the wire to the branch. And if it's wrapped too tightly. We cannot bend the trunk enough to flex the wire any further. To work harden and hold the position of our tree. Because when we start to look at wire. Particularly copper wire that has a work hardening capacity. Copper wire is annealed. The annealing process realigns the crystalline structure of the copper. Which softens it. And once the copper is soft. We want to do as little work with the copper as possible. While empowering ourselves to be able to provide movement in the tree. So that means that we really want the application process to be seamless and smooth. And use those bigger longer angles. So that the copper wire doesn't harden up. And we have full flexibility and mobility of the tree. When we start to bend. Okay. Now as I'm working up. I'm continuing the process of cleaning out the crotches. Cleaning the bottoms. Cleaning the weak interiors of the areas. That are blocking the application of my structural wire. Because we said. Listen. If we're going to maintain this as a mozai form. Just cleaning out the crotches. The bottoms and the weak interiors. That's the move. We looked at how we can drive. Drop crotch prune. Back to a strong secondary or tertiary branch. That was the pruning of that singular tip. Back to a junction where there are two finer. Actively and vigorously growing smaller pieces of ramification. Okay. But when we start to say. If I'm going to pursue a bonsai shape. That actually demands that I wire. I am going to want to establish. My primary line of the design. The trunk line. And the primary branches. The branches I'm going to use to execute the design. I want to establish their position. Before I clean. Because I may be reorienting the foyer mass. Okay. So I'm just doing this. Not having cleaned the backside. And I'm really not focusing too much on the bottom growing pieces. More on the pieces in the crotch. That are getting in the way of my wire. Okay. And what I'm doing is. I'm just moving this wire through the primary branches. So that I get a nice 55, 60 degree. Same angle. Same spacing. No gaps. Turn on my application. As I move out the trunk here. Okay. And I'm going to go ahead. And I'm going to carry this as far. As I have the technique. To be able to carry this wire. Out onto this elongated piece of woody tissue. And the reason I want to carry it out. As far as I possibly can. Is in order to be able to transition. I have to have an equivalent branch. To the size of the structure. So that I can wire a similarly sized branch. To a similarly sized branch. Use the correct gauge of wire for both of them. Have the highest degree of success. And there is not a similarly sized branch. To the actual trunk of the tree. As I move out to this tip. It is by far and away. The strongest. Thickest. And most predominant piece. I don't have a transition point. Which means I've got to use technique. To be able to get that wire. As far out. And have that wire function. Empowering me to be able to move that trunk. As far as I possibly can. So I'm going to carry it all the way out here. Not out onto the fine tips. But as far as that big thick piece. That big thick woody piece. As far as that runs out onto the tail end. Of the canopy. And I'm just kind of working through these branches here. Being careful recognizing that. Juniper is precumbens. And any plant species for that matter. Tend to tear at the crotch of the branch. You've got your trunk here. You've got your branch. This crotch right here. Or where two branches move like this. That crotch wants to tear. We're too rough in the wiring process. We rip that piece off. I've got my wire. Now I'm not going to cut my wire. I'm going to leave this. This is going to be my handle. And I said I want to elongate the design. I'm looking at my front from over here. Let me go ahead and clean off these pieces. Which means when I elongate that. I want to rotate that towards the front. As I lift it. I have a clockwise rotation. That clockwise rotation. Towards me. As I pull that piece up and towards the front. I'm going to use the length of this wire. I'm going to hold here. Really nice and stable. I don't want my tree moving around in the soil system. So I'm going to hold here. And I'm just going to go ahead and I'm going to let. The wire do a majority of the work. And I let the wire do a majority of the work. Distributing the force of that bend. Over an elongated piece of tissue. Now look at how. That just changed everything. Now we have actually. Provided some elevation. And notice how the trunk has taken on. A more significant amount of prominence. When this was laid out as that lateral pad. And that singular foliar mass. That really didn't give us a lot of opportunity. To do something radical or interesting. And we don't have to do something radical. Or interesting every time. But as we acclimate to the simplicity. Of that original design. We're going to want more out of our tree. So by elevating. Basing it on the fundamental principles. I have a slender trunk. And I've enhanced. The beauty and the opportunity. Let's say inside of the tree. So now I can come back in here. And I can start to look. Okay I've elongated. It's still a little tough to see inside here. But because I've elongated. I can start to get a little bit more of a feel. I can take away branches. That are in a bad position. Inside of the curve. Branches that are forming bar branches. Meaning they're immediately across from each other. On the structure of the tree. And the crotches. I can start to think more appropriately. About orientation. And again I want to continue to keep my front. As a continual consideration. Alright. Okay so I've brought this up once. Now I'm wondering. Can I push this any further. And this is where we talk about the process of bending. And I'm going to show you underneath here. Jesus can you zoom in. And just show me this section right here. Okay so this is where the majority of the force of the bend. Was placed on the tree. This kind of minty green. Whitish color. That's the beginning of the exterior. Portion of that separating. That is not a bad thing. That is not a tree hurting. But it is telling us. Okay now the force of the bend. Is starting to stretch the tissue. The most inflexible tissue being the dead tissue. Or the outer bark of the tree. Is going to open up first. It has no malleability whatsoever. Beware. Pay attention. This is what we now need to be aware of. In terms of further enhancing. The movement of the tree. Okay now if I'm facing the maiden camera. You notice that my tree is slightly orientated towards here. My front is right over here. So now we start to recognize. Okay. But I want more. I want that tree to lean towards me. I want it to embrace me a little bit. Okay. So I'm going to come in here. I'm going to place my fulcrum a little bit farther out. Now my thumb is out on the trunk here. And let me show you where that is. I'm going to shift the fulcrum of my thumb. Out here now. At first it was back here. And I expressed that bend over the entire length. Okay. So I started off with my fulcrum here at the base. Now I'm going to move my fulcrum out. And I'm going to shift the application of pressure. Out into this region right here. Where my thumb is. Now that allows me to place my thumb. Very firmly in the canopy of the tree. It allows me to grab my structural wire. And it allows me. To further bend. And notice that I'm giving just a little bit of rotation. That's coming towards me. Ah there we go. Now we're starting to see something happen. Now let's take a look and we want to be very aware. Okay. Alright so I haven't made this any worse. Because I changed the fulcrum of my trunk. Yeah bring me in tight there Lonnie. Okay I haven't made this any worse. But notice that other pieces are starting to open up here. Let me show you that one. Just a little one there. Now that the force of that bend moved out. To a much farther point on the trunk. Now I'm going to move the fulcrum. So that this part of the trunk bends. Okay. And we're going to see if we can't put in some really nice interesting movement here. So now my fulcrum. Is going to be all the way up in the canopy of the tree. I'm going to be up in here. Go ahead and bring me in tight. I'm going to be up in here. Up in the upper canopy of the tree. I'm going to go ahead and lock in really nice and tight. Because now I have two shorter areas. And I'm just going to use. There we go. I'm just going to use the strength of my hands coming together. Push that thing together. This is where I'm holding here with this hand. And I'm pushing towards that hand. I'm zeroing out the force and I'm pushing towards that hand. And suddenly we start to say. Oh hey. This is getting interesting. This is getting. There's potential here. This is not a bad tree. This could actually be something. And the answer is yes. Now let's just see. Can I get a little bit more? Yeah I get a little bit more there. Can I tighten this up here? I tighten that up there. Love it. And now for the first time. I can start to look at this and I can start to say. Okay. How do I want to design this tree? Okay I've got all these big elongated branches. That exist on the top side. Of this piece that's been laid down. But notice I have this big naked spot right here. Very very naked. Here is my front. Square to the table. Here is my front. Okay. Right there. I've got that beautiful wobble. I've elongated the tree here. Do I need these pieces over here? I do. But I want a piece that has a good angle. Okay. So if you notice. When we come in here. All of these pieces come off of this. Going in a vertical orientation out of the trunk line. I'm going to trade those pieces. Look at what I'm trading those pieces for. I'm trading those pieces for a horizontally emerging branch. This is a really really usable branch. Very nice branch. Okay. I'm going to come up here. I'm going to take off this vertical piece. But I'm going to save this one. Because I can bend it down into a horizontal position. The combination of this branch to this branch. That forms my first combination. Of my first two structural pieces. That are going to allow me to start to build. Some branch placement. In the creative space that exists in this trunk. So let me go ahead. And just start that process. Or let me go ahead and place that piece of wire. And let me just make sure I feel like I want this branch here. Because that branch. Do I want that branch here? Actually I'm going to pull back. I'm going to say I don't even want this piece. My front is right here. I want to see that trunk line as much as I can. And I think this is covering up that bend. I'm going to go ahead and take this piece off. Some of you might be saying. Don't you want to leave gin? Gin is not just finished enough. Down low to be thick enough. To be any sort of interesting gin. Structurally significant gin. Let's focus on trying to create a tree. That is reflective of the age of the material. And the stage of life that the tree form. Might be in at this point in time. And I see this just being. A slightly asymmetrical. Informal upright tree. As kind of the best utilization of this material. To create the beginnings of a really good bonsai. And we all know. That if again if we're working with a mozai. We're capturing the practice of bonsai. Awesome. Awesome. Let's learn how to do it well. Let's learn how to create the informal upright style. As a very traditional. In Japan typically labeled as the orthodox style. That traditional form. That is so beautiful. Has wonderful proportions. And most of us have as an image in our head. Of what a bonsai tree is supposed to look like. That's what my first bonsai tree started looking like. Whether I was looking in books. Or whether I was. You know paying attention to bonsai today. Original North American publications. For bonsai information. That database. That database. Of the traditional bonsai approach. And bonsai imagery. Is largely formed by that orthodox style. And interestingly enough. As much at Mirai. As we choose to pursue. A little bit more natural representation. We try to find drama. We pursue complex techniques. Still one of the most. Leisurely. And enjoyable. Things to create. Is an orthodox tree. It has a beautiful proportion. It has a stunning. Sort of shape. That taps into a lot of nostalgia. Experience information etc. And that's where we tend to find some value in it. Now when I'm going to bend this. I'm always going to be applying my thumb. Notice my thumb here. Pushed into the crotch. Let me rotate it a little bit more. And I'm using the tip of my wire. And I'm just rolling with that. And I'm watching the top of that shoulder. To see does that shoulder start to form. Those stress cracks. Or fractures that we were looking at. On the trunk of the tree. When we were setting the primary line. Now notice as I rotated that. That I kept that pad very nice and flat. My pad isn't flipped up like this. I have that flat bottom. That I already cleaned off. And now I've got it in position. Where you can actually see. The bottom of that pad. On the top of this here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to hold back. The top of this piece. Or any vertically growing pieces. I don't want to let pieces grow vertically. Now notice that I'm not just automatically. Cutting off vertical pieces. I also don't want to do that. Because those do form some sense. Or some portion of the contour to that pad. The body of that pad if you will. Notice that that's giving that pad. A really nice kind of full. Visual vibe. Now these pieces back on the interior here. I've got to say. If it's on the inside of a curve. I'm going to take it off. I've got a nice staggered formation here. Do I need to wire these smaller pieces? Definitely need to wire the smaller pieces. If we're talking about really developing. A high level of detail. I'm going to come back to that though. This is just my structural branch setting. We start at the bottom. After we've wired that trunk. And we work from the bottom branches. And developing our design idea. And our design notions. Second piece. I'm going to be holding that wire up against the branch. The off hand. The way that your off hand works in the wiring process. Is what dictates success. So although this hand is doing all the work. It's this hand right here. That's holding that wire to the branch. That gives us the greatest amount of control. And really improves. The quality, contact. Consistency of same angle, same spacing. No gaps. That manages everything. And protects the tree. Or the plant in the process. Because by holding that. The wire is not scraping against the branch. The wire is not tearing the bark. The wire is not digging into the smaller finer branches. Again I hold. Support that shoulder with the main hand. My index finger. Let me rotate. Index finger against the shoulder where the wire contacts the branch. I'm not going to move it. I'm dropping down. And watch this. The branch is loaded up on this side. Notice where my index is. That's the new fulcrum. And boom. I flare that out. And suddenly you see that branch form. You see that bop bop bop bop. That becomes a very nice pad. Now let me go ahead and continue to reference the front of my tree. Because I don't want this branch blocking my view of the trunk. Here is the front of my tree. Little bit obtrusive. So I think what we can do to help that scenario out. I'm going to go ahead and take off this uppermost piece. I'm going to try to kick out. Reduce the length of. And then kick out. This piece that exists sort of in the three quarter view. And then I'm going to run that sort of smaller piece down low. And watch how I change that. I'm going to go to Jesus right there. Now you see the visibility of that line. You see the visibility of that curvature in the trunk. Obviously we're going to come back. And we're going to wire these pieces down. We're already starting to see some definition. That exists inside of this. Okay. Let's come up to the next part. Let's come up to a zone. Where I've got a fairly significant branch here. Fairly big significant branch. But I have an even bigger. More prominent branch back here. And this is really where I wonder. Can we do something really profound and interesting. With this branch in the back. Or do we want to stay a little bit more fundamental. And proportional. With this piece right here. This is a value call. This is a complete judgment call. And to some degree when we look at this. The bigger branches. Are in proportion for the kind of tree. That we've started off creating. But sometimes an interesting branch. Can be the piece that makes this tree. Completely unique. For today. I'm going to say instead of going. With something completely unique. What happens if we just adhere. To a fundamental orthodox creation of a tree. And I'm going to go ahead. And I'm going to take off. The foyer mass off of this very slender piece. And I'm just going to use this. As a nice little accent. Of a gin. Of a piece of dead wood in the back of the tree. I'm going to leave it relatively long. And having that little dead wood. Having that negative space. Just to add a nice little accent. Our first insinuation if you will. Of age in terms of the design of this tree. Now when we kill off a branch. We cut off the foliage. You want to cut that tip down. If I want to adjust this tip. I just use the scissors linearly. I open up an incision. Boom. Pull tear and expose. The interior texture of that tissue. Okay. Really really kind of simple nice way. To create an interesting piece of dead wood. And you can see some of the texture. That exists in there. Now this doesn't have tremendously twisted grain. This isn't some ridiculous contorted Yamadori. Tree collected out of the wild. This is a very fundamental. Maul's eye that our friend gave us. And we're saying what the heck do we do. With this thing. That we've now taken ownership of. We're just working through that process right now. Okay. So now that we've made that decision. I've got a nice humble branch here. I've got a little bit of cleaning that I can do. Little bit of cleaning that I can do. Okay. And I'm going to want to be thinking about. Where this branch is going to go. Because I obviously have this piece right here. That seems to be a relatively important piece. This is going to move over into this direction. I want each of these pieces to have space. And space to themselves in terms of the design. I'm going to come over the top here. Get a really nice combination. My structural wire. Because these are primary branches. This is 12 gauge that I'm wiring this with. Okay. Enough gauge to move these anywhere I want them to go. And have the wire hold that position. That is the most important thing. When we think about wire gauges. You want to use the gauge. That allows you to hold that branch. In that position. No matter where you want to move it. So even if you're saying I want to move it a little bit. Cool. I'm going to move it a lot. Excellent. 12 gauge will allow you to move it a lot. Oh so I want to use the kind of wire that gives me complete and total control. That's exactly what you want to be utilizing. In terms of gauge representation. Now a lot of people ask the question. How do I know what gauge to use? There is no finite recipe. There is no textbook answer to that. You're thinking about how thick is the branch. How rigid is the branch. How long is the branch. How much foliage is on the branch. Right. So thickness. Rigidity. Length and foliar load. The longer. The thicker. Or the more foliar mass it has. And the more rigid. The higher the gauge. And that's where you start to say. Oh so a pinky sized diameter branch. Doesn't necessarily always need 10 gauge to be bent. No that's definitely not. It depends on how long. How rigid. How long. How long does it take. But you can also say. How much of a pinky sized girth of branch. Has to be considered in order to get that gauge to be correct. And I want to wire a similarly sized branch. Or a similar necessitating of gauge branch. I want to wire that together. So these two pieces having similar length and similar thickness. Empowers me to be able to. Pair them in combination together. And have the gauge of wire. Not be too thick for either one of the pieces. That is being utilized together. But we did take off that thicker branch. Prior. And the removal of that thicker branch. If we kept that thicker branch. We would have had to find some combination. Which probably would be more close to the apex. Where we could wire that thicker branch together. In combination. To a branch that would demand. A gauge similar to that piece. And very often in bone side design. We do get ourselves into positions. Where we have a branch. That doesn't really have a mate. Or a pairing. And that's when we have that next level of technique. That allows us to utilize. A single piece of wire for a single piece of branch. We're not going to cover that here today. So I'm going to drop this down. I'm going to kick this out. I like this branch here. I think this branch is what starts to give us. A lot of really interesting. Opportunities in terms of design. But since this branch is here. The one that exists in the back. Again fulcrum. I'm going to use my index finger right there. To hold roll with the wire. I'm going to pull this back. Into this space right here. I'm going to pick it up so you can see it. And then I'm going to flare it out. So that we start to have. A little bit more of exposure. Of all of those pieces. Now let me rotate this around for you. As I rotate this around. You're starting to see a three dimensional. Distribution of branching. Now instead of having that bare bottom. And that heavy load on the top. As one singular mass. We're starting to stagger. Still looking at the front from here. Still looking at the front true to the camera. I like where we're headed with this. Now we're moving into the upper canopy here. And we've got to lay some of these pieces out. We've got this bare area. Let me show you. A little bit of bareness right there. Notice there's nothing here. These branches are going to be coming over. Into this space. That's going to fill that space. That sets us up to have control of our apex. As a guiding light in design. So I'm going to go to my next combination. I've got a 14 gauge. Which should give me plenty of capacity. To move these branches anywhere. Where I want them to go. Maybe even a little bit too much. If I'm just being honest. But I've got a thicker one on the bottom. Thinner one on the top. Not such a big size discrepancy. That it's going to be an impediment. But definitely. If I can find similar to similar sizes. It helps with the process of pairing. To make my wiring work easier. And minimizes the amount of danger. From causing damage. When I use too thick of a wire. But sometimes technique has to be able to empower you. To make those pairing opportunities possible. That's again where you're off hand. This hand that's supporting. The contact of the wire to the branch. Is such a pivotal aspect. Of creation and design. Technically in bonsai. So I'm going to clean off the bottoms. I'm going to clean off the weak interiors. I'm opening it up. Because we do not wire over foliar mass. You just have to set. A level of expectation. A code of conduct for yourself if you will. Where you say listen. Although it would be so much more simple. And so much faster. To not clean all of that foliar mass off. I'm going to go ahead. And set my level of expectation. That I will not be. Wiring over the top of foliar mass. And that means I've got to get it out of the way. Clean before I can apply the wire. So that I respect the health of the tree. And this is truly. This is truly a discussion of health. In the tree. Because when we crush. When we overlap branches. When we pin them down. Number one. They can't photosynthesize. Number two. They've experienced significant physical damage and trauma. And when a branch experiences significant physical damage and trauma. The tree starts sending resources to that branch. It says oh man. That thing is damaged. And it tries to save it. So it's sending a lot of resources there. It's trying to save it. And when you put resources into that branch. Those are resources that the rest of the tree. Could be putting towards. Positive production of photosynthetic resources. Positive production of sugars and starches. And behavior that is contributing. Behavior that is contributing. To the overall health, growth and quality of your tree. So by crushing that branch. You have essentially slowed down. The rate of development. And you've reduced. How well your tree has the capacity to respond. To this styling work. That you're performing. So when we think about that. I would say it is a no brainer. Or I would say it is a. It leaves little to be decided. In terms of how do we conduct ourselves. We just set a standard that we do not. We do not overlap. We do not wire over. The tops of the foyer mass. We always, always, always. Give that respect. Give it sort of the correct application of technique. Etc. Okay now right here. We have our expectations of our design. Because you can see this branch all the way out here. I've pushed it. You can see it's kind of starting to pad out. But when I start to look at this. This branch occurs. Farther to the front. Farther towards you. Yes good. Farther towards you than this branch right here. So this one is farther forward. This one is farther back. This is farther forward towards you. That means it cannot go underneath. The bottom of this branch. Is back here. And this branch is in front here. I can't do that. Because this occurs farther forward. It has to exist in the design farther forward. That means that this piece right here. Has to move around to the back. That's the hierarchy. And this is where when you start to talk about. Bonsai design. It is very, very sexy to say. Oh I'm engaging with this art form. Where I'm communing with the tree. And it's communicating. And we're having this conversation. All good. All positive things. If you're listening. If you're an active participant. In that conversation. You know right now. That branch can't be on that side. Of the branch above it. Cannot. You have to again. Set your level of expectations. Set your ethos of styling and design. And this is one of the insistencies. Not rules. 99% of the time. If you follow the hierarchy. Of branching on the tree. You will come up with a design. That will be not only successful. But will continue to improve. Over the course of time. When you disobey. The branching hierarchy of a tree. That tree is already set up. To have problems in the future. And the initial styling of that piece. May be as good. As that tree gets. So if we have an opportunity. To set this thing up. To be a great bonsai tree. Over the course of time. Or we're going to shortcut. Some of the fundamental structural pieces. Of the styling. So that we get to a finished product. Or we get to something. That meets the image in our head faster. We actually might be realizing. The complete potential of that design. That you've enacted. We might be realizing it. In the very first moment that you enact it. And it may never get better. It may be wound. Open sore. It's not going to heal. It's not going to get better. It doesn't improve itself. You kind of committed the fatal sin. Of imposing your idea. As opposed to reading the idea of the tree. And that's where we say. Communication in bonsai with the tree. Is listening to the hierarchy. Of the branches. So I'm just positioning these pieces. I was going to go ahead. And I want to be respectful. Of the fact that it's tough to see. Okay this upper piece here. I've got some really nice short tight interior. Little buds in this area. Let me go ahead and rotate. There we go. Yeah nice. Whenever I have these small little tight little buds in here. That have the ability to be branches. I can really shorten. And again this is one of those vertical pieces. People say cut vertical pieces off. Don't cut vertical pieces off. Just because they're vertical pieces. Comes from the foliar mass. And that's where leaving as much foliage. As we possibly can. While still making the big decisions. To guide the design in the direction. You're trying to take it. This is the balance. This is the dance that we perform. In the bonsai process. Okay but now you can see. We're kind of starting to really get. Some beautiful representation. A little bit thick here. Let me go ahead and just reduce. The sort of size of that. Bottom branch. So that we can just sort of motor through. The rest of this design. And I've been looking at this tree. For a little while. But if we approach a bonsai. With just objective decision making. We set that primary line of the trunk. We start to set those primary branches. That emerge from the trunk. We then start to organize our secondary tertiaries. And we're listening to the hierarchy. Of the branching that exists in the tree. You are a long ways towards. Into a really beautiful beginning. And something that can absolutely mature. Into a high quality bonsai. Over the course of time. This is how we take that initial beginning point. And we construct. We create on that. This is the process by which. Bonsai are built. As sort of this living growing changing medium. Okay. I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to reduce the length of this back piece. Generally when we're talking about. Branches in the rear of the tree. They become super elongated. Right. Because the longer that they get. The farther towards the back. They take the visual weight. And some of the visual attention in the tree. We like to keep them. Not T-Rex arms short and stunted. But we like to keep them proportionally short. And reduced in terms of the length. With which they extend to the back. So let me just show you what that looks like. Really nice kind of short tight. I've got that angle to the front. My front is over here. So that takes us up to this point. Where we're now entering one of the bigger. Thicker branches in the upper area. Again I'm going to hold that shoulder. And I'm going to have to bring this branch. Into this negative space. We've talked about filling this negative space. And starting to create. That three dimensional model. That has even distribution around the tree. Okay if we're representing wind. If we're starting to talk about. Presenting some form of environment. Maybe we choose to change. Maybe we choose to change. Some of this position. Maybe it comes up and out. Maybe we extend its length. To show the wind blowing through it. These are all of the opportunities that we have. To be able to utilize design. To create intention in the design. To give rise to an insinuation of that landscape. But we don't have to do that. Again the orthodox model. Is more a product. Of the culture and tradition of Japan. Than it is any sort of. Natural reflection of a tree form. It's an idolized form. And I believe somewhere. There is documentation. Of the orthodox form. Being in reference to the Japanese garden. And the Niwaki formation. And creation. So I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to pull this piece up over the top here. Now this is starting to have a little bit of. Slightly. Repetitious. Continuity. In terms of the shape of the tree. So we're going to see what we need to do. To be able to. Give this a little bit more. Diversity. In terms of the branch placement. And even in the orthodox form. We want to have movement. We want to have interest. We want to have that in and out. We want to show depth. We want to show visual quality. We want to show all of the aesthetics. We want to show quality bone size. So I don't want to just accept. That this has some sort of limitation. Let's push the degree of craft. That we're pursuing with this piece. There's the upper portion set. And you kind of see. You kind of see this sort of. Synonymous spacing between those two. We're going to change that. But we're going to go ahead and carry through. The rest of the design first. And come back to that last. I'm going to take the big thick wire. Out of the top here. And do a little bit of detail work. I see I've got one, two, three, four. This little guy stands on its own. We're going to go 16 on that. I like these challenges. I like. There is something to be said for. The most humble piece of material. For being able to work with. A very humble piece of material. And creatively make something interesting. Right. And as I said. To challenge yourself. The informal upright form. Let me make a really good solid. Orthodox. Informal upright. Let me make. And this was something that I aspired to. When I first started doing bonsai. I wanted. Because it seemed so impossibly challenging. I wanted to learn how to make. A perfectly straight rigid formal upright tree. I think to this day. A perfectly straight formal rigid upright tree. Hardest design in bonsai. To execute well. Because all of the different pieces. That distract you from. The. You know. Whatever lack of necessity. To creatively solve. Design solutions. In your common bone informal upright form. When you straighten out the trunk. And you don't have that trunk. As a major piece of interest. Suddenly the branching. Has got to take on. A higher degree of consideration. And that's the true test of creativity. When you're dealing with a straight line. And you have to make a straight line. Look interesting. That is the true sign of creativity. Where do you intersect that line. How do you play with length extending from that line. These are the design concepts that really guide. And I think govern. A high execution of that formal upright. Ramrod straight. Traditional form of a tree. That was always a bar. To be able to achieve. And still something that I practice today. Mainly dealing with cryptomeria. But in Japan. It typically the formal upright design. Involved pines. And I really liked. The white pine. Which is a dwarf cultivar. As a stellar. Scale of the needle. To be able to create the formal upright design. And have it look proportionally accurate. That was really. That was really something to see. I had the opportunity to wire. A Kofu winning. Relatively formal upright pine. Called Musashi. Musashi was a tree. That was owned by Daiso Iwasaki. Had two very big dominant branches. And those two branches. Reminded Mr. Iwasaki. Of the two swords of Musashi. Who was a famous sword fighter. And therefore it was called Musashi. Anyways really really great tree. Awesome to see that win the Kofu prize. That was the second of Mr. Iwasaki's. Zuishos to win the Kofu prize. He had one prior to that. I forget what it was called. Maybe the emperor or something like that. So lots of glorious names. If you're going to win the Kofu prize. You probably have a cool name. Okay. Alright so now we're starting the return. Now we have to decide with this apical region. Is the apical region going to come back? Is it going to come back on this tree? Or do we want to carry it. Off to the right. This decision as we get into this moment. The decision of what to do with this apex. Do we go there? Or do we go here? I think hinges on which side of the tree. Does our defining branch exist on. Our longest branch creating the greatest degree of asymmetry. Because we could extend this branch out here. And pull that trunk back. We would move to the left. We would move to the right. And we would move back to the left. But we could also say I'm going to move to the left. I'm going to move to the right. I'm going to move to the left. I'm going to move one of these out. As the longest branch from that physical mass of my foyer body. Let's add one more change of direction. I think that gets the apex. Headed in the correct location. I think it adds complexity to the design. If I can go one, two, three. That's great. But if I can go one, two, three, four. Let's go four. Let's take that fourth move. This is where we elevate the quality of the material. To really enhance its ability to be something. That contributes. Okay. This upper piece kind of laid out. Spaced out. I think this is probably going to be a relatively small branch. That exists back there. And let me get this final piece. Up on the upper portion here. To see if we can't get that apex exactly how we want it. And I'm just kind of looking at. What is that apex going to look like. In terms of its position. Shape, etc. Okay. And there's not a lot. This upper apical branch has a very, very minimal. And I'm just going to shore up. I have six or four on something like this. Occasionally when you do big bends. You get a little bit of space. Not too much space. Too much space means it won't function. But I like to use underneath that space. I said it last night on the Rigida stream. If you can go underneath the wire. The wire pins. Your structural wire pins your secondary tertiary wire. Between the trunk or the branch. And the structural wire. It gives it a lot of function. It looks cleaner, etc. The ability to utilize. Some of those. Slightly fudge-tastic. Fudge-tastic in terms of. Really sort of. Taking the rules of wiring. And just bending them a little bit. There's a little space there. I'm not going to cross it over. I'm going to go under it. Nobody said I couldn't go under. Nobody ever said I couldn't go under. I can always go under. Okay. All right. I'm going to go ahead and take that off. Beautiful. And drop that down. And this might need to come up as a little bit of apical region. Because I sense. I sense that this is going to be a little bit too. I think this is going to be a little bit. Underserving for my apical region. Even though it's the highest. Highest structural. Piece on the tree. I'm going to go ahead and fold that over. This is getting me that fourth piece of movement. I'm going to drop that forward. Utilize that apex. Starting to get. And then let me go ahead. And let me just turn that. So that that apex does have. A very pronounced position. Okay. I'm going to go ahead and turn this. Just starting to now tweak. My pieces a little bit. And I'm going to save the bulk of this tweaking. So that you can see it. But I have to form my vision. I have to be clear about how that apex is going to work. That's starting to kind of. Come together nicely. I've got my base. I've got my line. Probably I rotated just a little bit too much. Okay. All right. So that's going to be there. Let me go ahead and let me dial in. Just a few more of these smaller little points. I'm going to take off the big dramatic tip to this back here. Get this headed in the right direction. Okay. Almost there. Let's go through our first. Maul's eye styling. And we're building. We're building on a lot of technique. There's still some inconsistencies in the front. That we're going to utilize. I've had this request for forever. The request is hey. Can you just create a normal tree? Can you just create a normal tree for us? Can you just take a normal piece of material. And create a normal tree. So we can see what that looks like. And I've always been resistant to that. Because it's like why don't. I'm just trying to take advantage of the material. And when you have a lot of technique. There's a lot of different things you could do. For example. If you look at the bonsai tree from common Christmas tree nursery stock. You know we could take. We took a spruce tree. We split the spruce tree in half. Half the trunk became a branch. Half the trunk became an apex. That tree is out in the garden. Doing great right now. That was a literati design. That also was a refurbished. Or say repurposed Christmas tree. So those opportunities to use creativity. That's where the good stuff is in bonsai. That's why we all do bonsai. Is to have those moments. Where we tap into that creative process. But I understand. I understand what people are asking. When they say hey. Can you just make a normal tree. And that's where I said. Listen we could do something radical with this today. Let's just make that normal tree. But I think this tree. It's origins as a malsai. Right. First and foremost. It's fascinating. This like accepted kind of bastardized form of bonsai. Has an expectation of it. And it's not rooted in any way in traditional Japanese bonsai design. But it does to some degree have connotation of an expected shape and form. Okay. Let's just do a simple tree. Let's show what we can do as beginners. With this. This is not very commonly. Readily available. And let's just be really honest. Malsai are affordable. In the grand scheme of bonsai. Malsai are very very accessible and affordable. You can find them almost anywhere. There's usually somebody vending them out of a van on the side of the road. In a shopping mall. At a county fair. Right. This is how people in the western world are exposed to bonsai. Is through this exact. Vehicle. And expression of the art form. So let's focus a little bit more time and attention on it. Because it does have the opportunity to be interesting. Okay. So let's just see where we're at now. Take a look. Okay. All right. So we see this here. Now a few things that I notice. This space right here. And go ahead and bring me into the three quarter Lonnie. Okay. This space that we see right here. This is appealing to me. Okay. Let's first solve this piece. So I'm going to elevate this branch up and into that space. Okay. And then I'm going to drop this branch down. And I'm going to. We're doing our best here. Malsai styling. Okay. I like this elevated into this space. Because this occupies the depth of the design. And the depth of the design. If you want to really magnify. The quality of the tree that you're creating. Got a little bit of juniper branch in my shoe. That you're creating. Use that depth. Notice that depth right here. Let me just show that to you. That depth. That little piece right there. Right there. Yeah. Yeah. That's good. Okay. Now this piece right here. Occupying that depth plays nicely. With this piece giving you that return right there. Okay. Let me see what that looks like. Yeah. So that's not working for us. Okay. There's some interest there. But I like this actually being shorter and towards the front. So we played with it a little bit. We recognize no that's not going to work. Okay cool. No harm no foul. Let's bring that back towards the front. That works for me. Okay. I've established my angles of drop. Angle. And just because I'm a bonsai professional. Doesn't mean that I don't miss these things from time to time. But the knowledge of these things. Is what allows me to come back in. And make changes. That improve the quality of the design. So that I can reconcile through known design aspects. Some of the issues in my tree. So if I come back and I start dropping. These branches that weren't at that angle. Down to that angle. It starts to change a significant degree. Of the tree. About the design. And the quality of the design. Because I start to create continuity. In terms of how those branches occur. Okay. And let me show you what that looks like now. Because it really does have a significant. A significant impact. Let me just go ahead and take this out. It was clogging up that area over there. Beautiful. Okay. Significant impact. Okay. Take that off of that. Good. There we go. Now we're starting to get some differentiation. Now we're starting to get some. Something interesting. I've got a little bit. Between these two here. Let me just go ahead and pull this towards the back. Okay. A little bit difference there. Yes. Yes. Now what is changing? Is the length. And I'm just kind of seeing these little pieces here. Seeing this. This. This. This. It looks good from there. Let me see it from here. The way this branch and this branch overlap each other. Let's go ahead and let's bring those into. Similar plane. There we go. Now that makes it a little bit more simple. Good. Like it. Okay. So now we've gone down. We've gone down. We've gone down. Okay. We're getting that beautiful angle establishment. This piece right here could go further down. That's good. Yes. I like how that. Yummy. Yummy. Okay. And now we go down here. Let's see what this does. Yes. Okay. A nice. Simple. But not lacking quality. Not lacking consideration. When you think about the use of material. To create the very best tree that you possibly can. Really trying to maximize the quality of that material. The quality that you create in the image of that tree. Demands. And here's the 360. And I'm looking just past the camera. At what we've done here. Right. This is a really beautiful distribution. All the way around the trunk. Of that originally. Simple. Very simple form of the tree. I'm going to go one more time. I'm going to go one more time. And you can see the whole. Cycle of the tree. Good. And you see where we've used those branches and those planes. Coming all the way back. To now the front of the tree here. And the greatest piece of organization. All right. We've taken that foreground. We have the greatest number of changes in direction. In terms of four. We've taken an otherwise very simple tree. And we've given it a true blue chance. At being a really good bonsai. Okay. Moles I have the capacity to be something wonderful. If we just apply fundamental. Sound knowledge. Of how we go about modifying the structure. And enhancing the quality. Of that very simple form. That we begin the bonsai journey with. Nice. I'm going to go back to. Super complex work. In the workshop. But just stepping out. Having a little fun. A really great exercise for me as a professional. To continue to pursue. The orthodox design. You know the challenges of it are still very real. Very real. And every tree has its own unique little circumstances. That we've got to rectify. As a bonsai creator. Hopefully this gives you some inspiration. Hopefully this gives you some usable pieces. And inspires you to take that piece. And instead of discarding it or hating it. Turning it into something you love. Have a great rest of your week. Love you. 
