Please drink lots of beer, all right, and everybody everywhere, enjoy. Thank you very much for joining us for Mirai Live's lunch. You guys are awesome. Yeah, cool. Okay. What are you styling, Ryan? So, it just so happens that because I'm working next to Alex all evening long, his favorite species is a redwood growing up in California, so we chose a redwood to kick off Mirai Live. It also happens to be, for me, a very iconic species in American bonsai, the only place in the world that redwood grows. And we've got a very, very unique situation here with this tree because when you start to look at redwoods in their typical standard upright form, it's almost, this is almost counterintuitive to what a redwood is. What a redwood would look like. But we have a lot of quality characteristics in this tree that we're going to try to maximize over the next hour and a half or so. As I'm working on this tree, I invite you guys to kind of consider what's happening, where I'm moving the branches. Try and see if you can predict where they're going to go and what this is going to become. And then if it goes in a different direction, talk to me about it. Interact with us online. Interact with us in person. And let's see if we can't kind of come to a cumulative agreement about where we're headed. All in all, I think for the most part, we're going to be doing a lot of work. For the most part, I'm going to try to compress this and make sure this tree maximizes all of this really interesting deadwood here. This is more of a bonsai than a natural tree reflection. And we have that freedom inside of this art form to explore all different manners and levels of how we engage and what we're trying to reflect. But I want to bring all of the attention down to this wonderful piece of beauty that nature's made. So I'm going to get started. And if you guys have questions, ask me along the way. And I'll see you guys in the next video. So one of the biggest things that we've always got to understand when we start to create with bonsai is how do we give movement to our composition, right? How do we create direction? How do we give flow? So if we're starting to talk about age and antiquity, one of the biggest things about age and antiquity is creating that asymmetry. And you see asymmetry reflected across the board in most art forms. Very rarely do you see art striving for symmetry. Very rarely do you see design striving for symmetry, right? That's almost like a traditional model of how we used to approach bonsai, how we used to approach art when you looked at formal gardens or when you looked at very formal sculpture and painting, proportionally accurate and symmetrical in its form. I want to try to create asymmetry. And the way that I'm going to do that with this tree is I'm going to use this branch and give myself a lot of distance and flow over here. And then I'm going to start to manipulate these branches to work with it. So it's more like I'm going to bend this tree. And then I'm going to keep on folding it over. At my risingroom level, I'm going to add more branches. I just want to darken my administration at the bottom of the tree and take in more of this wonderful lie. Very light, darken my state. Really broad, and for me when I comments and sizeгоi it, I kind of try to make it look very nice dash. I'm trying to have it as representative as possible here. Generally people can have a bit of different texture to the word lightly shaped. Like what are some of. writes can have. Dude. Well. Leave a comment each. I appreciate it. I appreciate it. Indeed. Let's pray. Let's pray. Some of that foregauge for you. Is this a tree that fell over and re-grew? So this actually, when we start looking at redwoods, a lot of times these redwoods that we're working on, they come from old logging slash roads. So when they, we've logged a lot of the redwoods, they would bulldoze a lot of the smaller trees out of the way. And consequently, what you would get is in the root systems where they were dislodged, it created this super contoured, gnarly, radical base. And that's what you're seeing. Most of this was below the surface when this was actually collected. And so that's how you're getting all of this radical contour and design. So I'm using, I'm using a copper wire that's foregauge. I'm going to pass this around. You guys see how much you can bend this. I'm going to give you another shot. See how much you guys can bend that. Anybody else out there? Doug, you want some? Redwoods are extremely flexible. So I'm going to pass this around. I'm going to pass this around. I'm going to pass this around. So redwoods are extremely flexible, but they also have their bending or their breaking point, just like any other species of tree. And usually when we start to bend, there's a technique for every species that we've got to be extremely aware of in the process. For redwoods, redwoods will tear before they break. So they don't just all of a sudden snap unexpectedly. They'll actually start to, we'll see them start to separate. We see that tissue pull apart. You see those gaps forming. That's a definitive indication that we need to slow down. Now, notice how my wire is turning clockwise on this tree, and then watch how I'm going to be moving this branch. I'm twisting branch with the turn of that wire. Try and distribute the strength of that bend across the widest possible amount of tissue. Now notice just in one turn, how much that changes that tree. So when we start talking about bone size and art form, we're using wire almost like a paintbrush, right? This is how we create the picture. Moving and manipulating these branches and creating different layers and forms. All right, let's see if we can create a little bit more flow. You guys want to see this get down a little bit more. How many people here do bone size? All right. How many people here want to do bone size? How many people here, want to do bone size? All right, how many people here are like, what the hell is going on? Okay, so I need you guys to help me. How long do you guys want this branch to be? And I'm asking you guys in the camera, too, how long do you guys want this branch to be? Looking at this tree, let me just give you a little bit. I'm going to give you a little bit of an idea. So I'm looking right here to the front. I'm filing and designing this tree right about there. Right here. Shorter. Yeah, shorter. Oh, you like it longer? What do you guys think? Shorter? Longer? Longer? That's better. I got a floppy mic. They have pills for that? Yeah, all right. Okay. I didn't say it. He said it. All right, let's see if we can get it a little bit lower. So you guys want it long. Long. Richard, you want it short? All right, we got to give these guys time to respond, too. Okay, yep. Get it closer to your face. I can't. It's like in my mouth. I think that's where it needs to be. It needs to be in my mouth. There we go. How's that? Beautiful. Better? Can you guys? Hear better? I think that's beautiful. Let's hear from the crowd if that's better. Like eating mic all night long. I got to do this for four hours, so you guys buckle up. Floppy mic syndrome for the rest of the night. Okay, so while we're waiting on a little bit of feedback there, I'm going to go and I'm going to give this a little bit of shape. Anytime that we create this kind of movement and direction and length and flow, we've got to have something to contrast or counterbalance that, and that's this little piece of growth here. Now, again, we said ancient is asymmetry, correct? So, if we're going here, the last thing we want to do is also go here. If we go here, we need to be pulling in here. And if we go here and we pull in here, we've got to be moving that tree to get that engagement, apex, trunk, and branch, okay? So, when I drop this, if you guys nailed it right here, then the length of this is dictated by the length of this, which is why this is so incredibly important. All right, let's take a look at what it looks like. I'd say leave it that length. Leave it that length? Yeah, Brenda says that. I think leave it that length. These guys think leave it that length. You think leave it that length? All right. The front disagrees. The front disagrees, and you guys want me to shorten it. You're outnumbered. All right. Outnumbered and outmatched. So, how many people here have already signed up for Mirai Live? How many people have signed up? Oh, that's not enough. That's not enough. Every week, every Tuesday, 6 p.m. Pacific Standard Time, we'll be streaming from all over the world. As we're traveling and doing bonsai. And meeting interesting people and going to interesting places, continuing to expand on bonsai as a practice and bonsai as an art form, kind of sharing our approach and thoughts and also the approach and thoughts of other bonsai professionals throughout the world that are doing interesting and amazing things. If you guys find any value in this or you have curiosity about bonsai, there's a lot of different levels of engagement on Mirai Live that you guys can take a look at and see if there's something. I know that kind of speaks to you and your interests. But I do appreciate the fact that you guys all turned out for a good party. If you guys have a moment tonight while you're here, BSOP's outside. There's a Mirai booth outside and then this is being projected outside as well so you guys can watch the live stream as you enjoy the fire pits. I'm sure Basecamp wouldn't complain if you drank more beer. You guys have any questions for me now? You guys have any questions for me? What do you got? Do you always bend first and then cut? That's a good question. I always bend first to make sure I don't break first before I cut. So, yeah. We bend first. We cut. Now, one of the best things that you can always do is leave yourself an out when you're first setting the structure. The quality of any bonsai tree, any bonsai tree is definitively represented by this structure. If the structural setting of this tree is good, it's almost like I've given myself the correct outline on my canvas to be able to color in after that point. So if I lay all this down and I make sure that it's all in a beautiful place with beautiful lines because think about this. You've got multiple lines in this composition. You've got this primary line that is the trunk, but then you also have this line that we created the flow with and you've got this line that's countering that so the tree just doesn't feel like it's going to topple over. These primary lines, if they're beautiful and we get that set and we get that outline painted in a really beautiful way, all of a sudden we start to have the building blocks to be able to color inside the lines and create something a lot more interesting. Hey Ryan, why don't you use this tree for a demo? Okay. Okay. The question that was on the live stream is why did we choose this tree for the demo? Who asked that? Guess Julianne. Not sure. Guess Julianne. We chose this tree for the demo because redwoods are iconically American. And anytime we start talking about bonsai as an art form, you start to talk about bonsai as a vehicle to discuss culture, nature, and the individual. And there's nothing more appropriate than a redwood to discuss, I think, the spirit of the western United States at least. How long do you guys want this to be? All folks Ludus. Just one moment guys. Okay. Okay. All right. How long do you guys want this to be? how long does this need to be okay hang on let me rotate for you guys I gotta give him a chance take a good look okay scissors mark the front we'll go again Alex how long does it need to be huh Alex says right here what do you guys think compact compact so you want this shorter and you want this shorter but everybody else said longer they don't know okay so if we go this long if we go this long here because I'm committed to that now I listened I listened I listened okay If we go this long here, say for this is not going to get any shorter. How long do you want this? Longer? People are saying short. Short? Shorter. Short? Shorter? A third shorter. A third shorter. All right, here we go. Bring it to the end of the wire. Now, I haven't seen this. I'm really trusting you guys to be guiding me through this, right? If you screw up, it's not my fault. Anymore. Anymore. Anymore. Did everybody say hello to Aaron Packard? Aaron Packard in the house, curator of the Pacific Bonsai Museum outside of Seattle. If you guys haven't been, you need to go. Austin Heitzman right next to him there. The best stand maker in bonsai. All kinds of good friends coming out tonight. Todd Schlafer, First Branch Bonsai here. Todd, thank you for the support for the event, man. I really appreciate it. Todd's going to be traveling the country, teaching everybody good bonsai skills. So you guys at home, First Branch Bonsai, Todd Schlafer, you guys here. First Branch Bonsai, Todd Schlafer, he's going to be coming to you with some good skills. Well, you guys asked me to cut this too short. It's too short now. Now what do we do? Oh, I should have listened to Alex the whole time. Never go against the DJ. What do you got? Are we using basic tools? Basic rules. So we got a question asking us if we're using basic rules. Basic rules. Basic rules. Basic rules. Basic rules as we design. Now, I guess I would kind of fire back at you guys. If we start talking about rules, who makes those rules? Who makes rules? Did you say they do? Yeah. Yeah. So no, we're not functioning off of any rules. But, but, whenever we start talking about breaking the mold of any kind of pattern that we've come to accept as normal or traditional or standard, we are moving off of the same old rules. We are changing things. We are having things that we can do differently. The problem is how do we do things differently? What is the way that we're doing it? How are we doing it? Two things. One, I'm trying to work a little bit bigger. I'm trying to identify the things that we're doing here. I'm trying to figure out what's right. The first is we have to be thinking about a lot more than that. So like I said, if you're going to do it, you've got to do it differently and you've got to do it better. So you can't do it differently and do it the same. You can't do it differently and do it any less. If you're going to change it, you better change it for the better. it, which is why it's always such a pleasure to get to demonstrate in front of you guys, because then that allows me to pick your brain about what we're creating on stage. You weren't supposed to see that. Can you hear me? Everywhere we go, Mike's problem, everywhere. He said, why this pot? Why this pot? And I asked him if he liked it, and he said, the trunk color versus the pot color is interesting. Well, so what's the goal? Are you trying to, in this whole composition, is this supposed to match something here? I don't know. Huh. Have you ever asked what you're trying to do there? Like, have you ever thought about it? Well, so this, yeah, so the question is, as a, as a bonsai creator, would you rather the eye be drawn to the pot, or would you rather it be drawn to the tree? So, if you're talking about Japanese fundamentals, right, they would say the tree. But, then that's forgetting, but that's forgetting an entire equation, or an entire genre of compositions you can create that don't put the attention on the tree, right? So now all of a sudden, if you start asking the question, what's the purpose of the pot, you can come up with ten different potentials. And that makes ten different pots that would be acceptable for this tree, right? Now all of a sudden, we're starting to talk. Because instead of just saying, this is the right pot for the tree, no, this is the pot that probably maximized, probably maximizes the visual attraction to the deadwood, right? Because, because it's so different in color to the deadwood. And now all of a sudden, when you've got a really contrasting color, that creates a lot of energy. It maximizes that contrast. Does that make sense? Oh yeah. All right. So, we put it in this pot because the, the, the ornateness of these decorations fit well with kind of this exploded, gnarly nature of the trunk itself, absolutely. What's the, what's the history on this tree? No. It was collected probably in 2008 or 2009 down in Northern California. Yeah. Yeah. And, and it's been in for, let's see, 17, but we just. It's been in for about, let's see, 18 years. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. All right, let me keep going here then. It's going to keep rolling. What do you say, Alex? Yeah? We'll come back to it after I get this branch done. We'll come back to it after I get this branch done. Beating the soul. Nice. This is one of Alex's favorite drum and bass tracks he's playing for you guys right now. But. I did want to come back and just let you guys know who are watching online and all over the world. The response to Mirai Live has absolutely exceeded expectation in every way, shape, and form. This is a project, you know, that I've been working on since 2010. And to see it come to fruition tonight, to have bass camp, their capacity is incredible. They actually came to us last week and said we've had so many people. RSVP. RSVP for the event that we're not sure we're going to be able to hold them all. And so to see everybody here tonight and then have you guys joining us online, I can't thank you guys enough for the support. Seeing this thing finally come to fruition. Pretty monumental occasion for us. So, you know, this is just the tip of the iceberg, though, because we're going to be able to deliver so much more to you guys. Thanks. The tertiary videos. We're getting ready to upload. We're going to have impromptu Q&As where we give you guys a little bit of a heads up and you can get your questions answered. We're literally going to open our workshop to you guys and just bring as much quality content and footage of bonsai being practiced by professionals all over the world. We'll have Colin Lewis. He's going to be doing. We visited David Benavente's garden, Alcabit Bonsai Museum, which is on the archive right now. Under the David Benavente stream. We're really going to go through that and dive into that bonsai knowledge because people have been asking us for so long. How do we learn more? Where can we go to get this information? And that's why we built this. So that you can join us kind of on the journey as we as we continue to kind of feel out what it means to use bonsai to represent. Yeah. Am I rapping? Am I rapping? I'm talking to people all over the world right now. oh they can though yeah you guys can't they can yeah I got what you guys all right what do you guys think about this tree what do you think coming along I'm wiring what needs to be wired yeah I'm wiring so I don't want to wire everything we need to wire everything we need to wire everything we need to wire everything we need to never want to wire everything but we can wire what we need to wire to have control of the growth right all right Alex bring me back in hey guys all right guys join me join me for a little more design exploration okay how do we feel how do we how do we feel about this branch right here how does that feel everybody give me a little bit yeah any any any any here right here this guy okay so let me let me get the front again you like the length all right okay here we go huh huh good good you guys are into this yeah what about this needs open what do you guys think bring it down all right let's try this first is that better I'll bring it up go out in this way this way all right let's see what happens let's see what happens when we get get into this area right here okay all right you keep drinking you keep watching I'll keep wire and we'll come back sound good okay all right all right you line kindles coming back to the chat board deeds we have have any questions I've been checking on my phone I haven't seen any but let me let me plug back in yeah that's a good question so this the question is what am I trying to do right here I had this big hole right so I got to fill that hole somehow otherwise this just looks like some branch sitting out here by itself so I'm working on creating another pad right here that fills that hole and that's that's my focus as I'm doing this yeah back in the truck back in the truck yeah oh yeah I guess you could out here we have more questions about who made the pot and it's Georgie Dave Georgie yeah Georgie Georgie so so Mariah's now the G-I-O-R-G-I I'll type it out for everybody but we're now sole distributors of his work so if you want to see more of his work please go to G-I-O-R-G-I.com. So if you want to see more of his work please go to G-I-O-R-G-I.com. So if you want to see more of his work please go to G-I-O-R-G-I.com. Georgie pots you got to come to Mariah and we got some questions about the arc of the video archive whether these videos will be saved forever on Mariah live and that's correct the archive video just get the archive gets bigger and bigger you can rewatch the videos anytime that's right that's any place it's anytime into infinity and I was just joking with Arthur that we're going to be live streaming like into infinity every week and just really really think what that means the bank of infinity. The bank of information that will be available is going to be limitless the usual someone asked what will be the usual start time in Pacific Standard Time 6 p.m. Pacific Standard Time is going to be our usual start time obviously today is a different situation just because it's launch day we're going to be going from 5 to 9 p.m. but mostly a lot of bonsai as a general as a general rule will be streaming live 6 p.m. Pacific Standard Time every Tuesday evening. So there's a gentleman in the front row that asked me if I feel like it's more difficult to style a tree in this environment. Versus a more controlled environment in my studio and I would say yes. But this has its own whole nuance of fun right yeah absolutely has an energy to it. A lot of things. I'm. I'm. I'm. I'm. I'm. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Ryan, I got a good question from Jim. What do you got? Guest Jim. I don't know if this is Jim's name for real, but his name is Guest Jim. He says, What do you fertilize with? How often, and does the strength come from the roots as pines do? Ah, super savvy question. So, in all actuality, redwoods, we don't fertilize them a ton in the spring because you can't manage the vigor of redwoods. Now, when you talk about the epicenter of strength in the redwoods, you're talking about the vascular, talking about the vascular system, which is a little bit of an obscure place to say that energy is based in the vascular system, but basically what that's saying is you can heavily prune the foliage as long as you don't touch the roots. You can heavily prune the roots as long as you don't touch the foliage, but you can't do both. And the reason that you have that flexibility, unlike a pine or a juniper, where pine, you get the strength in the roots, and juniper, the strength in the foliage, the reason you have that ability is because redwoods store so much of their resources in their vascular tissue, and what that means is literally on a cellular level, they're just packing that cell full of... sugars and carbohydrates. And then in the spring, when they push out that growth, you get this big rush of water moving across those cellular barriers and picking up that sugar and picking up those carbohydrates, just blasting that towards the place in the tree where transpiration is taking place, which is up in the foliage mass. So all of a sudden, it's just dropping all those sugars and carbohydrates off right at that point where evaporation is taking place, right at that growing tip. And all of a sudden, you've got resources, you've got water, you've got everything that you need to catalyze the production of... foliage, or, if you choose to leave the foliage mass for a couple of roots, then all of a sudden, all of the sugars that are being produced via photosynthesis from that big movement start getting transported south and contributing to root growth. It's a really beautiful system. Nature's mechanism for growth is absolutely amazing, second to none, in terms of being well thought out and well designed. All right, Alex. Give me the volume. Yeah, I got you. All right, guys. How we doing? Yeah? All right. My name is Ryan Neal. I'm the owner of Bonsai Mirai, and you guys are here for the Mirai Live launch party. So, for those of you that don't know, Mirai Live is an online streaming platform that delivers information about bonsai across the world to anybody who wants to join us. 6 p.m. Tuesday night. Pacific Standard Time will be streaming from all over the globe as we travel and we continue to pursue the art of bonsai as a medium to explore culture, nature, and the individual. Okay? That bridge, that gap that this art form has the ability to start to communicate about. So, if you guys are interested in learning more about bonsai, live.bonsaimirai.com. And there's a sign-up booth out here in the tent. If you guys want more information, there's T-shirts. There's also the ability to sign up right out there for the platform. And we'll be doing this for... Apparently, we just had a little discussion because as we're streaming, people are also talking to us online right here. And somebody said, So, are you going to continue to take what you do here and add it to the website? And absolutely. This is going to be... This little event right here will be visible for eternity. Or as long as technology lasts, which could be to, you know, solar flares. I don't know what's going to happen. But... Presumably, it'll be for eternity. So, we're just going to continue to build and build and build and build and kind of grow the exposure to this art form and its capacity to continue to be able to reach out and connect a lot of different genres and thought processes and connect us back to the environment that helped us form who we are. Okay? So, once again, I just wanted to let you guys know we've got Alex on the decks over here. Alex Daniels. Everybody give him a big round of applause. Entertaining you guys tonight. I want to give a lot of love to Basecamp Brewing for their wonderful beer and the beautiful space. Thank you, guys. So, we have a raffle outside Patagonia Gear. They're giving it away. You guys need to get out there and check it out. All of the proceeds from the raffle go to Eco, which is a nonprofit that helps get inner city kids out into the wild environment, understand what that nature is all about and how it can impact us in a positive way. So, your contribution goes to a really good cause. So, if you guys haven't been out to the tent, make your way out there. You'll also see a stand for Bonsai Society of Portland, BSOP. BSOP in the house. Who's in BSOP here? Hey! All right. So, all of you, all of the Portlandians here that have never heard of BSOP, it's the best club in the world right now for bonsai. So, if you guys are stoked on bonsai and you want to learn more about bonsai, check out BSOP. They've been a huge support and they continue to grow and get better. Okay? We also want to give a lot of love to Todd Schlafer and First Branch Bonsai. Todd flying in from Denver. New on the professional circuit. Todd's going to be doing a lot of beautiful things in the world. He'll be actually at BSOP in April to take care of their April meeting. And so, you guys come check Todd out and show him some love. BSOP, I hope you guys take good care of him. Okay? What's that? And last but not least, Lime Productions in the booth back there in the gray hat. Arthur on the deck or on the switcher. Lime's the person who created this and made this event possible. Lime. Lime. We love you. We love you. All right. Okay. So, before we dive back into it, just a brief hiatus to catch you guys up on where I'm at. So, you guys chose to go this long. Now, I never would have made the decision to do this. And we were talking to the people on the stream who were asking, what are you going to do now with that length? And I said, that's not going to happen. That never would have been my decision. In a million years, I never would have said, I'm going to leave this this long. But you guys came along, changed the game for me a little bit, and then forced me to kind of respond and design around that idea and that concept. And I don't know how you guys feel about it, but the product of that kind of push to do something that I wasn't comfortable with is kind of opening up a whole new door. Now, once we went long here, I thought, okay, we could have left this a little bit longer. And then you guys said, cut it short. And I thought, oh, I don't know if I should trust them. And I cut it short. And in fact, I probably shouldn't have trusted you, but we went that way. And I'm actually liking that, too. So, you guys are more or less kind of dictating what's happening to this tree right now in this room. And it's nothing like what I would have created, okay? But the product is going to be amazing because of the fact that you guys are continually challenging kind of the standard of what I would do to approach this tree. So, this is very, very interesting and fun for me, as well. I hope you guys are getting a lot out of it. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to finish up the upper portion of this tree. And hopefully, you guys can kind of see this design build and come to fruition. We're going to do a little bit of a music interlude. And then we're going to give you guys the first viewing of a brand-new film that was made by somebody really close to us, Ryan Bush. So, stick around for that. I'm going to knock this out. And then we'll come back in, check in, and see what we all think about the final design, okay? Because clearly, your opinion matters on this one. All right. Ryan. Yo. Aaron Wiley wants to know what's aftercare for this tree for this year, next year. Yeah. So, I mean, as far as aftercare is concerned, I mean, what I'm doing to this tree is actually going to make it feel so much better that I'm not concerned about it suffering. I think the one thing that I've got to really buffer and do, I've got to really buffer and be careful of is that I don't let it freeze because we're still not out of the woods for cold weather yet. And also, after removing this much foliage, the last thing that I want to do is set it out in the cold, wet Oregon rain and just let it get hammered by constant moisture. Because when you remove so much foliage, you've got to understand that the water mechanism for movement in the tree is offset entirely, right? You've lost that evapotranspiring mechanism. And you can accumulate too much water. So, keeping it out of the rain so that it doesn't get too saturated, not letting it freeze. And all of a sudden, we're going to see this tree just pop out and really do some magical things over the course of the next year. Now, as far as refinement of this styling, that's probably the bigger question. And what we're going to need to do is start the pinching process as soon as these branches start elongating. Because if you let a redwood elongate, irregardless of how long it's been a bonsai, once they start elongating, if you don't pinch, the inner nodes get excessively long and all of a sudden, you lose the ability to maintain compaction. You get these big, long, elongating fronds. And that's not necessarily what we want to create a small-scale redwood. So I'll be on the pinching as soon as this thing starts to grow. And I'll be pinching as long as it's growing, which takes us through the summer. Nobody said that redwoods were a small chunk of work. These are extremely vigorous trees, which opens the door to interesting design concepts. It also means that we've got to approach these with a high level of craft in terms of handling and managing that growth. You can ask me a question. Do I worry about disguising the cuts? So on a raw styling like this, where it's like a first styling, I'm not super concerned about disguising the cuts. Because I'm going to get so much growth from a redwood after this that it's not really going to matter. Yeah. Sure, yeah. Now if we were talking about a more refined, more refined tree or a slower growing tree, then we would need to prune back beyond where you can see the cut to disguise it. But that's not a redwood. That's not this redwood right now. Bonesite 101, you bet. Thanks for coming. Bye bye. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. He's saying leave it long. I got to go long. What's going on, Arthur Hitchcock? Are they? I'm having a good time, too. Somehow, Arthur Hitchcock just came up and told me everybody's having a good time. But he predicts it's only going to get gnarlier and more of my style. And I don't know how to take that. Hope you guys are having a good time watching back home. Everybody here is wondering what the heck I'm doing, talking to myself up on stage. But I'm chatting with you guys. Make sure you're feeling the love. Wish you guys were here with us. But we're super excited to be able to bring this event to you guys live online via that Mariah Live. Little gym that you're watching. You guys haven't registered yet. Sign up because we got a lot more in the works. We're going to have Young Cho with us next week. Anybody who's interested in those little pieces of accent, grasses, small understory plants, et cetera. Young Cho is an absolute wizard when it comes to that. Her artistry, her knowledge of that material, including species. She's on. Watch it with you. You'll want to tune in for that. And then we're going to be back to you for a real fundamental discussion on spring. Care, fertilization, operation, thought processes. They apply to different species. No. All of that good stuff. So tune in for all of that. Continue to interact with us. . no it's no it's not a phoenix graph it's actually it's actually the real deadwood yeah shari yeah it becomes shari when it turns to the trunk and it's deadwood it becomes shari as as it's commonly termed right all right ryan i'm back oh you're back it's like where's that voice coming from kindle to the rescue i got a download of some questions oh sorry everyone on the chat i needed to get a beer uh that's i'm sorry for the delay priority number one we are at a brewery this is a lunch party for us too we've absolutely kicked each other's ass bringing this to fruition right yes this party for us i deserve a beer i deserve a beer after all i have been working very hard to bring this live stream platform to everybody that's viewing it okay all right i got some questions what do you got neats um how long do you leave the pinched fronds how long do you leave the prince fronds before what i'm not sure that was that was just a question or just explain what pinching means what is okay so this that question explain what pinching means tell you what let's hey deeds let's do a redwood stream on pinching redwoods pinching redwoods i would love that i don't even know what that means that's what i'm saying neither do they so let's do a little pinching redwoods live stream on it and teach you guys how to pinch them this is i dedicated it to tony hayworth because he asked that question all right tony tony tony i love you thanks for signing up we're going to come back and we're going to teach you guys how to pinch redwoods when it's time so the best part about this is you guys are going to get to tune in as it's time to actually be doing the operation and we're going to show you how to do it in the way that best maximizes the ability for the tree to recuperate and take that position of strength in that operation and move forward so instead of trying to explain some nebulous concept to you guys when this tree isn't giving us the kind of growth that we need to actually illustrate that concept let's come back to that when we're ready sound good got a deal what else do you have kendall what else do you have all right i got yeah i'm talking to the people on the site on the website yeah they can hear me how well does that yamadori this is yamadori yeah um yeah so you guys can talk to us while we're online how well does redwood handle heat right so redwood will handle redwood will handle heat as long as you keep foliage hydrated like you know one of the things that people don't understand about redwoods is how much of their growth they or how much of their water they take in through the foliage and this is not necessarily an issue with them when they're a bonsai tree you're not fighting 400 feet of gravity acting on your system but redwoods in the wild take in anywhere between four and five hundred gallons of water a day just via the mist and fog that settles on their on their foliage mass particularly up in the canopy of the tree where they have a hard time getting water via the root movement they're taking in most of their water and their leaf structure is actually genetically different and designed to take in water from fog and mist so when you're starting to take in water from the foliage you're not fighting 400 feet of gravity to cultivate redwoods in warm weather areas you definitely want to be making sure that they're getting enough moisture in and around their foliage and i know of people that are cultivating redwoods in phoenix arizona which is you know obviously the desert but what they have to do consequently is mist their redwoods almost you know three four or five times a day with a misting system to keep them hydrated so that's the sacrifice if you choose to cultivate a tree outside of its range then you have to do the things that are necessary to keep that tree healthy and thriving in that environment kendall's inundated with people they just found out that she's taking your guys questions and passing them on to me so now they're asking her all the questions so bear with us bear with us as she is handling the crowd so to speak almost there what else you got dees brian wants to know what is your thought on cut paste need or not cut paste cut paste cut paste on redwoods not needed let me go back and quantify that cut paste on a redwood is not needed unless you have a tear or a break but like big cuts on a redwood redwoods are not going to bleed like it's going to bleed like it's going to bleed like it's going to bleed like it's going to bleed like other species of treat they have sap they will produce sap but typically when you use cut paste you're either worried about the tissue drying out or you're worried about the tissue overly bleeding now if you have a tear or a break you would be concerned about it drying out and that's why i say okay if you have a tear or break then cut paste becomes a discussion but just in terms of redwood cultivation in general when i'm cutting these branches off you don't need to be sealing now think about two if we're saying in a really hot weather area you're cultivating redwoods maybe in a location like that you may want to seal wounds on redwoods because you're looking for any advantage you possibly can and keeping moisture in the foliage of the tree so that's another thing to really consider your region and where you're cultivating them and what is unique to that particular environment and area and that is a process of trial and error and hopefully trial and success then the next step would be to create some form of a bur Stark all the way down to the center of that the bottom tier by the way shallots are very fun they come out and they're very listeners they're very baked out and if you like they just drop a twig or two of them andw gill they just can pop off on the outside they make whatever you there that milk they take a damn long time outside and you're going to get an order going at them and making them feel fresh they're you know just there they don't Bur sagt Thank you. So there's a question that said, are redwoods single flush? Redwoods are elongating. Whether they're single flush or not, no, they continue to flush over the course of the entire year. When you sign on to a redwood, you're making a commitment, right? But they do elongate, and that kind of growth in the way you manage it is different, right? Because that's where we get into that pinching again. So that's where we talk about pinching to manage the growth. Thank you. Thank you. How's it going? Thanks. She liked it. Guess we're doing a good job. I have to say, I didn't really know what to expect doing a live event and streaming at the same time. This is a challenge. It was hard enough trying to figure out how to talk to a camera, but now trying to talk to a camera and people in person, and if you guys at home are feeling like I'm not speaking to the camera, it's literally impossible. Literally impossible. But we're doing our best, and we've somehow, in this whirlwind of music, beer. This is something that I would have gone with this. But what an interesting challenge to be asked to create something against what you would normally be doing. Trying to create. It's a really, really fascinating and engaging experience to get to fool around with that. To be challenged by that. I think, you know, as professional people say that demonstrations aren't valuable. I totally disagree. I think it depends on how you handle that demonstration and the respect that you show that material, obviously. Because I think a lot of professionals do things they wouldn't normally do for the shock factor of that piece of work. But I think if you stay within yourself. And you continue to utilize the techniques and approach that you execute in the workshop. Sharing that with people is an incredible way to help make bonsai a little bit more accessible. And particularly, one of those areas that seems to be so mysterious, which is the design process. You know, the number one thing people ask me is, how do you design, how do you design, how do you design? Well, watching design is almost a better answer than trying to answer how you design. And this stream gives us the picture. The potential to do that. So I'm really, really excited to bring this to you guys. We've got a lot of interesting design projects drummed up this year for you guys. All right. I'm going to blast back out and wrap this up. Alex, can you give me a little love? All right. Okay. Could be. I don't know. I won't make that statement. But that could be a record for the fastest redwood. I've never wired. I don't know. Hour and a half. Not bad. Yeah. All right. So I'm going to start over here. I've given you guys the scissors to check out the front. And just a little bit of a rotation. And you guys can let me know what you think about the final design. So after I'm done rotating, we're going to do a thumbs up or a thumbs down. Turn it back. OK. Go back again. All right. Here we go. Going back. Going back. Stay with me now. All right. Be honest. Be honest. Thumbs up. Thumbs down. OK. And then we had the middle. All right. Nice. OK. All right. Very cool. OK. So again, the challenge was this super long branch giving us that movement. Does this feel as awkward over here now? Or did it start to feel a little bit better? A little bit better? In the future, would you like to see it longer, shorter, or right where it is? Right where it is. Right where it is? A little bit longer you want? Yeah? Oh, you need to see it again? Put a cloth on it. Put it on. Hide this. Hide this. Put a cloth on it. Put a cloth over this. OK. Hang on. Go back. Step back. Step back. Step back. This is more customized than I generally offer. P.S. Hang on. Hang on. I got to get everybody's. This is clearly a group effort here. So everybody give their opinion. Without it? Without it? Alex? Oh, hang on. Hang on. Hang on. OK. Hang on. One more time. OK. So everybody take a look. Go, go, go. All right. You don't want to keep it? Keep it? All right. Here we go. Everybody who votes to keep it, say aye. Aye. Everybody who votes to cut it, say nay. Aye. It's got to stay. It's got to stay. All right. So here's how this is going to work. I'm going to leave this up here for you guys to check out for about 10 minutes. I'm going to take a little break. Alex is going to keep you guys engaged. Base camp's going to keep you guys hydrated. We're going to come back. We're going to have just a short talk. I need to tell you guys a few more very important things. We're going to watch a film, and then we're going to launch into another entirely different treat and take on a little bit of a different format. OK? So enjoy. Come up and check out the work. Get something to drink. And we'll rendezvous back here in 15, 20 minutes. OK? See you then. Bye. Bye. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. 
