what's going on everybody super tuesday oh my goodness it's good to be in the house doing some housekeeping you know i i do i hope you enjoyed last week's stream on the wisteria that tree kicking butt ira just spent a past day uh drenching the garden supplemental nutrition ha ha ha bonsai kung fu these days um but i do like doing these like fundamental building block streams i know there's a grand desire for radically inaccessible design and execution of technique and i feel like we do those too and we'll have we do have some special little something something's drummed up for you guys coming up um but i feel like these are more of the bonsai practice as a lifestyle as a fluency of communicating with the tree reading what's going on knowing what you're trying to accomplish how do we how do we move in and out of this vortex of this cycle of this you know primary secondary tertiary how do we how do we kind of play with this you know model because bonsai is not linear it's not on a it's not on a continuum it's it's oh oh my gosh i went here and then it took this turn and then it went here and then it went back there i didn't never envision that holy cow what do i do now oh my gosh i want to get it over here and and that's tough right that's a really really tough thing to learn how to you know they say good boxers don't uh avoid getting hit they just roll with the punches and it's like bonsai is going to deal a lot of damage over the course of time the more trees you have the more complex and valuable those trees are uh the erratic aspects of of nature the environment neighbors uh weather etc so how do we continue to you know let our trees build not lose what we had not try to hang on too tightly and end up in a better spot than we could have imagined that's that's the goal right anyways got ira on the mic this evening what's up hey zeus producing the live stream from the mothership and lonnie live in studio mr sales out and about out in a boot boot in the world yeah is it his birthday today oh my gosh everybody wish josh sales uh a happy birthday yeah somebody should blow up his instagram story tonight is how do i take and if you if if you don't know this tree this tree excess moisture removal part one the discussion of changing the balance of water and oxygen in the containerized environment this has been a tree that i have you know loved and loved and loved and loved and loved and loved and loved and loved and loved i collected it when i was 12 years old ponderosa pine i grafted it in 2010 right when i came back from japan because it was big and long and leggy and no matter how much i got this thing to back bud it was never going to be of scale and proportion and it has been a tree that has been truly built from the very basic bones of buds on the grafting locations into what it is but you know in that transition the domestication of the wild tree you know you're taming a stallion it really does become this three-dimensional model you know where where we move forward where we move backwards where it gets better where it gets worse where it almost dies where it barely survives where we change the container where the we we get the right angle we miss the angle we break a very major branch you know x y and z it's all happened with this tree now it has been two years since the last time that we decandled this tree because it has been in a dire state of needing to get the roots back to a state of health and let me go ahead and just sort of give you the once around because in those two years of correcting the balance of water and oxygen of working on the nutrition you can see that the tree has gained not only a tremendous amount of strength but we've had to continue to manage the tree to a degree over the course of time and yet again we get to this point where we see that the tree has gained a lot of strength and we've had to continue to leg it up over time again we get to two years of course a number of years more years of working together even years more years with the but like if we got 15 years of time off 12 different weeks we had everything back within just three years of working together into we just continued to try and you know do anything in general we would like things pork labor we really just think about that thing like properly trainpatient what we want things that allow the tree to recover and regain itself and you come back when it's ready how do i know it's ready good strong candle growth and elongation how do i know it's ready i have a relatively even distribution of needles but inside of this model we understand listen multi-flush pine this is a japanese black pine grafted onto ponderosa the foliage determines the behavior not the roots so we're saying that black pine multi-flush pine strong gets stronger weak get weaker very quickly because of the high water mobility that empowers a multi-flush pine to produce those multiple flushes and so i see the top and the candles up here getting stronger i have weaker areas on the interior the lower branches particularly in these regions in the back are quite weak and we say man i'm gonna wait until decandling to do something about it and the answer is no no no no no no that's that's not now we can't do that okay because if we wait till decandling we miss this entire push of energy from the root system over the spring season stored energy pines strengthen uh in pines is in the root system pushing of sugars and starches up into that canopy how do you tell the sugars and starches where to go in a multi-flush pine in a high water mobility piece we tell the resources where to go by plucking the needles down to the weakest significant branch to reset the energy system of the stronger areas of the tree we have a lot of energy in the lower branches of the tree and we have a lot of energy in the lower branches of the tree okay and so as i look at this and i'm in the rear portion of the tree here which i would say and let's just do another once over there is quite a bit more needle mass down in here but when i look at these regions that are super strong i've got to be very honest with myself this is very minimal compared to the strength that exists in here okay so as i start to look at this i'm saying all right okay so i've got to balance the energy of this when all of that energy is going to be in the lower branches of the tree and i'm saying all right okay so as i start to look at this okay so as i start to look at this you're going to see that the energy is coming out of the tree up into the canopy this is one significant moment you got to capture this okay raw tree for the first time sort of moving into not a raw tree let's say a styled tree for the first time moving into some degree of refinement we receive a tree we purchase a tree we're given a tree friends got an issue with this tree we're trying to help reclaim the energy and balance and distribute in our multi flush pines use this period of time to the best of your capacity use this period of time to the best of your capacity because right now, the transpiration, right, the loss of water through the needle, one water molecule evaporates, it puts tension on the chain, pulls more water molecules into that region. What hitches a ride on the water molecule? Nutrition. What hitches a ride on the water molecule? Hormone, right? So we say we have auxin coming in, we've got nutrition coming in. That area that's photosynthesizing and transpiring the most is going to be pulling the most resources through that portion of its system, depositing the nutrition, getting a stronger candle. Tree's saying, I want to be big. I've been left fallow for two years now. We've done our very best, and yet we come back to this again, and we say, oh my gosh, I've got to continue to balance the energy and strength, and the answer is yes, okay? All right, so first and foremost, whenever we start to enter this system, we want to be functioning. This tree is all about aesthetics. The whole occupation of bonsai is all about. So when I start to look at needle plucking to balance and distribute energy, I'll never forget Mr. Kimura gave me a Japanese black pine to needle pluck in like the first week of my apprenticeship, and the day prior, I'd been watching one of the older apprentices needle pluck this pine, and he was locked in. I mean, he was like focused, and he was just like, needle plucking, needle plucking, needle plucking, and I was like, oh, that's what it looks like. And then Mr. Kimura gives it to me, and I was like, I'm going to Edward Scissorhands, this thing, and I just started needle plucking. I didn't think anything about how it looked, which was hilarious, okay? I didn't know, all right? I should have known. I didn't know. That's how dense I was as an apprentice in the beginning. I was just like, I guess, you know, Edward Scissorhands on the bushes, and all of a sudden, you got a giraffe and a balloon animal, and I'm like, oh, this is how you do it. And Mr. Kimura looked at it at the end, and he just goes, wow. That is, that is the worst piece of work, like, I've ever seen, like, ever, you know, because, like, a Japanese apprentice would have been, like, you know, very conservative, and Mr. Kimura would have said, go faster, go faster, and they would have said, I'm so sorry, I don't know what I'm doing, but I was like, no, I saw that dude. I know this. I got this, right? And then at the end, he was just like, that's, you've officially destroyed that tree for, you know, the next six months until Candle's second flush, right? It'll be okay. That's the advantage of multi-flush, is we can screw up, okay? So when you're doing this, you're automatically thinking, okay, I'm going to be cleaning this up. By the end of this operation, this needs to look good. Now, what is the exception to things looking good is in the weakest areas, we will accept, we will accept downward growing needles, we will accept a slight degree of disarray just to have the needle density that allows that area to photosynthesize and catch up, okay? So as I'm working in this area here, I am looking at, even inside of my, the weaker area, I am looking at where is the stronger buds and portions, and where are the weaker buds and portions? Because if I have stronger, denser areas, even inside of the weakness, I want to have an even distribution across this region of quote unquote weakness, okay? And so I'm looking at this. Now, any time we start to talk about needle plucking on pines, and I do not think that this is as much as people think, oh my gosh, needle plucking on pines, you've got to be kidding me. It's like, okay, well, if this is so mundane and routine, how come needle plucking on pines, when you see this technique applied, you see people using tweezers, and it takes them forever, and it's kind of fruitless in terms of the productivity of the operation, and in the end, the aesthetic of it doesn't look any better than when they started. You say, listen, if you pay attention to this, and I say this all the time, you can accomplish more through the act of cleaning. If you had one skill set, I can either clean or well, or I can wire well, you will have a more beautiful tree if you know how to clean a tree well, okay? And what we're talking about in this whole operation is getting these needles to display themselves like this. Now, again, in the weaker portions, if we have some of this, that's okay. In the stronger areas, this is exactly what we can't tolerate, okay? And certainly this we cannot tolerate, okay? So we're cleaning up those bottoms, we're changing the orientation of those needles, and we want this. That's what we want in terms of the needles that we want to see. So we want these needles to show us at the bottom of our pine in the way that they end up. Now, we want this without completely removing this. I don't want to bud here and have the candles or have the needles across the entire top portion and to nude the bottom portion, okay? I need those needles here. I need needles on the bottom. I need my bud right here. I need that kind of grip of the full 360 needle distribution. All right? So that is a criteria to how we present pines and we clean up the bottom of the tree. And inside of that, we want to have a kind of a clean bottom. So that is a criteria to how we present pines and we clean up the bottom of the tree. And inside of that we got to be working this constant system to try and organize this so that we get the very best presentation so as I'm working this one of the fundamentals to achieving and accomplishing that is always and you'll notice from the beginning through the entirety of this tree I am constantly teaching my students this I'm gonna have students in the workshop starting tomorrow they're gonna be here through Sunday we're gonna be working on strength balancing shoot selection on the multi flush pines that existed outside in the garden and weren't in the greenhouse because we understand listen if you don't shoot select in the fall it gives more cold tolerance to multi flush pines but you got to come back in the spring yeah you got a needle pluck you got a strength distribute you got to prepare for the decandling process and I'm gonna be constantly telling those students to not be putting their hands in the tree like this you don't reach into a pine like this that's not how you approach a pine you're always approaching a pine from here from the bottom working your way up so every time that I pull my hand out of this I have to come back to the correct approach to this system and if I'm constantly coming from the bottom up into the tree I can come through here and I can be relatively Rambo about things ok I don't need to necessarily be super duper rigid about that approach because just coming up from the bottom is what preserves the shape and integrity of the needle ok now you might be saying but Ryan I thought you said that your weakest area how come you're there plucking needles again I want to distribute the energy here but I also want to set the tone for the aesthetic expectation okay because as I'm plucking in here I am removing a few bottom growing needles we said we would accept those though Ryan you said that that was okay that we could leave those yes but if I have the ability to redistribute the energy through the rest of the tree to the same density as is in this weakest portion then I do want to clean up the weaker portion I do want the weaker portion to look beautiful I do want the weaker portion to have the same aesthetic value that is what triggers you have to understand that is what triggers your passion to continue working with a tree the more beautiful a tree looks the more inclined you are to work with it okay the more inclined you are to do all of the arduous work that it takes to really start to move these things in the correct direction okay so as I get into some of these stronger areas right and I'm just kind of working into an area that's getting a little bit more candle elongation I'm still working through you these buds from the bottom I'm happy to come into the interior here and I'm just taking off some of these bottom growing needles that are hanging down those are the needles when we start to look at needles like this that when I let that go it's coming across that aesthetic of these other upright needles okay I'm going to take these off I'm gonna come in here I'm gonna take these off I see these growing towards the interior I'm gonna come in and I'm gonna take those off and what you'll see is that there's a commonality here okay I'm not removing all second year needles I never I'm gonna say that again I never one more time never remove all second year needles never remove all second year needles ever remove all second year needles never ever ever remove all second year needles okay that's not the goal that's not how you handle pines that will cause a rapid decline a rapid weakening of your multi flush pines or of your single flush pines now let me just also tackle something while I'm kind of massaging this area and then I'll walk you back in terms of why I'm doing this in the weaker portion okay do we needle pluck all pines to distribute energy absolutely not absolutely not needle plucking as a distribution of energy and pines is a technique that strictly applies to the multi flush genre Japanese black pine Japanese red pine right we can do this with our pitch pine we can do this with our Virginia pine we can do this with our pinyon pine we can do this we can do this with pines that we have the water mobility and the rapid metabolic capacity to be able to generate lopsided distributions of strength through that rapid transpiration okay so I'm not needle plucking a mucro pine I'm not needle plucking a ponderosa pine I'm not needle plucking a Scotts pine okay that's not what we're doing we go we come back and we distribute energy on short needle single flush pine through pinching we distribute energy through long needle single flush pine in terms of pruning when they drop their third year needles we distribute energy in multi-flush pine through needle distribution needle plucking right now as the tree is pushing its energy into the canopy and distributing its energy this is one of those moments where we can radically alter the distribution of that energy and change the strength of weaker areas for the better in preparation for the decandling operation okay so as i'm working through this this is something that you have to really wrap your minds around that this is a technique limited to the multi-flush pine genre because of their high water mobility their rapid metabolic capacity and this is something that we are doing as an aesthetic consideration but in order to maintain horticultural viability we cannot remove all of the second year needles because those needles contribute in multitude in a multitude of ways right now people have said how do they contribute when i was originally teaching about multi-flush pine i said well those older needles contribute to hormonal regulation i was not wrong in that i was not wrong in that but i was not completely and totally accurate and right either what we've learned is that certain needles in terms of their age on the tree hold certain resources that drive the metabolism and the continued productivity of photosynthetic sugars and starches different sub-solid bodies that come in with the right energy and the right fat content so i know like i said in the last class i know that we should be doing this with different people that we should actually be doing that because there are different body parts and different types of DIAT so and the idea is to actually work within different body parts like these okay i'm going to go ahead and put this back together and hold it up right now and i'm going to see if i can just see what what a little moment i'm going to give to you is really where you start to talk about potassium right potassium is a macro element uh one of the major macro essential elements i'm not sure how many essential macro elements there are it's changed a little bit over the course of time it used to be hard and fast when i was taking plant physiology in the early 2000s i think there were like uh 14 so it's either 9 12 or 14 macros and then you know the remainder of the 23 24 essential elements were were micros okay but potassium specifically really has a significant seat in the in the the physiology of the tree in the older needles that exist and when you start to talk about that potassium you say okay well um that's that's awesome but can't we just apply potassium in terms of fertilization and replace whatever's lost through the removal of all of the second year needles and the answer is you can't because the second year needles have the capacity to move potassium in and out of the new needles so the potassium regulation of your tree is driven by these second year needles and the older growth that exists on the tree potassium is responsible for the what would you say blood pressure of the tree the the rate with which the heart beats and metabolizes these other resources okay it's a very fundamental uh plant element for vascular tissue production fruiting and flowering uh creation and evolution and development it is a very very important piece of the puzzle okay and so we want to be very clear and very careful to keep some of those old pieces on the tree and maintain that regulation dysregulation over the course of time leads to a weaker tree okay so i've just gone through this this weaker area and i've created a little bit more transparency i've created a little bit more organization and i've tried to evenly distribute the energy of this area so that i have even density throughout my weakest area okay and i start with my weakest area because we said hey listen i'm going to take the strongest areas of the tree and i'm going to pull them backwards so i don't want to leave this area super dense pluck all the strongest areas of the tree come back in here and say oh i could have done that better it doesn't really look that good maybe i'll pluck this this and that and then have to go back and repluck the rest of the tree okay like i said you don't want to be in here with tweezers you don't want to be in here slow rolling this work this should be very very quick in fact if i'm doing this at a rapid professional's pace i really wouldn't have to think much about what i'm doing i'm doing everything by eyesight okay but when we start to say okay all right doing it by eyesight so we want to balance it are there thresholds yes and you know these thresholds because we talk about these thresholds thresholds are this limited number of needles that the tree needs available to be able to photosynthesize at the the capacity that sustains the physical mass of the tree the vascular mass of the root system the trunk and the branches the photosynthetic mass of the needles maintains transpiration and draw so that the roots have a balance of water and oxygen we can't go below a certain threshold and that certain number of needles that the tree needs available to be able to photosynthesize at the the capacity that the tree needs available to be able to photosynthesize at the the capacity for energy balancing on a multi-flush pine 10 to 12 pairs of needles per tip per shoot okay we do not go below that so if we have a weakest branch that's six to eight needles per shoot on average across a region and we are speaking regionally i'm not counting any one of these pieces i'm just looking at them and i'm saying does that look about right yes that looks about right i see a little bit more i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to take that down yes that feels this region feels reconciled this region feels distributed i didn't count a single candle or a single needle count on this area right you can always start that way and calibrate but i'm trying to balance this density on this branch to this density on this branch to this density on this branch to this density on this branch that's that's the ultimate goal and we do not go below that 10 to 12 pairs multi-flush 12 pairs right of needles we don't go below 20 to 24 needles per shoot even if our weakest significant branch is far less dense than that so we will pull the stronger areas closer to this density saying listen i can't pluck this below 10 to 12 pairs because i need the stronger areas to still have the critical mass of needles to transpire to photosynthesize to draw water out of the container and maintain a balance of water and oxygen and feed this system i will not pull it below that okay but in doing so these are going to catch up a little bit right when we come back and decandal if it's super weak we won't decandal the weakest point we will decandal the strong and the moderate points we'll pluck them down eight to ten close the gap certainly in a year we can close that gap very effortlessly but just by pulling it down to the 10 to 12 allows this to catch up a little bit and by decandling maybe we even get to decandal this because in decandling the whole thing and plucking the strong down further by utilizing this time right now the weak is catching up they're allowed to catch up and then we do it again at decandling now it's evened out they're allowed to catch up we do it again at shoot selection in the fall shoot selection and needle plucking again the the weakest branches producing stronger shoots we keep the stronger shoots stronger areas producing weak and strong shoots we keep the weaker shoots boom we again close the gap in two years in any multi-flush pine that is a tree and refinement that has the ramification balance and the its наши and we re off new be to out into the tip of this here, and I'm also going to be removing some of the newer needles, okay? And when we start to talk about this, I want that radial distribution, right? I'm never going to take, and let me just show you that, I'm never going to take all the needles off of the bottom here and create that flat irregular distribution. I want to be taking needles around there. I still have older needles here. I still have three-year-old needles here. Those are still mattering. If they are still on the tree because this tree was in a state of disrepair that encouraged us to put this back into a position of not decandling, of not trying to continue to refine, of focusing on the balance of water and oxygen, if that's the case, then the tree will probably be holding on to three years' worth of needles. Trees that are unhealthy hold on to extra needles. That's their safety gap. That's how they continue to support the endeavor of growing and cultivating and having the capacity to survive. Right? So if that's the case, I also need to be keeping them when I go through this process here, okay? So I'm saving some of the old, I'm removing some of the new, and I'm radially distributing that energy around the entirety 360 of that shoot, okay? When I get into the interior here, I've got to back off. The exterior have longer candles. They have more needle mass. The interiors are equally as weak as the interior or this weakest branch over here. So inside of this, I'm constantly looking at the inside of the tree. I'm constantly looking at the inside of the tree. I'm constantly looking at all of the densities that I'm managing. I'm constantly assessing all of the strengths that exist inside of the system, and I'm needle plucking to go ahead and create balance and uniformity across the interior, exterior, top, bottom, right? I've got to be working and focused on this when I'm doing it in order to be able to achieve the objective, which is to, again, redistribute the distribution of resources via the vehicle of transpiration, by needle plucking my multi-flush pine to have the same number of needles regionally, roughly and regionally, strong, medium, and weak-sized shoots, so that they all photosynthesize and transpire at the same rate. I'm going to open it up to questions. I'm going to keep working on this area, and I'm going to start to pick up the pace and just discuss some nuances as we get into this a little bit deeper. Marianne is up first and says she has a Japanese black pine that its candles have hardly pushed out this spring, maybe just a quarter to an eighth of an inch. Should she needle pluck this spring? Should she cut any of the candles or just leave it until next year? And she wanted to add on that maybe it's just in refinement now and the slow growth is to be expected? So, I would say that the strength of the growth on a multi-flush pine is generally, and I wouldn't say it's always, but I would say it's generally an indication of the strength of the growth on a multi-flush pine. I would say it's generally an indication of the health of the tree. We know ultimate health also comes down to resistance, the heat, cold, etc. Does that tree have resistance to those other metrics? The only way that you would know is by trying to decandle it and seeing whether it pushed out a second flush. That suggested, oh, it is in refinement and that's exactly what it's supposed to be. My assumption, Marianne, is that it is probably a tree that is struggling a little bit because even a... multi flush pine in refinement should produce with the correct application of fertilization over the spring season should be producing very very vigorous elongating candles and if yours is not then it probably means there's some impediment and that's really the ultimate objective you know why did i go for two years without decandling this because the candles did not grow long enough to encourage me to need to decandle it's not like i sacrificed the entire you know aesthetic of this tree as i was working through the system and i was like oh my gosh it's growing so much but it must be so weak it wasn't growing enough and so i said oh it has to be weak if it's not growing enough that's why i forewent the decandling process and it and it took two years to get to a state where i actually am seeing candles elongating to the degree where this tree will really need a super solid uh decandling over the course of uh this early summer period so i would say that tree is giving you the indications that it's probably hands off and when it's hands off you also don't want to be plucking needles because how does a tree regain its energy how does a tree rebuild itself through the process of photosynthesis if you have an imbalance of water and oxygen that's leading to a root related issue which again strengthened pines comes from the roots okay think through this with me strengthened pines comes from the roots and the only way to rebuild roots is through needle mass on the tree the only way to improve balance of water and oxygen is adjusting your water application plus continuing to drive transpiration out of the container as these plants lose water through the foliar mass that's what puts tension on the chain that pulls water out of the container and opens the space for oxygen to percolate through as long as we adapt our watering to allow a pine to thoroughly dry out even a multi-flush pine still leans on a heavier oxygen than water side if that's the case right we don't want to reduce the transpirational rate we don't want to slow down that mobility of water we want to focus on giving the appropriate amount of water we want to maximize the amount of water that's moved through the tree and we will accept in a situation where a tree is showing weakness we will accept a lopsided distribution of strength to get the tree back to a state of health that allows us to then rebalance it and that's exactly where we were here and that's exactly what we're doing right now we allowed it to get lopsided to get to a state of health that created that root system that vascular system the capacity to not just sustain what I have which is not growing sustain what I have and add how much is it adding the degree that it's adding to health the rate the vigor that it's adding is what starts to tell me that we have the capacity to pull on the energy system to get a finer product shorter internode shorter needles bifurcation which is what we ultimately quest for in the decandling process you got to hold off and these are you know that's a good question that's a good question that you're asking should I be needle plucking to solve this solution needle plucking does not solve a health solution right or a health related issue needle plucking will impair a tree if a tree is not healthy enough it is one of those aspects of the bonsai activity that can really debilitate a tree if a tree is not ready to be needle plucked Bob M is up next and asks if you have needle bundles in the apex that are really long compared to the needles on the lower branches can you just cut the needles to reduce their length and the energy balance from that area of the tree absolutely and that and that in fact is is the move right because you say listen it's not that I have so many more it's not that I have so many more needles it's that the needles are just three times longer so do I pluck them down to a really limited number of needles and really denude the area or do I go ahead and mechanically shorten the needles to be able to facilitate a more even photosynthetic distribution and I would say and there's a caveat to this as long as the tree has not been repotted you absolutely have the capacity to cut those needles okay but there's an interesting thing that happens if you cut the needles in the fall and you repot a multi-flush pine in the spring the needles that you cut will die if you repotted a multi-flush pine in the spring and you cut the needles in the summer uh in this throughout the spring or in the summer those needles will die okay and so it can actually be quite catastrophic for a tree that is anywhere on the cusp or or repairing itself from repotting it can actually be quite catastrophic to cut those needles so we want to be a little bit careful about that one caveat but if you've got a tree that has an established root system that hasn't suffered hasn't been touched then you absolutely have the capacity to utilize the length of the needles as as much of an adjustment as the quantity of the needles in terms of being able to distribute that strength Bob Marianne has a question and says what's the ideal time for this work common practice in Northern California is to wait until June 1st uh so this is not decandling June 1st is when we would decandal and needle pluck and again decandling and needle plucking that operation is going to take the needle count down even farther than what we're taking it down now we are taking this down as an energy distribution methodology with a basement right 10 to 12 pairs per tip on our strongest we will not go below that our basement density for just functioning as an act of strength distribution is is higher when we come back and we decandal in in the beginning of June and we needle pluck the decandling removes the entirety of the new growth right takes away the auxin dominant hormone stimulates that second flush to occur and at the same time we come back and in order to get the best out of that second flush in order to maximize the number of buds that push as a result of that removal of the tip through the decandling process we pluck the needles down to 8 to 10 right it's very minimal shift from what we're doing now right so if I'm looking at this and I'm saying gosh if I do come down to 8 to 12 which I'm guessing my weakest Branch has more than 8 to 12 pairs per shoot so I'm functioning off of the density of my weakest Branch but if your weakest Branch had a density that was less than 10 to 12 pairs per shoot right it has more than 10 to 12 pairs per shoot okay but if your weakest Branch had less than 10 to 12 pairs per shoot you can only pull the strong down to 10 to 12 pairs okay but if your weakest significant Branch has 20 pairs per shoot my wheelhouse for sitting in optimal photosynthetic rate is 15 to 20 pairs per shoot okay so if my weakest is that is that 15 to 20 I'm sitting optimally in my weakness I'll just pull my strongest of 25 to 30 down to 15 to 20. then when I come back and decandal I'll pull all of those weak medium strong all of my branching down to 8 to 10 pairs okay so we decandal and we pluck 8 to 10 pairs of needles per shoot because the sugar star suppression with the removal of that hormone is what triggers all of those buds in the interior to push if you just decandal I just cut the shoot I leave the needles alone I'm just going to cut the shoot I don't want to overly stress the plant it's the worst thing you could do you would be better to not decandal than to just prune the candle you prune the candle you pluck the needles and that removal of the hormone at the tip plus the sugar starch deprivation is what causes the plant to go oh my gosh I don't have enough but I'm a strong plant because you fertilize correctly and you did this because I was healthy and showing you I had the energy to be able to support this kind of activity ah and that second flush explodes with all kinds of interior buds and wonderful proliferation of short needle short internode bifurcation at the tips that you pruned okay so there's a there's a whole mechanism here there's a whole grand mechanism here that you've got to have the pieces in play to maximize the operation and be even motivated or encouraged to think that your plant is ready for that operation and if it is not it will easily be one of the most stressful things that that plant experiences okay so you've got to be ready for this and again you see this hey listen every every four to five years a Japanese black pine a multi-flush pine has got to be left to regain its strength it cannot be annually year in year out decandle it's too stressful of an operation every four to five years you have got to allow the plant to rebuild a little bit to regain its energy to restock its coffers and then you come back and you rebalance the energy right so you let it restock you say when does a plant restock plant restocks over the fall season vascular productivity so I'm not going to go through and completely denude this tree I'm going to let this tree candle out I'm going to leave those candles on the tree over the summer I'm going to leave those candles on the tree over the fall and guess what I'm going to come back right now in the spring season okay now I understand Marianne you're in Northern California spring started probably two months ago can I do that now while they're still the the candles are still elongating you're one month away from pruning in warmer areas it would have been better if this had been done a little earlier this is the soonest that we can do it here and to show you this kind of operation I need to be able to put my hands on a tree but you could still do this now and come back decandle and pluck uh in another month and have a positive impact on your tree you absolutely could Douglas has a question and is Austrian black pines Pinus nigra fall in as far as the needle pluck or not to needle plot group uh so when we when we talk about nigra nigra can be and any pine and let me just be very very careful okay because I don't want to start saying creating confusion okay any pine when we are cleaning a pine up we're going to be taking away bottom growing needles right any pine when we're cleaning a pine up we're going to be cleaning up needles that cross over inside of the canopy okay when we're when we're when we're um you know manicuring it for exhibition we're going to be removing needles and and guiding that growth and cleaning out the needle density between uh the shoots Etc okay so it's it's not that we're not removing needles on other genres of pines we are not using needle plucking as the strength distribution methodology okay that is not how we treat a mugo pine a ponderosa pine a limber pine a white pine uh a Scott's pine a lodgepole pine we don't treat them that way okay so with Pinus nigra an outlier pine right we've got nigra we've got pinion we've got pinea or stone pine we've got jalapensis we have several outlier pines that periodically when the strength gets dysregulated we can build that tree up through fertilization and a hands-off approach the previous year fertilization over the spring interior they just produce buds they don't produce a second flush most of the time or at least nigra certainly does not okay but those buds become evenly distributed strength the following year we don't necessarily want to be needle plucking okay we can clean it up we can aesthetically manipulate it we can handle the needles in that capacity but we're not evenly plucking the needles to get energy distribution we're using the pruning methodology to stimulate back budding and reset the system of that tree's energy distribution okay that's where nigra exists and we've done that on nigra on the stream we've dissected nigra pretty pretty uh sufficiently and shown the product of those decandelings the motivations the indicators the timing and the results of that so check that out in the library it's there for you okay so I've just done I've just done this branch this branch and this branch okay and I would say this one is showing maybe even a slight degree less density because it has less ramification okay don't get too hung up don't get too hung up okay I've got let I've got fewer numbers of branches holding needles so this is slightly sparser if I'm trying to compare the two one to one ultimately the tips are holding the same needle quantity this is close it's at least in the wheelhouse but now what you're starting to see once we've done this lower branch is that the density here is significantly offset from the density up above it okay and so this is a bunch of metal this is very much bigger than what I've used to once I've used up to the top of it okay and so this is this is what we're showing here right here you can see the density here is significantly offset from the density up above it okay and so this is what you're seeing right now so I'm going to have two ends and So this is where we come back and we say, okay, I'm building. I'm building from the bottom. I'm creating a very even distribution of energy just as a matter of course. Again, old needles have to stay. Some new needles have to go. This becomes the mantra of needle plucking to distribute energy. Again, draw the line, okay? Needle plucking to alter aesthetics for cleanup, for exhibition, et cetera. That's one type of a needle handling, okay? Okay, manipulating needle mastering the decandling process for sugar starch suppression. That's another kind of needle handling, okay? Needle handling on multi-flush pines, reducing the strong down to the weakest significant branch, forming a basement of what keeps the tree moving forward. That is another type of needle handling and that is what we are engaging with here. All of them should equal a beautiful aesthetic by the time you're done. If you are doing something in bonsai that does not look good, that doesn't look beautiful, you're doing it wrong. Just assume there is no, ah, this is temporary so it can look like crap. That's not the way that high-level bonsai have ever been built in the world in the history of bonsai. That's not the way they've been built, okay? So even if we're doing something strictly for mechanical purposes, even if we're doing something strictly for a horticultural purpose, it always has an aesthetic outcome, all right? Any of those needle work that we just discussed should have a beautiful aesthetic result at the end of them. Ricky D is up next. So I'm not dissing the pot because it's amazing, but could you argue that it's slightly ornate for the tree or am I just being hypercritical? I think that there is an inherently trained aesthetic to traditional species and varietals of pine. Um. And when I put black pine onto this, I think the informality of, ah, of a Western pot in the, in the slight degree, because obviously Tom's pots, this is a Tom Benda pot, Tom's pots are of supreme craftsmanship. The, there is no doubt that in Japan if Japanese bonsai professionals could get Tom's pots, they want Tom's pots, right? And I've, I've had that conversation with Japanese bonsai professionals. Um. Because his, his craftsmanship is, is absolutely on par. With the best ceramicists in, in Japan. Okay? Um. But there is a, a Western aesthetic. There is a, a, an aesthetic that is different than the traditional model that occurs in Tom's pots. And I think that when you see it on a tree that has a, a fairly traditional execution, and again, am I going to take a black pine and am I going to make it some wild iteration of, of, of, ah, of a high mountain, ah, perspective in the, the Rockies or something? No, no. I put black pine on this. It creates context just in the loaded, ah, subject matter of Japanese black pine, Pinus thumbergii foliage. And it's something that I do try to respect both out of, ah, some degree of indoctrination, but, ah, I think also out of just this simple, sheer historical aesthetic that exists within Pinus thumbergii as a bonsai subject. And ultimately, if you want to go down the deeper rabbit hole, Ricky D, you're going to be talking, talking about, um, the growth habit. The growth habit determining what can be accomplished over the course of time and not trying to fight that growth habit, which Japanese black pine has a very rigid, formal growth habit, no matter which way you cut it. So, does the container necessarily match well with the tree? I, I think there are other containers that would be better. And I'm always on the lookout for a container for this tree because, again, I've had it since I was 12. Ah, it's been through a lot of iterations in my hands. And, um, now that we're finally at a point where we've figured out nutrition, we've figured out water pH, we've figured out, ah, the necessities in the Pacific Northwest of how to cultivate Japanese black pine with health and, and with success and with great biology and with, ah, even distribution and with all of the other things, ah, we're probably going to have the capacity to move this tree along very, very quickly now. Kyle's up next. When we are counting needles on our weaker areas, do we count just last year's needles or all that are on the twig up to the last branch bifurcation? All, all. You got to count all, okay? You got to save some of those old ones, but you got to count them all. Those are all contributing to the photo system, okay? And when you count them all, if you're, if you're going to save some old and remove some new, then it, naturally, we've got to take the old into consideration in that totality, okay? Now, again, I would only, I would encourage you, okay? There's ways to do bone size. Slow and there's ways to do bone size fast. Bone size becomes very fun when you can do it fast. If you train yourself to see density discrepancies visually instead of leaning on, you can start by giving yourself a reference through counting, right? How weak is this compared to this? Let me just see here. I got 1, 2, 10, 20, you know, like, ah, I'm going to pluck this down. Okay, I take that, I take that. Now, I've got this many. That's what it looks like. Okay, great. Now, I'm ready to run. That becomes your visual gauge. That area becomes your visual gauge. I'm no longer counting, you know, and I didn't start off by counting, but if I counted, I would be real close to the estimate that I gave you when we started. But now, I'm just kind of functioning off of what kind of density do I want each of these tips to have? And in the event of an area that has fewer branches than others, can I make that about face and that compensation for that irregular distribution of more or less branches to be able to draw even over time? Can I make that about face and that compensation for that irregular distribution of more or less branches to be able to draw even over the totality of the density of the tree when I step back and I look at it? If you can develop that skill, you become fast. This becomes something where you can knock out. We used to decandal, you know, between five or six pines, and I'm talking big, big, big, big pines, five or six pines a day per apprentice. We had to get through over 300 pines in less than three weeks, right? So, you would, the workshop, as a younger apprentice, between the workshop, you hated decandling season. There were pines that were in your butt crack when you went home at night. They were between your toes when you were trying to sleep. You were knee-deep in pine shoots, and I'm not kidding you. You'd walk into the workshop at Mr. Kimura's, and you would be knee-deep in pine shoots and needles. I mean, they were everywhere. It was like arachnophobia of pine needles. I mean, it was unfathomable, the foliar production that these trees were producing and we would cut it all off and pluck it down and move them back out, and it was just boom, another one, boom, another one, boom, another one. It's incessant, right? So, you had to be fast, but it gets fun. And as I'm working here, you know, this becomes a very, very routine activity to be performing on multi-flush pine. It becomes part of the fluency of the language. Fluency of the language of bonsai, right? Patricia's up next, says, hi, I've got a 75-year-old corkbark Japanese black pine. She thinks that you had styled it some years back. She's interested in knowing if she lets a candle grow, could she air layer it? And if she did this, or should she do this if she wants to get another corkbark black pine? It's very, very tough, if not impossible, and I would never say something's impossible. Very, very tough and highly, highly, highly unlikely that an air layer would occur on a pine in general. Ground layers, when the pine is in the ground with the vigor of an expansive root system, can certainly take. That's how most of the great clump-style pines are created in the growing field. They allow the node, right, that central whorl of branching. Zoom me out, Jesus. They allow that whorl, you know, that first node to branch out. They build all those branches off that first node, let the central trunk run. They remove the bark. They build the soil up around that. And they ground layer those pines while they're in the growing field. Takes them 12 to 18 months to produce roots. When they're in a bonsai container, it's almost impossible. Because of the energy system, that piece gets shed. Because of the dry behavior of pines and their relatively slow process of callus formation, and then what we would hope would be root formation, the timing doesn't work out and the tree sheds it before it ever turns. It turns into something. The most you would get is a callus formation. Very little chance of roots. And then when you take, and that's just a regular black pine, then when you take the cork bark mutation, that's particularly weak. Rarely, if ever, does it exist on its own roots. And it's very unlikely that it would produce its own roots. Absolutely. Now, if you want to talk about cork bark black pine in terms of strength balancing and distribution, okay, they are a different animal altogether. And we've tackled that. Which means we don't treat them identical to a pure-strain Japanese black pine. We obviously can decandle. We do so every other year. We obviously can needle pluck. We never needle pluck down to the same aggression that we would handle a pure-strain Japanese black pine. Tree Root Steve's up next. How early in the spring push can this work be done? Ideally, this work would be done before the candles begin to elongate, but after the threat of frost is gone. When you start to see the buds swell and just begin to wake up and move, that's your ideal time. I waited on this one because we plan our streams out for four to six months in advance. And I knew that I wanted to cover this subject matter because I think that some of the most important subject matter for Mirai students to know, to be good at bonsai, to manage these special trees that we're developing the capacity to maintain, to horticulturally keep healthy. How do we enter the refinement phase? I think the refinement phase and perpetuation of refinement, the continual perpetuation of a tree moving forward, despite it being in a state where it is relatively quote-unquote finished, that is the most underserved aspect of bonsai in North America. It's not very discussed. Not a lot of people are pushing the degree to which they can refine a tree. If you go to Japan, that's the focal point of an apprenticeship. There's very limited amounts of yamadori left in Japan. There's very few masters, Mr. Kimura is one of them, who is designing trees, redesigning trees, and radically transforming trees, which is obviously why I went and studied with Mr. Kimura. There aren't many people that are doing that kind of work. Most of the work that's happening in Japan is maintenance work, is show preparation, is the final aesthetic tweaking that occurs on the trees. And consequently, because we haven't had the capacity to get trees to that point with proficiency, because we haven't had the knowledge to pass those trees into the community and continue to move that tree forward, those trees oftentimes take a step backwards. That tells me we've got to build our skills, that we've got to come back and we've got to do the work to really close some of these gaps so that you all have the ability to continue moving your tree forward. Suffers a setback, what do we do, right? Suffers a setback, how do we regain it? Suffers a setback, do we lose it? It takes away the fear of, oh my gosh, if I don't decandal, it's never going to look the same. And then you decandal a tree that wasn't ready to be decandled and it's forever changed in the most negative of ways. If I can remove that fear from you and give you the capacity to let a tree regain its strength, know how you get it back into the system of even energy distribution, put it back into the cycle of refinement, then you have nothing to fear about letting your tree grow healthy, robust, and strong because you know how to get it back into the position that it's only going to move forward with success. That's a big skill to build. Kurt's up next. If I just repotted my Japanese red pine this spring, does this plucking change? If you just repotted a red pine, this is where we start to get into nuances. Is it an established tree, first and foremost? Was the repot routine in terms of you were simply at the climax of its longevity in that soil system, it had fully occupied the container, it's super dense, you took off the surface sides and bottom, you checked the sheen, it was in impeccable shape, you put it back into a container, really soundly anchored it, and the tree just started crushing right away like it never skipped a beat. We've got the field-grown Telperian pine, we did repot that into a bonsai container, and it's like I might as well have not touched it in terms of the way that it responded to the repot because the root system was impeccable, the biology was impeccable, the sheen was already impeccable, and the tree is using the same amount of water, went directly outside. We probably could fertilize it if we wanted to, although we did show a little bit of respect and reservation today when we were drenching. If that's the case, sure, you can pluck your red pine. Now, most of us know that's not the case. That's not really what's happening because typically when we're doing those repots, unless we're well-versed on that type of, what can I say, routine sounds like it's simple, but fundamental skills, fundamental handling of a tree is not simple. It's a discipline. So if the discipline of that action was executed well, then you could go about plucking this. If there were any, any missteps in that, you certainly do not want to pluck the needles on that tree right now. I would wait until I decandled and I would probably do it then. Do you lose the distribution of the energy coming up from the roots at that pivotal spring season where the tree is in a peak energy positive and you're plucking the needles as that energy is being pushed into the tree to get an even distribution? You do miss that. Is that worth missing? Absolutely, if the tree is not ready for that. You've got to let that, you have to let that energy distribution and let that energy system work itself out. So you can, you can decide, you can decide where you're at, how that went, how you feel about it. It will impair a tree. Keep this in mind. Trees do not rebuild their root system until the fall, period. I know everybody thinks, oh, but when you take it out, it's growing roots. Yeah, but you took it out. You stopped that. You stopped that from happening. The moment that you took that tree out of that container, you stopped that root growth from happening. So anything that was happening in the spring is piggybacking off of what happened in the fall and is just a byproduct of the momentum that was built up over the winter season. The transitions already started. And then and then you stop that. You stop those growing tips. When do they start growing again? Ultimately, you'll get a small, small little sprig of growth in the spring. Most of the growth that's going to take place in the regrowth of your root system happens in the fall. So we start plucking needles and then we decandle that thing. And all of a sudden the tree doesn't do as well. Some branches get shed. We get to the fall. It's got a got a disease issue. And we say, oh, my gosh, what happened? Disease hit my pine. No. We became the force of nature acting on that tree and we knocked the wind out of it. Right. So I would err on the side of caution more often than not. Jonathan's asking if we've discovered any North American native multiflesh pine. Yeah. So the Virginia pine, the pitch pine, Pinus rigida, loblolly pine, long needle pine. I don't know about the spruce pine in the southeastern United States. I don't know anybody. That has a lot of experience. But I would say a lot of those southeastern pines probably have that capacity in addition to the Virginia in the rigida. Are there any others? Let me think. I mean, the opinion is an outlier because it doesn't produce a second flush of mature foliage that fully matures in a single season. It produces a second flush of juvenile foliage, which is very, very different. Right. As does stone pine. As does the Aleppo pine. And that's why we call those outliers. We call the nigra an outlier because it's strong enough as a long needle, single flush pine to be decandled and give us a robust profusion of buds that have no problem picking up where they left off the following spring. And that does homogenize the energy system on the tree, different mechanisms of the outlier pine. But that's a few natives to think about that behave in the way that we're talking about with dependable second flushes of mature foliage that fully mature in a single season. David's up next and says, if my candles are already six to eight inches long, should I still needle pluck now or did I wait too long? Well, and this is not waiting too long. If I'm just exposing you to this opportunity while the tree has stored energy. Because again, once a tree comes out of the fall winter, you're at peak stored energy on that tree. That is energy positive deluxe. That's the most energy that tree is going to have until you get to the fall of this year. Because that tree spins. You think about this. Make no mistake, fall is the first season of growth, not spring. Fall is the first season of growth because everything that happens in the fall in terms of vascular productivity, your trunk swells to handle more water transport to support the foliar potential that was established over the season. You're branching swells to support more water load. Your vacuoles and your cells are stocked full of sugars and starches that both give winter hardiness, but more than anything, the quantity of stored sugar and starch is what determines the foliar mass that occurs next year. And the root system expands to be able to take in the water of the potential energy that was stored in the system that creates the foliar mass next year. Everything about this spring was created last fall. So coming out of the fall where all of that is stocked up, which continues over the winter period, trees continue to photosynthesize. And store resources over winter all the way until January 15th ish. Your trees are gaining energy. OK, so when we start to spin that energy, you're in the spring at this energy positive. When the tree spins that energy, it's pushing it into driven by hormones and transpiration, the areas that are using and growing the most. OK, and so if we can be doing this once we get past the risk of frost, which we need those sugars and starches in place to protect the tree from frost, and by doing this, the tree freaks out and evacuates its sugars and starches. So we say, listen, you can't can't put this outside and have it freeze if you do this right. But if we get past that point in the spring before it spins its energy, if we do this, we'll get a more even distribution of spent energy across the tree and the weaker areas get stronger. OK, if we get to the point where the tree has spent 50 percent of its energy, if it's spent 75 percent of its energy, my candles already six inches long. Should I do this? The benefit to the operation is not nearly as positive. And I would say, hey, look, you're a month away from the candling. Go ahead and wait. Right. But for us in the Pacific Northwest, this tree just came out of the greenhouse last week. We had freezing temperatures like 10 days ago. Right. And we also hit 95 days ago. Like, tell me about challenging. And that's why we're doing this now, because we're just now getting that expenditure of energy. Will we get enough over the next month to decandle? Yeah, because this tree hasn't been decandled in two years. Right. Are the black pines that have been decandled annually for the past three years going to have enough energy with with the winter being this long spring, being short, cold and wet and not having a real significant push of heat until last week, there's going to be more than a dozen black pine that don't get decandled this year. You know, so I'm showing you this technique as a metaphorical handling and distribution of energy of a pine that was put out of that cycle of the vortex and it didn't lose its shape. And I'm bringing it back in at a point where the tree is investing all of that stored energy and spending it on that for your mess. OK, that is the point. So that might happen in L.A. for somebody in February or in Northern California for somebody in March or in you know, Dallas, Texas, for somebody in in, you know, early April. Right. Just depends on where you're at when this whole moment begins. But I'm just saying that you can really maximize the ultimate execution of the technique to the benefit of your tree. Kim says, so what I'm hearing is that we are needle plucking now to distribute hormones and give time for that shift to happen. Then we candle prune and needle pluck down to eight to ten pairs. OK, so we are candle or excuse me. We are needle plucking now to be distributing the needle mass evenly so that every part of the tree is transpiring at the same rate. We are not obstructing necessarily. Yes, the the the the hormones are moderately held in the older needles. More than that, it's the nutritional distribution and balance that the older needles create value in. The hormones really come into play when we candle and we remove the tip and we remove the hormones and we remove the oxen and the tree freaks out and says, oh, my gosh, I've got to replace my navigation system. And we say, oh, yeah, you think that's bad. I'm going to pluck all your needles off so that you have to use every single ounce of energy that you have stored up to replace the every single potential piece of energy producing system that exists as a dormant, adventitious. But OK, but it's the removal of the hormone that causes the plant to freak out and grow again through the pruning of that tip. OK, the plucking of the needles is is is a distribution of photosynthetic productivity and a distribution of transpirational mass. Making sure that the transpirational mass is equal means the same water, nutrition and distribution of hormone is going to occur. But the more major thing is that the transpiration is evenly distributed. Pruning of the candle is to reduce and completely zero out the hormonal suppression so that every piece has the same transpirational mass. It has no hormonal control and the plant has to reestablish that hierarchy through that second flush. Roberto is up next. He says, Hi, Ryan. To reduce the vigor of an apical branch, is it better to reduce the candle or remove some needles? Thanks. Never. So I'm just going to tell you this right now because there's like so many different pieces of information out there. And this was the most overwhelming thing for me. I used to go down to Muranakas in Napomo when I went to school at San Luis Obispo. And there's probably some people that have some Muranaka pines in the chat. If so, you should give a shout out to George Muranaka because he and his brother were probably, you know, largely responsible for black pine availability on the West Coast in California. But I would I would go down there and I would get these pines and I would bring them back and I would read Boneside today. And somebody's somebody's pinching their candles down by half. Somebody's pruning, you know, the the the weakest shoots first and then the strong and then the medium and then the strong every seven to 10 days. Listen, when I went to Japan, Mr. Kamura, I was like, oh, should we be breaking the candles off in the spring? And he's like, don't touch that. That's that's exactly how you screw this whole thing up. And I was like, oh, OK, should we be pruning the strongest first and then waiting 10 days and pruning the medium and then waiting 10 days and pruning the weakest? And he's like, what are you talking about? You know, like where did you get that? And I was like, here's this magazine. And he's like, this is all garbage. Right. This is information that somebody some, you know, professional over here, you know, magazine's got to sell. Here's a professional providing information. Magazine publish it. They're not vetting it. They don't know if that's correct. He's like, this is too much. This is how you zero out the system. This is how you distribute energy. This is how you shoot, select a needle pluck. This is how you handle multi flush pine. Keeping it simple is the best possible solution. The more complex it gets, the lower the success rate and the more limited duplicating that response becomes. OK. Strong, medium and weak. Prune them all at once when we get to early summer. OK. Pluck all the needles to an even distribution when it's in its growing phase, when we're talking, right, just sustaining itself. Basement of 10 to 12. Ideally, we want all branches to be 15 to 20. We get to that decandling, cut everything 8 to 10. Boom. Done. Easy. Right. And so, no, don't break the candle. If you break the candle now, if I damaged any of these candles now, this this tree will produce a juvenile flush of growth. It'll produce a juvenile flush of growth. It's the worst type of growth, worst quality of growth, least manageable growth that we could get on a multi flush pine. You don't want that. Dalton's up next in a multi flush like a lob lolly that has three needles per cluster that are extremely long, how many needles should we pluck back to or how should we go about finding the minimum number of needles to pluck back to per shoot? Yeah. And I still I still would go eight to 10 trios. Right. As opposed to eight to 10 pairs, eight to 10 trios. It's a solid number. It's a decent needle mass. And when you get into the position of lob lolly, the thing that you that everybody needs to understand about these operations, you say those needles are all long. Yeah, those needles are long when it hasn't been treated in a multi flush capacity. But guess what? Japanese black pine needles, when it hasn't been decandled and isn't in the refinement cycle, are also very long. Right. They're very big. They're very long. They're very robust. When you have a raw hulking out tree that hasn't been contained or the energy hasn't been suppressed to make it more controllable so that it can achieve these aesthetic needs, then it's the same thing as a lob lolly or any other type of pine. Right. So when you first do it, you want to be you want to be distributing the energy. You want to be, first of all, styling the tree, having it wired, which starts the hormonal process. That's the primary setting of structure that catalyzes everything. You cannot be decandling and needle plucking a pine that is not styled. This tree is styled. These branches are laid out. I have hormonal distribution because of that branch layout. OK, but but I wouldn't don't fixate too much. Lob lolly will produce just as small and tight of a needle as Japanese black pine will once you get it into the process and you start distributing the energy, controlling the energy and manipulating the tree towards that aesthetic goal, which is representation of nature and miniature, smaller needle, smaller, shorter inner node and bifurcation. Ricky D, so I know you've always said the characteristics of a tree are in the foliage, but are there any variations you have found from a standard black pine to a grafted black pine on pondo, does the root coarseness of the pondo compared to the black pine have any relevance? Or is it still just foliage based? That's a really good question. So the the the the caveat to all grafting and I'm going to I'm going to say this across the board uniformly, OK, if you are taking a fire hose. And you are necking trying to apply. So let me let me let me back into this a little bit of a different way. OK, if you have a. If you have a garden hose. Right. I've got a garden hose and I want to put a fire hose into it. OK, the garden hose is never going to give the fire hose enough water to support the flow of the fire hose. OK, but if I have a fire hose and I put a garden hose into it, the the fire hose is always going to have the capacity to support the flow of the garden hose. OK, so when you think ponderosa pine is coarse, ponderosa pine is a fire hose. Japanese black pine is a garden hose. So that compatibility exists. But if I trade to take the fire hose of ponderosa pine as a needle and put it on the garden hose of black pine. I could never support the water distribution. So when you compare the response of a ponderosa grafted with black pine to the response of a black pine on black pine. Ponderosa on black pine is actually more vigorous. Because it's a fire hose feeding a garden hose as opposed to a garden hose feeding a garden hose. Right. And there's some hormone compatibility. There's some really interesting things that can happen when you graft. Sometimes when you graft with black pine on ponderosa, ponderosa will back bud profusely with ponderosa behind that graft. Sometimes when you graft with black pine and it fails, it will back bud profusely and you don't need the graft anymore. But more often than not, black pine on ponderosa has a 50 50 success rate. You increase it by styling the tree. You can get up to a 70 80 percent success rate. No higher. Right. At least from what I've seen and who I've talked to across the board. And we've grafted literally hundreds of ponderosa pine in every state. But we find that they are far more vigorous. Now, are they coarser? No, because a black pine can only be a garden hose. It can't become a fire hose. And from that perspective, you do really have a sustainable model in an energy system that over the course of time will last in perpetuity. I've had grafted ponderosa pines that have been in Florida for eight years. I've had grafted ponderosa pines with black pine that have been in L.A. for seven years. Right. Three years is the cutoff where a tree that's going to atrophy because of sugar starch deprivation and eight and seven years, you know, there this is a bulletproof process at this point in time, because again, what allows a plant to exist in any region is the structure of its needle, period. How much can it produce at a high metabolic rate stimulated or a low metabolic rate, which is suppressed by cold or stimulated by heat? That's what depends. That's what dictates where a tree can exist and grow. Showing Stig has a question, when you say that every four to five years we should skip a year of decandling, how does that timing of the cycle align with the cycle of repotting every six years or so? Ah, I've never functioned with enough of a calendared mechanical system to ever really think about it from that perspective. If a plant needs repotting, I'll repot it. If after I repot it, it doesn't show the kind of vigor to decandle, then I just don't decandle because again, I understand the energy system and I'm not fearful of losing whatever progress I could potentially be fearful of losing by not continuing the refinement action. So and if I repot and the tree continues to thrive, I will decandle. If the tree shows weakening and and I haven't repotted, I won't decandle and I won't repot. So it I've never like calc it out like that. Like, oh, my gosh, this is going to disrupt my, you know, finite plan that I've penciled into my calendar. It's it's I've never had that kind of process to bonsai. But if you if you just think about it and everything went exactly according to plan, then technically if you if you give a tree a break in the fifth year and it's hulking out with strength starting the sixth year and you repot it, there's a strong chance you would still decandle it in the sixth year because of the stored energy that was accumulated from letting it sit fallow. And actually, the repotting process might give you a much more controlled second flush regardless. Right. So I could see that working out. That certainly for ponderosa pine is part of the strategy of styling a ponderosa pine once the back buds are driven to needle count and then repotting at the following year when you're trying to get shorter needles. And you put it into a bonsai container for the first time, which inherently reduces the strength of a ponderosa pine and shortens the needles that first year. Right. That's that's definitely a strategy that we utilize where repotting is a disempowering action to take a fire hose species like ponderosa and make it a little bit more garden hose in behavior to get those shorter needles. That's that has been done. Japanese black pine. I have not calendared it out or strategize to that level. Bentley has a question. Does the scope of work also apply to multi flush pines in the field? No, no, this has absolutely. Because here's the thing. And this is where that the the the crux of the of the of the app that we've been redesigning was how in its in its advanced form, how in its advanced form does it delineate between primary, secondary and tertiary? Tertiary actions, right? Primary, secondary or excuse me, developmental primary, secondary or tertiary refinement actions? How does how does it how does it delineate your behavior? Because there is a definitive split that you all need to draw that I've been trying to get you like a guillotine to drop on your knowledge in your head where you separate refinement activities, where you separate tertiary activities from primary development. Okay. And when you talk about growing in the field, you are not refining a tree. That is not what you're doing in the field. That is not possible. You do not have control of the energy system. The Bonsai container suppresses the energy system. It gives you control by weakening the tree inherently. You constrict its growth. You also dope the tree up with a little bit more toxicity than we probably have all been aware of to date, and consequently, the tree does things that it would not normally do if not in that circumstance. In condition. And that's what we've become accustomed to through Bonsai. We just didn't know it. Okay. So when you're in the field, that's not the case. The tree is hulking out. It's raging with energy to try and refine a tree in the field is like. It would be like wiping your nose before you blow it. You know what I'm saying? Like you haven't done you haven't done the work yet. And you're trying to get the finished product. It would be like cleaning up a room before you paint it. You know, it's like. You got to paint it and then you and then you kind of put it all back into place. So the the the response to needle plucking something at this time of year in the field would be would be pretty ludicrous. Okay. And to decandling a tree in the field would also be pretty ludicrous because you're not getting the control that you need. You're not going to get the shorter inner nodes and and the shorter needles in the field. The purpose of decandling is a refinement activity. Refinement activities, tertiary activities are something that take place under the energy constraints of the bonsai container. And that's where really where you have to draw the line. Milwaukee, the way that Chris and Gary outlined their handling of pines in the field at Telperian. That is a late summer, early fall manipulation of sugar and starches to be able to elicit the kind of response in the field that's necessary. And you can only get a tree in the field to do so much before you've got to dig it out and you've got to start the process of controlling its strength via the containerized environment. That's up next, if you pull needles down to six to eight at candle cutting, candle cutting, the structure is opened up considerably. Would you consider detail wiring at this time? Or do you consider that to be too stressful? So I would never take it down to six to eight. I would take it eight to ten, right? Six pairs per shoot is too much. It's too much. There are Japanese bonsai professionals that used to do that. It was not sustainable. It was too it was too sparse. And you might say, dude, what are you talking about? The difference between six and eight is four needles. Trust me, when a tree is plucked to that degree, four needles matters. It matters big time. So I would never take it down to six when I take it down to eight. Is it a good time? It's a good time to detail wire if you have a pine. And I was actually I'm glad that you brought this up because the wire on this pine is currently biting in fairly significantly. Right. And you say, oh, my gosh, I've got to get it off. But I've got all of these candles that are elongating. And I already said, listen, if I damage the tips of this right now, I'm going to get a juvenile flush of growth, the worst quality of growth that I could ever get out of a multi flush pine if I if I damage these right now. Is it the time to be wiring? Not right now. OK. But but the wires biting in, isn't that an issue? No, because vascular productivity will only occur after the new growth hardens off and it'll be a minor amount of vascular productivity, the next major amount of vascular productivity is going to take place over the course of the fall, starting in late August, early September. OK, so I'm not really worried that the wires biting in now. And because I don't want to damage the candles, I'm not going to be doing any sort of detail wiring at this point in time, nor am I going to be unwiring. But when I come back to that decandling and I now I'm down to eight to ten pairs per tip and I fully decandled every single shoot on the tree and it's a wide open system, I absolutely will be unwiring and rewiring. OK, here's the difference, though. This is a tree that has been in refinement for a long time. Yes, it's gained energy. Yes, it it wasn't decandled for the past two years. Does that mean it's a tree not in refinement? No, it doesn't. It means it's a tree that was in refinement that we gave a little break, regain the energy, and now we're putting it back in refinement through this action right here. Because we're distributing energy. Distribution of energy is a refinement activity. OK, it's not a developmental activity to distribute energy and development. We don't care if there's lopsided distribution of energy. We want developmental goals, thickening, elongation, root rebuilding, healing, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. OK, so. When I when I have a tree that has been in this state for several years, it's not a shock to the tree to wire it out when I decandle because the energy has already been distributed. The health of the tree is in a state that would allow me to decandle. And that's a very fruitful activity. But if you're decandling a multi flush pine for the first time, if you're taking a field grown tree, you're cutting big, huge candles off. You've got needles at the tip and not much back in here. And you want to wire and crush that thing out and structurally style it and whatnot. You will see ultimate failure. You will see ultimate failure because the tree is not ready for that lopsided action. Structural wiring occurs on a tree when it is in peak energy positive, not when it has spent all of its energy and then we come in and we cut it all off. Yet again, spring prior to the flush of growth or fall prior to the onset of vascular tissue is when we would be initially styling raw black pine for the first time. We lay all of that out. We have hormones, we get backbiting, we get all of these things. And then we would be decandling either if we did it in the spring, looking to decandle. In June, or if we did this work in the early fall because we didn't decandle that tree up to that point in time, we would be looking to the following June to do that decandling operation. That would be the initial styling and how we would take that on field grown tail period pine. We did it on the stream. January was when we started that structural work. OK, so it all it all kind of falls in line. And this is why I'm saying, hey, if I can if I can draw a guillotine division of knowledge in your brains as a bonsai practitioners between primary, secondary and tertiary work, so much of what people still confuse themselves with as far as timing, strategy, knowledge would be almost immediately reconciled because now you understand, oh, needle plucking, this is this is something that I'm doing to distribute energy in order to do that. I've got to have a contained energy system. This is a refinement activity. Decandling is something I do to get shorter needle, shorter internodes, that also is a is a refinement activity. I have to have strength containment. So I've got to have the roots. So I've got to have the structure wired. So I've got to have the branches built. You know, it starts to become like this trickle down culmination of of information that you can tease out. Should I be doing this? Why or why not? How's up next, I'm working on my black pine right now, and it's hard to radially radially pluck needles from the density to choose from. Do I just give it my best spiral plucking or what do I do? So, again, you're functioning with aesthetics. First needles that you're going to be taking off are the unsightly bottom growing needles, right? Second needles that you're going to be taking off are the needles that are growing between the clusters that are causing that you don't want that crossing of needles. You want to organize those needles, right? I take off my bottoms, I take off the pieces between and then I start to take off any pieces that look unsightly after that that starts to create this. Look at how organized. Everything is starting to get on this. That's that's the finished product of it. OK, so in that process, the thing that you've got to be careful of. And I talk with this with students about this a lot. I talk about this on the stream a little bit. You've got to be careful of the runaway train. OK, the momentum that starts to build when you pluck a few needles and it starts to look really good and you're like, oh, my gosh, that looks good. I'm going to pluck a little more and pluck a little more, pluck a little more. And then you start getting into the Edward Scissorhands like I did. That first black pine that Mr. Cormier gave me where I was just like. You know, an aesthetics went out the window. A notion of what was what I was supposed to be doing went out the window. I was just plucking needles just because I thought that's what I was supposed to do in it. And it totally cremated that tree. Right. So you need to you need to be able to give yourself a little bit of checks and balances, which is why you see me step back periodically. Even as a bonsai professional, the the the idea of being a bonsai professional is not that. That I can't screw up. It's that I know to be checking myself and I know when the momentum I know that sensation, I know the byproduct when that momentum starts to build. Being a professional, you step away for a minute, you check yourself, you recalibrate and then you come back to the tree. That's that's what being a professional is. I could get the runaway train syndrome just as easily as anybody else. Kyle's got a question, is it a good time to wire when we pluck needles for detail or structural? So I answered this, but I'm going to say again, now is not the time. If we were doing this in the spring prior to the candles emerging, right, which again, this tree just started growing because we've had an abnormal spring, this is a metaphor for how to handle spring strength distribution on a multi flush pine that has become dysregulated by taking it out of the consistent sort of vortex and phase development to regain energy and regain its root mass. But if you were doing it in the spring, absolutely prior to the elongation of the candles. Once the candles start elongating, my candles are elongating. I'm not I'm not fearing doing this distribution. It's not going to hurt the tree because they haven't elongated so much that the trees spent all of its energy. I still have a lot of energy to push into the weaker areas of the tree by evenly distributing the needle mass and really sort of guiding that distribution and consequently through distributing transpiration. I distribute the stored sugars and starches that are moving from the root system into the foliar mass. OK, but if you're at a point where the tree has already spent a lot of its resources and you've got big massive candles, not only should you not be wiring for fear of damaging them and inciting juvenile growth, you also shouldn't be needle plucking because the energy has already been spent and it's not going to do much. Just wait till, wait till you decandle. Roy's up next. I've got two Pinus strobis radiata. They've got a good foliage mass, but I don't get any back butting. If I needle pluck them, will I have a bigger chance of back butting? OK, so this is only a multi flush pine technique. Pinus strobis is a long needle, single flush pine technique. The way that you get back butting on Pinus strobis is you wire it out. OK, again, auxin, cytokinin, cytokinin. When you lay that auxin tip down, cytokinin comes flushing in. That's what stimulates back butting. And then as we start to get more back butting, we continue to let that tip grow. We can cut it back to those back buds after they've become 50 percent of the needle mass at the tip, that's when we can cut that tip off. Slower process with long needle, single flush pine to get the back butting, to develop the back butting into a strong enough piece. One thing we can do to speed it up when we lay it down, we get the back butting, the back butting achieves needle count, we can pinch that tip as it's elongating in the spring because we know it's going to be sacrificial. And by pinching it, we allocate more energy to the buds that have already turned to needle count. But that's two or three years down the road of laying that tree out and starting that structural design process. You got to get the back buds this year. You got to drive them to needle count next year. And then you've got to transition the strength from the tip to the interior the following year to be able to eventually cut that off four years from now. That's your process on long needle, single flush pine, low water mobility. Very, very slow energy redistribution. So you've got to build to that. Here's the shocking thing. In all actuality, it's not slower than a multi flush pine. It just looks different. It just the process of it looks different. You can get to the exact same state of development on a multi flush pine as you can on a long needle, single flush pine. But the process looks a little different. Treebird Steve. Can you give a minimum time before and after repotting during which a multi flush pine should not be needle plucked or is that too simplistic? It's too simplistic. Yeah, it's way too simplistic because repotting is not repotting is not a universal black and white thing repotting is a very gray thing. You know, how did the tree how is the tree first repotting, second repotting, third repotting, a healthy tree, established root system, healthy tree. Really poor root system that we had to fix something on, you know, not as healthy of a tree repotted, got really healthy. What do we do? Not as healthy of a tree repotted. Did all right, but it's probably going to take another year or two before we can go about the process of decandling, you know, not not a very healthy tree repotted. We've got three to five years to rebuild the energy system on the tree because things were just that bad and we've really got to focus on balance of water and oxygen more than anything else. You know, the the the the circumstances of the tree repotting. The circumstances of repotting are are the number one. I would say the number one variable in bonsai. More than you can absolutely dictate and predict the behavior of the foyer mass, right, if it's healthy, you can absolutely you can you can depend on that's that's that's what you call a reliable fundamental technique, reliable fundamental technique. I do this when a tree is healthy and I get this as a result, OK, if you can depend on that, if you can duplicate that time in time out, that's a dependable technique, repotting. You can't I I can't guarantee that. I can't guarantee that on strong, healthy tree that has absolutely no reason to suffer. Sometimes you repot those trees and those are the trees that take the longest to recover. I don't know why. Maybe I missed chopstick. Maybe I folded some of the roots underneath themselves and they atrophied and rotted and the tree had to compartmentalize. And replenish itself. Maybe I broke a root, maybe I severed a root. Maybe the tree wasn't as strong as I thought to begin with. Maybe something happened prior to the repot that that led to the post repot response, right, like this this whole the whole notion of can we do this after a repot is like, well, that is is so dependent, so, so, so dependent on all of the other stuff. OK, so now I'm here now. I'm going to show you guys a technique, again, fundamental, fundamental technique. Nobody nobody talks about this. And one of the biggest pet peeves I have is people go through all of this work and time and effort to make a tree and then they don't frickin clean the thing up, you know, it's like, why do we do this? If we're going to leave all the needles hanging in here and make and have this look really poor. Now, I worked from the bottom up, which a lot of people would say, well, that's kind of asinine because then you just dropped all the trees back on the area that you just worked. You're not wrong, except for I had to calibrate and typically my lowest branch is going to be my weakest branch. And I have to start there to calibrate for the stronger areas being pulled back to the weaker areas. OK, but when you get to the bottom of this, always, always or when you get to the top of this, always coming back and just hitting the base, assuming there's no structural flaws, assuming there's no big bends, assuming there's no wedge cuts, assuming there's no rebar holding that just hitting the bottom of an area of the structural branch. Right. I'm just right here and I'm just giving it a little bump and it sheds some of those needles. I'll come over here. I'll give this a bump and that kind of shakes them loose. Now, with a pine, I take my tweezers and I just come up through this. I come up with the needles and I'm not going to bump the branches. But even if I didn't have any needles hanging in here, this is how for a show you come back in here. And I showed this on the Ponderosa Pine when we prepared it for the Pacific Bonsai Expo. Yes, it did win the Pacific Bonsai Expo. Don't worry about that. No problem. OK. OK, well, when we when we're doing this, this is just reorienting everything that's happening here so that all of those needles come back to that position that we were trying to achieve. And we can tweak and we can kind of adjust and we can replace things. But this is how we want to get rid of all of those needles that are caught in. And you occasionally see some needles that through the bumping process are coming free and I can kind of see them sitting because I've organized everything. I can see the needles that are sitting crosswise in the canopy. This interior piece here, the weakest of them all, probably a branch that will go. We didn't even pluck that one. That one was really, really tough. And I'm not referencing that because that's a hopelessly weak branch that's on the interior there. It's not photosynthetically capable of sustaining itself. OK, but I'm just going to come through here and I'm just going to go ahead and kind of. Pump up and kind of clean up and reorganize all of these little needles here so that I get that even distribution. These ones over here I was a lot cleaner with because I was already over the top. OK, something like that, then I come back in, come back in and I get rid of some of these needles on the interior, I'll go through the entire container. OK, I'm going to show you one more thing here just because I'm on I'm on a roll in terms of radical bones, I fundamentals tonight. Get your tweezers. You should be picking up eight to ten pairs of needles before you dump them out. If your tweezers work literally looks like picking up one needle at a time, this is going to take you forever. OK, needles can stack on your tweezer if you're in here. And the less that you open your tweezer and the more that you keep it moving into all of these needles, it allows you to pick up a tremendous number of needles at the same time. And it makes the job very, very quick. And Mr. Camaro would get upset if we had any less than ten needles in our tweezers when we dumped them. OK, so just making you aware if you're not aware. A lot of people are like, oh, my God, that's going to take forever. So they just put this back outside. You don't want these needles in your container. You don't want these. Listen, this isn't the native environment. This isn't the forest floor where decomposing humates stimulate all kinds of positive things. Old needles inside of your bonsai container carry all the shit that you don't want in that container. That's the tree's way of expelling waste. So you don't want to leave it in there. Learning how to master your tweezers is one of the ways that you can speed up that speed makes bonsai fun. OK, menial poor parts of bonsai. The more proficient and capable you get, the less you have to think about doing it. It becomes a fluent action and you're on to the next thing of designing a tree, repotting a tree and doing the fun stuff. Duncan's up next, if a branch looks weak and on its way out, can it be revived by better placement, for example, putting it in a vertical position? Or are we better off leaving it alone and hoping that it recovers? If a branch is weak and on its way out, I guess, you know, the answer to that would have to come from why is it weak? Is it weak because it wasn't oriented towards the sun? Is it weak because it's under another branch? Is it weak because the design wasn't sustainable? Is it weak because it was broken or damaged? Because each of those has a different solution. Now, typically, when a branch is weak and that's why I said, let me just kind of focus on this here. Can I have this branch right in here? Lonnie, can you kind of show that branch right there? Can you pull back just a little bit? Good. OK, so here's my branch here. Let me just pull this there. OK, I've got this in here. Notice I've got this big, healthy, robust branch up here. I've got this tiny little photosynthetically inefficient, non-sustainable branch on the interior, which happens this is part of, you know, this was efficient at one time. Now it is not because this has continued to grow. OK, if I want this, if this is an important branch, I've got to remove something up here. That's how I would get energy back into the system. And if I want this to be strong, I've got to reduce the needle mass of the stronger areas to be equivalent or close to that. Now, that may be and I would assume that is fewer than 10 to 12 pairs per tip. So I can't even bring this down to that strength discrepancy to even those out right now. But I certainly could close the gap if I wanted to. But this is weak because it's not sustainable existing underneath these. So no matter what I did, even if I wired this straight up, even if I wired it straight down, that's not going to help things. I would actually have to part the seas, give that tremendous sun exposure and alter the design entirely to facilitate that branch. OK, so you've got to really figure out, is that a sustainable moment? Now, I will I will I will tell you this is a very important branch right here. This piece right here is getting very big. Have I considered taking this entire thing off? Absolutely. Look at that. Look at the interior there. That would certainly empower that branch to exist. OK, maybe that happens when we decandle. Maybe it doesn't. I've been thinking about it for a little while. It's not a structurally flawed branch. This is a very good branch. But it's become a very big branch that's occupying over the top of these pieces that I think are very important in the defining branch, which is dropping down in here. So I want to be very considerate of that. And that might be a design change that we make. Andrew's up next is Pinus ceratina pond pine, a multiflesh pine. I have one that I collected as a seedling in the New Jersey Pine Barrens. I thought it was a pitch pine at the time, but the candles look different. Hmm. Pond Pines, the kind of common name it's on the East Coast, it looks like. Yeah, I've never I've never, never heard of it. I know that the New Jersey Pine Barrens are filled with interesting stuff, though. I've never been there, but it is a place I would like to go. There's actually an ancient tree ring researcher, I believe, in New Jersey or New York. And she studies ancient trees that are excessively slender. Try to wrap your mind around that. She's looking for the oldest trees that have never thickened. And she's found thousand year old trees that are like like 12 inches in diameter. Really, really interesting stuff. And the New Jersey Pine Barrens is one of the places that she actually does some of that research. So but I don't know, I'm not familiar with that species of pine. How would you go about deducing whether a tree can produce a second flush or not? Right. That's a really important. Question to ask yourself. And it comes down to looking at the native shape of the branches. Do they form 90 degree right angles as they get older and older and older? Do they form 90 degree right angles towards their tip? This would insinuate or suggest that there may be some capacity for that redirection of growth that comes from the loss of new growth and a second flush. There may be some insinuation there. I'm not saying that's the end all be all, but that might be one where you look at and you say, I see you, I see that potential in you. That's interesting that you do that. Douglas is next. Last year, I had a couple of Japanese black pines that I decandled. They produced juvenile foliage. What might have caused this? I had not pinched the candles or done anything weird. Timing issue, maybe. I don't know. Aaron, Aaron Packard at the Pacific Bonsai Museum has the really large emulating Japanese black pines. Stunning. Maybe the best Japanese black pine in North America. Unbelievable tree. Unbelievable tree. And because the tree is so large, if he decandles that tree, even in the first week of June, he'll never get the needle length he needs out of that tree. And so I think he decandles that tree the third or fourth week of May. And I would say that Aaron is right on the cusp of decandling early enough that if he missed it by even a few days, he could go from getting a second flush that's mature to getting a second flush that's juvenile. And that's literally, you know, if I damaged any of these candles, I would get a juvenile second flush at that site and location tonight. Right. So I'm guessing it's a timing issue. The only other thing that I could think is it was too traumatic of a transition from a pine that was raw and undeveloped and you went in and you cut it and decandled it. And and it freaked out or you I'll give you one more. You may have cut past you may have cut past the candle. Right. We do need to leave that few millimeters so that the adventitious buds that form that mature second flush come out. If you cut past that into the woody tissue, it'll produce juvenile buds between the needle crotches oftentimes in a really aggressive, young, non-refined Japanese black pine when you decandle in that way. So that that it could be any one of those. Since we're talking about it, what do the juvenile foliage what does it look like? Yeah, it's tough to describe it. It is a green, fleshy stem that has pointed leaflets like a juvenile piece of juniper foliage. And in that in that spiky leaflet, there's a little bud that forms two needles. But you have this elongated inner node. You have this awkward juvenile primordial leaf and then you've got these spindly needle pairs that come out of it that are really unsightly. It's very long. It's very out of scale and it's very unattractive. Roberto asks in a Japanese black pine to try to contain the length of new needles, is it better to suspend fertilization? Now and then resume it again later? No, quite the opposite in order to well, so if you're going to be decandling, the purpose of decandling shorter needles, shorter inner nodes and bifurcation ramification at the tip where there was one shoot, you will end up with two after shoot selection in the fall. OK. If you're decandling, you need to be fertilizing now and you need to be stopping your last application of fertilizer. OK, listen, first week of May, y'all. Do you think that we didn't plan this? This is the last week that you can fertilize your pines if you're decandling the first week of June. Four weeks after your fertilizer application is when you should be planning to decandle and you're not going to fertilize that pine until the second flush fully matures and we get to the first of September in the northern hemisphere. Right. This is your last fertilizer application this week. If you're decandling, in the beginning of June for most of the northern hemisphere, that's what we're doing. OK, so if you're trying to not decandle your multi flush pine, which there are merits to not decandling multi flush pine, you say, listen, the first flush, the needles are more beautiful. The growth is softer and more natural looking. It is a far more presentable foliar mass, but you do have to control the needle length. You would treat it like a long needle, single flush pine and refinement. You'd be holding off on fertilization from the very beginning of spring. All the way up until when the third year needles drop, which for Japanese black pine, third year needles are probably going to drop in the mid to late summer, much like ponderosa pine. So you would have a very yellow tree. It would be very anemic, but you can get a very beautiful flush of needles that are quite small and aren't decandled on a multi flush pine. If you do control fertilization, I've seen it done, I've done it myself. But it's a challenge. That is when we get real deep in the horticulture of bonsai right there. Hubert Steve's asking if you know of any European pines that are a true multi flush pine. I. We've got the outliers in the Mediterranean region. There's an outlier in terms of the Turkish pine, which behaves like nigra. Aleppo, get over there, Aleppo's kind of an outlier. Aleppo, Halapensis is Pinea. It's an outlier, like pinyon. They behave exactly like pinyon pine. Not that comes to mind. No, nothing comes to mind. And, you know, when you think about what makes a multi flush pine, there's two things. Response to fire. Or coastal tropical conditions. Right. Japanese black pine is a coastal pine in the south of Japan that exists in a more tropical, highly moderate climate with very little to no cold. Japanese red pine is a foothill pine. Not a high elevation pine, a foothill pine. And that's where you start to see like Rigida and Virginiana having the same capacity as like a red pine. And red pine also responds to fire in a similar way. And that's where that works itself out. So when I look at loblolly, when I look at long needle pine, when I look at some of these southeastern natives that exist along the coast, that exist in more tropical, subtropical regions, that's where you're probably going to find pines that are adapted to regeneration after, you know, hurricane conditions or have a prolonged growing season where their metabolic capacity, transpirational rate, et cetera, not not geared towards high alpine and not geared towards aridity, they're geared towards coastal conditions and prolonged growing conditions give you the capacity to have that multi flush characteristic. Kind of on topic now, Dylan thought was off topic when he asked a few opinion, he has a few opinion pines that are in refinement thinking about bringing them to the forum. So please do that. I'm curious what Ryan would say about decandling them. And has Mirai evolved any of its understanding of pinyin more recently? Absolutely. I mean, we we know, you know, and have decandled pinyin over the course of the past 13 years. But the key to an outlier pine like Italian stone pine, pinea, like Aleppo pine, jalapensis, like a pinyin pine, is that you can only do that decandling operation once every three to five years, right? And then once you decandle it, you're treating that pine like a short needle single flush pine, right, where you're using pinching as a methodology for controlling and manipulating the growth. But you're using the decandling operation on a really vigorous outlier pine to stimulate back butting on the interior because a lot of those outlier pines are long spindly. And refusing to back bud kind of pines. And even if they do back bud, the back bud rarely turns into needle count. So we decandle, we get the juvenile growth. The juvenile growth takes a year to transition to mature growth. And then once it's mature growth, we can manage through the pinching process like a short needle single flush pine. We mature that, we develop that, maybe that gets too big. We fertilize, we build it up over a year, we come back and we decandle and we do the whole thing again periodically to rebalance that energy system. And redistribute those interior buds. That applies to pinion pine. But there are also pinion pine that will settle down enough in a bonsai container. There are Italian stone pine that can become refined enough and secure enough in their containerization and their control of energy where you might never have to decandle them again and they just behave like a short needle single flush pine that we manage informally through the pinching process. And sometimes you don't even have to do that. They're just a single flush pine that we really don't touch much, you know. And I've had that, I've had all of those experiences, all three of those experiences with pinion pine over the past 13 years. We used to have a lot of pinion pine nursery stock that we utilized the decandling methodology to build very, very fast ramified pinion pine in short order. But collected pinion pine, I've found, if they stay in a growing container long enough or you keep them in too large of a container, the decandling operation applies if you put them into an appropriately sized pot. I really haven't had to decandle them again. And I find them to stay quite small, quite compact and grow relatively slowly compared to what they will do if you have them in a large container. Matt has a question, are you looking forward to a day when you can stream more about design and aesthetics rather than technique with the understanding that you provide the community the technical knowledge and we've absorbed the knowledge and are applying it successfully and consistently? Yeah, this never stops. No, this never stops. This this discussion never stops because it's the understanding of these fundamentals that gives rise to the aesthetic. And it's the desire for the aesthetic that demands we pay attention to these fundamentals. It's a cyclical conversation. This never stops. If we're not talking about this kind of energy distribution, which I'm going to tell you, this is the most advanced energy distribution discussion that we've had on needle plucking to date. And I'm very, very happy and proud of the evolution of knowledge that comes from our collaboration as a community here on Mirai Live. But this is never going to stop. Now, do I want to make trees all the time and have Bonsai be this super sexy, creative endeavor and be an art? Yeah, sure. Of course, that's that's why we all do it, because that's the cool part of it. But, you know, you've also got to mix the aesthetics with the function. You've got to mix the design with the horticulture. They don't. They don't exist independently. And so, you know, in all honesty, this is all just part of the continuum for me. Do I want the community to be able to speak more fluently? Do I want to have fluent conversations with the community? Yes. And what would that mean? That would mean you understand what a refinement action is versus a secondary action is versus a primary developmental action that that is a real gift to cross that threshold. That is a real gift. You would then start to understand, oh, my gosh, decandling and needle plucking is the exact same physiological action as partial defoliation and pruning on a broadleaf deciduous tree. That's the same thing. Same science, same hormonal removal, same sugar starch suppression, same response, which is a vast push out of of a finer degree of ramification. Right. And now you start to cross these things and you start to say, could we do this? What happens when we do this in my area? I can get away with this look. Bonsai today, issue number like I think is like eighty six, eighty seven. Maybe it was even in the 90s somewhere. Ernie Kuo wrote an article about using the juvenile growth on. I believe he did it on an Italian stone pine, but I think he also applied this technique to Japanese black pine where he decandled three times in a year, three times in a year to call a black pine a double flush pine is inaccurate. Because if you live in the correct area, you can get a Japanese black pine to produce three flushes that fully mature in a single season. Now you do piggyback on juvenile growth, but if you can control that juvenile growth, if you know how that juvenile growth matures, you get you get two sets of ramification in a single season, right? And that's where we start to say, listen, it's not limited. If you lived in Taiwan, you get four flushes out of a Japanese black pine. If you handle the energy system correctly, there are innumerable things that we can do that have never been discussed or being done in backyards of, you know, mad scientists across the world, and we'll continue to dissect those on this platform and and explore what that means, how we do it well in our regions with the specific limitations or opportunities that are provided and how we do it in a way that's sustainable and respectful to the tree. And I love that it's it's a continuum. Yeah, someone in the chat was saying they can get three flushes in a year where they live. Sure, absolutely. Mike is up next. What if the tree has really strong candles and others are weaker? Can you decantle the strong and leave the weak buds to grow stronger and then decantle the entire tree the following year? Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Sure. Come June, right? Not now. Don't do it now. This is just to distribute energy as this is metaphorical spring, right? Spring just happened for us at the beginning of May. Spring happened for the rest of the United States in, like, February, March, April. Right. But but come June, June is a universal reset. Right. Because we have sort of that cumulative daylight length summer solstice as a marker of plant behavior. Winter solstice is a marker of plant behavior. It's no secret when you start to talk about plants hit their peak energy storage just past the winter solstice. Plants hit their reset system just prior to the summer solstice. Like these things determine life on on planet Earth as we know it. Right. So we're looking as a homogeneous group at sort of June or in the southern hemisphere, December as this point of resetting our multiflush pines through the decantling operation. And if there are pieces that are weak, absolutely don't decantle them and they will get stronger. The key to that is, listen, if if if you want to continue to move a piece of growth in a direction of being usable, that piece of growth needs to be part of 70 percent of that growth. That's the key to that action. Right. So if you're decantling, if you want that decantled piece to be a ramified part of your design, you can't just decantle a few strong pieces and not decantle a majority of the tree as weaker pieces and have those stronger pieces contribute, you will completely throw off that balance. If you're decantling 70 percent of the tree or more and you're leaving behind 10, 20 at max, 30 percent of weaker buds that can work. OK. Or if you say, listen, I'm going to I'm going to only decantle 30 percent of the tree and I'm going to leave 70 percent in development, you cannot do that. Right. So just recognize that that distribution of behavior has got to be the majority in order to keep that growth contributing. Now, you've seen me decantle just the strong tips of the Tauperian Black Pine and not decantle a majority of the interior growth. I did not want that tip to be a part of the ultimate tree. That was a sacrificial action to transition the energy without just cutting it off, which would have shocked the system of that multiflesh pine. So I decantled it as the first step in transition. I then removed those when we shoot selected in the fall. Yeah, that's a part of it. But I didn't want it to be a part of the tree. So just recognize if it's going to be a part of the tree, if you want it to be a part of the tree, it's got to be part of 70 percent of the action when you decantle to keep it a part of the tree. Falls up next. You spoke of the fire hose garden hose topic for grafting. Considering that, could you graft Virginia pine onto Ponderosa with a collected Yomadori Ponderosa pine? Yes. Yep, you could. Virginia pine, pitch pine, lodgepole pine, white pine, red pine, black pine. You can graft them all onto Ponderosa pine. Now, that doesn't mean it's going to be radical success. People. Expert grafting on Ponderosa pine will get 50 percent success rate at best if it's just a wild raw Ponderosa pine that's healthy, strong and recovered from collection. OK, that pine is wired out and styled. An expert grafter can get 70 to 80 percent success. OK, so if you're not an expert grafter, take your 50 percent success rate of an unstyled pine. Take your 70 to 80 percent success rate of a styled pine and start to adjust those numbers in the downward direction. People say Ponderosa pine can't be grafted. People say there's a reason that it fits. No, no, no, no, no. You're putting a foreign genetic on a foreign genetic. You are going to have some limitation to success. Japanese black pine on black pine. You should be close to 100 percent, right? Black pine on Ponderosa pine, you're going to have a lower success rate, but it is absolutely feasible, viable, possible. It has been done time and again. You just have to set your expectations correctly because you see somebody who's grafted very infrequently go, oh, tried to graft Virginia on Ponderosa pine, Ryan's full of shit. It didn't work at all. It's like, well, yeah. Are you good at grafting? Did you have the right impression? Was the tree even healthy to begin? You know, like there's so many factors and variables to grafting success, but absolutely. You can graft. Virginia on Ponderosa for sure beyond a shadow of a doubt. Mary Ann's asking, when do you start applying fertilizer in a calendar year for black pine? OK, so the work back methodology, right? If we're going to decandle June 1st, our last application four weeks prior because nitrogen causes elongation, we want all of the nitrogen out of the system the day that we decandle. OK, so our last application would be May 1st. We want at least two applications to build a pine up. So that means we could start April 1st. But if we could get three applications, that would be even better. We'll get a better push out of the second flush. So that means March 1st. March 1st is the beginning. April 1st is the second. May 1st is the third and last application in the Pacific Northwest. If our black pines are outside, it is way too cold. March 1st, we start April and then May. If it's in the greenhouse, we will hit the March and then the April and then the May. Ricky D, would you consider a benda square pot or maybe you could just extend the back to front depth of the pot some and slightly reduce the sides? I would say the thing that makes this pot a little bit of a discrepancy is actually a straight wall. And if you had a outward flaring lip to this pot, it would feel entirely different. Currently, it has this slight inward curve here and it feels a little frumpy and that I would say is the greater limitation for the aesthetic of the tree. If it had that outward flare and you got that kind of rotational trajectory, it would change everything about this aesthetic. Jonathan says, I know it's been said many times that we're just scratching the surface of North American bonsai, and I was wondering if there are any proficient practitioners in Mexico. Mexico has the largest number of Quercus species and I believe has many pine species as well. Any insight? We podcasted with the gentleman from Mexico that had done a deep dive into the history of bonsai in Mexico, and I would say it's a fairly young bonsai culture. But then beyond that, I have two or three students from Mexico that we talk a lot about this, and it's just simply not yet a country that has been able to dive deep into bonsai technique on the very fundamental varieties of the precumbens, the black pine, you know, and a lot of Mexico is also tropical. But, you know, diving deep into those fundamental species to have the skills to then start collecting, working with Yamadori, having some artistic expression through that native material and exploration. So I don't know any advanced practitioners that are really like cutting edge bonsai personalities in Mexico. I think there are some people in South America that obviously have achieved a really high level of artistry and technical capacity. But Central America is still evolving and developing. I know Juan Andrade is in Costa Rica. I don't know much about what he's doing or don't see much or communicate with Juan, but he was on the stream with his concept of epiphytic bonsai. He did beautiful work on a Bougainvillea and several other trees while he was here. So, you know, there's I'm sure there's opportunity. Mexico has some of the best collected junipers that exist in the native environment in their mountains. They've got tremendous pines. You just said that they have the largest variety of Quercus. And actually, I do. Let me take one step back. Enrique Castaña is a phenomenal bonsai practitioner in Mexico who lives in Merida. And Merida is a tropical environment. But Enrique Castaña's trees would be absolutely world class on the highest level. I do take that back. Excuse me. He is he is very much an exceptional bonsai practitioner and an expert at a super high level. In fact, we've we've toyed with the notion of going and filming with him a couple of times and the timing has never worked out. But as far as like Quercus and temperate varieties of trees, I don't know anybody in Mexico that's doing that. Bentley says I'm having a hard time reading the apex. Is this a dynamic or harmonious design? Oh, I think it was meant to be. Harmonious, but currently, because the wire is biting in, it's under gauged because it's been sort of left left to grow for the past two years. There's this is a completely ambiguous tree at this moment in time. When we come back and decandal, maybe we'll do that on on the stream so that you guys can weigh in on the design, you know, direction of this tree, whether we remove this branch, how valuable that is, et cetera. I think that could be really fun. But it was always meant to be harmonious from the way it was initially designed. You know, this branch being so far out, there's no crossing over of the apex and defining branch. I don't know that it's set up for a dynamic. If it reads dynamic, it would be pulling itself apart and it would be a poor design decision, in my opinion, but who knows what will happen when we come back and it's really open and clear and we go about the process of redesign. And then Bentley has another question, when you fertilize this tree, was it at the refinement amount despite being at the development cadence of every four weeks? Yeah. So when we are building and this is where we step past that sort of we establish this baseline knowledge, right, we've got our gas pedals of quantity and timing and and we can follow sort of quantity and timing for development. Secondary refinement. We can mix and match those depending on time of year. When we take that next step in, when we take that far step in, we recognize there are exceptions to lower quantity and lower timing when when a multi flush pine is in refinement and we say, listen, we are aggressively fertilizing for two or at least two, optimally three applications, time to the decandling operation in June and working our way back to hit those marks. Last application is this week, right, for any multi flush pine that are going to be decandled. But then we're holding off on fertilization in early September. Right. So you're talking June, July and August, three months without fertilization. And we're cutting off all the trees growth, plucking its needles off and saying grow again. You've really got to prepare a tree for that operation. And that's where that preparation and knowledge of what it takes to take all of the new growth off a tree when it's in a state of slight energy deprivation at that point in time to get that shorter needle, shorter internode and bifurcation. You sacrifice a lot. You've got to build a tree to that. We have to have an exception to that sort of baseline knowledge of fertilization. And that's where this lies in terms of that discussion. That's all the questions we have for tonight. Yeah. Good conversation. Good fundamental frickin bonsai, right? Like just bonsai tonight is just deep in the traditional Japanese black pine. Ha. Got to know it. You got to know it. You have to understand it. You have to understand it inside and out to manipulate it, play with it, twist it up. And and have it turn into something magical. And. I don't. My desire to have knowledge this deep is why I have it right, but I love to share it. I love to share it. And had somebody been able to tell me this before I went to Japan, I would have saved myself a lot of brain damage. Right. Probably be a much happier. No, I'm just kidding. Actually, I'm quite a happy. person. But I am glad that bonsai in outside of Japan is taking on this higher level of knowledge because you say, listen, the shokunin mentality, the pursuit of perfection on a daily basis, that was and so much artistry. Don't get me wrong. So much artistry in Japan. Pre World War Two, post World War Two, different aesthetic dynamics to Japanese bonsai. There's so much to discuss there. Tremendous amount of artistry, the shokunin mentality and the pursuit of perfection, the fixation, the fascinating, the working, the massaging of information to tweak it and nuance it to get the best out of the physiological response for the tree. That is what got Japanese bonsai to that highest level. You don't have to follow the aesthetic of it, of Japanese bonsai to be motivated to achieve that degree of mastery of knowledge and physiology, which empowers your aesthetic in the execution of bonsai. And that is really where we come from at Mirai is being able to harness the horticulture, which then empowers our design capacity. OK, so think about that. Chew on that and and work towards that pursuit of in-depth information. And your bonsai will only get better. Your aesthetic, your aesthetic ideas will only evolve further. Right. The horticulture can inspire the aesthetic. The aesthetic demands the horticulture. They are constantly connected. Love you guys. 
