What's going on, guys? Super Tuesday. Welcome to Mirai Live. Tackling a big one today. As a matter of fact, I would say this is a monolithic pillar of bonsai that we're going to be confronting today. And we touched on it on the growth perpetuation stream from Besaw two weeks ago. But today is all about these pines, in particular the multi-flush pines and how we go about handling this candle elongation, this needle plucking, this whole big mystery with thousands of articles that are guiding you in all kinds of odd different directions about how to do it, why you do it, what you do, etc. So I'm really excited about this stream. I've been looking forward to this stream. This was one of the major fundamental pieces that I felt like this Mirai Live could address when we started coming up with topics just to show you guys. How to make multi-flush pines a lot more accessible. So before I start geeking out and we dive too deep, I just want to welcome our Tier 1 members. And thank you guys for tuning in. I hope you very much enjoy the live stream. And hopefully this stimulates that love of bonsai and you guys decide that you want to continue growing. For our Tier 2 mastery members, I hope the archives are serving you guys well. We very much appreciate your support. And I hope you're getting a lot of reinforcement of that. And I hope you're getting that knowledge via those archived videos. For our Tier 3 innovators, can't thank you guys enough for finding value in what we're doing to the point that you're participating in the impromptu Q&A's and enjoying that tertiary footage. We work really hard to try and create things of value that go beyond the normal scope of bonsai discussion or further reinforce the details that we're covering in the stream in those tertiary videos that we're supplying. And now, with Ricardo on board full-time and Arthur having some more freedom, we're creating tertiary content that I think is just going to absolutely be mind-blowing and overwhelming. So it's super exciting. You guys get to be the beneficiary of all of this enthusiasm. And as always, we appreciate you and couldn't do this without you. So welcome this evening. Very much happy to be here with you guys. Got Kendall on the mic. Mr. Arthur on the switcher. Yeah, we got Lime on the soundboard. Quiet as always. Yeah, we got Lime on the soundboard. Quiet as always. Yeah, we got Lime on the soundboard. Quiet as always. Yeah, we got Lime on the soundboard. Quiet as always. Junior on the supporting mic this evening. Hello. And we got Ricardo on the detail camera, so the family is in effect. Troy's out in the garden watering. I don't think he'll join us tonight unless there's some ice-cold beer. We do have a fridge in the workshop, so things are getting funky here. We'll see where we get and what Troy decides to do, but you may hear from him as well this evening. Anything that we need to focus on before we dive in? I don't think so. No? No? Okay. Without further ado, I wanted to start this stream off by breaking down the fundamental concepts of the why. Why we do what we do, why we choose the timing that we choose, why we choose the technique that we choose. And I think the best way to illustrate this is via a whiteboard discussion so that you guys can just take that educational knowledge, see it laid out for you, grab onto that, come back and rewatch it, and then we'll come back and we'll put that into action. And so, enjoy this next clip. This is going to set the foundation for tonight's stream. When we come back out, we're going to take all of those pieces that we've given you from that. We're going to show you how those are implemented. Check it out. So it's finally time to get down to business about these multi-flush pines. I know that we're always talking about multi-flush pines and how we handle them. When we candle prune, when we needle pluck, whether we reduce candles by pinching. But in order to understand multi-flush refinement, what's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? What's the most important thing? Okay? Why prune candles? Big question. So first of all, let's just establish multi-flush pine, any species of pine that can produce more than one flush of growth that fully matures in a single season. Meaning, if we remove their first flush of growth, they will produce a second flush that fully elongates needles out and turns into mature foliage within that one year period. Okay? So we're looking at Japanese black pine, Japanese red pine, pitch pine, Virginia pine, and several species of native pines to the southeastern United States among potentially more species across the world that could be utilized in this way. We might not know about those yet, but hopefully understanding these techniques, you guys will have the courage to go explore. Okay? So at this period in time in the year, the big operation with multi-flush pines is decandling. Why decandle is the question. Okay? We're going to say that we're going to decandle number one to get shorter inner nodes. So we know that first flush of growth elongates a very great distance from the needles before those needles actually start to form on a really vigorous black pine or a really vigorous multi-flush pine. We want to reduce that inner node length, otherwise our tree will expand exponentially and very soon grow out of the proportion that gives it value as a bonsai. Okay? Number two, we want shorter needles. Okay? So those first flush of needles are going to be elongating all year long which allows them to get extremely long. We want to shorten those down and maintain the proportion that best fits our tree. And number three, we want bifurcation of growth. And that is to say we're on one branch of the tree that's going to have one branch tip. We get one candle. When we cut that candle off, that same branch tip by the end of the year should have two pieces of growth in its place. Where there's one, we get two. Where there's two, we get four. Where there's four, we get eight. And on and on and on, exponential increase in branch density. Okay? So if we're looking at shorter inner nodes, shorter needles, okay, we've got to be understanding that at this point in time when we're performing the operation of de-candling, we have to be at the end of a cycle of fertilization. An end of cycle of fertilization means four weeks prior to the moment that we're pruning our candles, we should have been applying an application of fertilizer. And so if we're thinking about this, we actually start the entire process of our training of our black pines based on that date that we know we're going to be de-candling to get the proper needle size for that particular tree. So say for us, we start de-candling June first. Our largest trees will be de-candled on June first, and then we'll be de-candling smaller trees successively after that so that we get shorter and shorter needles the later that we de-candle the tree. If we're de-candling on June first, what that says is, our last application of fertilizer needed to be May first. In order for us to have four weeks for all of our trees to be of the nitrogen to be leached out of the system so that when we decandle, the product of that decandling is not longer internodes and longer needles, it's shorter internodes and shorter needles, okay? We're hoping for two to three applications of fertilizer across the spring season depending on where we're out and how warm our spring gets, okay? So our next application would be four weeks prior to that. We're going to say this is April 1st. Okay, and if we get three applications in, March 1st, okay? Now here in the Pacific Northwest, there is a very good chance we don't get to do three applications in a spring. This year we did not. Last year, the cold stopped early and we got three applications and had a tremendous response to the candle pruning process in our black pines, okay? So let's be very clear about what this first scope of work here in the spring is or for you guys entering this system, right? We need to understand what's going on in the spring season. We need to understand what's going on in the spring season. We need to understand what's going on in the spring season. We need to understand what's going on in the spring season. We need to understand what's going on in the spring season. That strength in our multi-flush pines is balanced by needle distribution. So think about the fact that here we have a tree, here we have Mr. Sunshine, okay? And all of our water transport is driven by transpiration and loss of water through the needle mass. That loss of water through the needle mass creates tension on that chain of water all the way down to the soil. And so the more water that we're losing, the more nutrition that's being delivered to that location on the foliage mass by adhering to the water molecules moving up through the system, okay? So the more water we lose, the more nutrition we accumulate. With photosynthesis and sun, we create more photosynthetic resources, sugars and carbohydrates, and all of a sudden, we have this stronger and stronger area. The tips of our branch, the apex of our tree, okay? So when we start to look at that, if foliage mass is dictating how much water and how much nutrition we're losing, we're going to balance foliage mass across the entire tree to get that distribution of strength. So in the springtime or when we say point of new acquisition, when you newly acquire a multi-flush pine, if it is incredibly strong, we can balance the energy as the very first step to enter this cycle. So we will say, number one, needle pluck to balance energy. And we're going to say, we're going to be needle plucking our stronger areas down to the weakest significant branch. And when I say weakest significant branch, that is an area on the tree, not a small weak shoot, okay? So if our weakest significant branch has on average six to eight pairs of needles per shoot in that location, we're going to be wanting to take our stronger areas that may have upwards of 20 to 30 pairs of needles down to a closer count to our weakest significant branch. Now, we're going to draw a threshold there. We're not going to pluck lower than, 10 to 12 pairs per shoot. We will not go below that because even taking that density down to 10 to 12 pairs per shoots closes the gap between strong and weak. Okay? So we're going to be needle plucking to distribute energy in the springtime when you enter this cycle or when you can freshly acquire a tree that has an imbalance of energy. We're going to be fertilizing throughout the spring season based on that point, that day that we know in the northern hemisphere, to be early to mid-June in order to get proportionally sized needles for a larger tree, early to mid-July to get smaller needles for a medium-sized or a shohin-sized tree. If you're in the southern hemisphere, switch these dates by six months, December 1st, January 1st in terms of December 1st for large trees, January 1st for medium and small trees, okay? So we're going to be fertilizing a month prior to that date, four months or four weeks prior to that and four weeks prior to that to get two to three applications so that when we prune those candles, the response is shorter needles, shorter internodes and bifurcation. Okay? Now, one more thing that we need to keep in mind when we're pruning, okay? What do we prune? Okay? So let's understand inside of this, we've got this very strong candle, okay? Now, be very aware of the fact that the buds that you're trying to prune are going to be very strong. Okay? The buds that you're trying to stimulate the growth of exist right here at the base of that new piece of growth, okay? So when we're coming in and we're decandling, we're leaving just a few millimeters of that new tissue cutting the entire candle off of the tree and in doing so, we stimulate the growth of these dormant buds as new shoots to create that second flush with shorter needles, shorter internodes and giving us that bifurcation, okay? And we're pruning strongly. We're pruning medium and we're pruning weak and last but not least, we're pruning unemerged candles. We are pruning them all at once, all at the same time, all on the same day so that we make sure that all of our growth starts afresh with the same timing and we're redistributing the energy based on the needle count distributed throughout the tree. Now, we've got one more thing that we're going to be doing when we prune candles. Decandle and the second is to needle pluck. Now, you're saying we're needle plucking again. Didn't we needle pluck in the spring or at the point of new acquisition? Yes, you did but this allows us to further close that gap. Remember, our discussion was weakest significant branch dictates needle count but we won't go below 10 to 12 pairs of needles per shoot. So here, we're saying, listen, when we decandle, we can increase the tree's response to the decandling process by further reducing the foliage mass which also closes that gap between strong and weak. We're going to cut this off at eight pairs of needles per shoot as the basement level of foliage that we will leave on the tree, okay? We don't want to take any more than that or we start to impair the tree's ability to photosynthesize and produce that second flush. As long as we're fertilizing aggressively, as long as we're pruning the candles appropriately, and as long as we're closing that gap between strong and weak, at this point in time, the response will be a second flush that has shorter internodes, shorter needles, and bifurcation for us to shoot select on come that fall season, okay? Once we've decandled, from this summer period until we talk about multi-flush pines again on this stream, your guy's goal is to not fertilize and to not touch those new shoots, okay? So we're going to say your work, after you've performed, you're going to be able to do that. You're going to be able to perform this operation, is to don't touch the tree and don't fertilize the tree. I will make sure you know what to do with the trees that you start to integrate into this cycle of development when the time is right for you guys to be performing work on those trees, all right? I hope that helps add some clarity to this. I'm going to show you these things in tonight's stream and I hope that this adds a lot of technique and a lot of help for your approach to your multi-flush. All right, so I hope that helped give you guys a little bit more insight and background into this whole operation because one of the most fundamental things that is not discussed about handling our multi-flush pines is the process of fertilization. And another aspect that's not discussed in multi-flush pines when we decandle is why do we decandle? So if you don't understand why we're decandling and you don't understand how to fertilize or how that fertilizer impacts that operation of decandling, then you're already gone, right? And so I hope that that adds clarity and some connection of content so that you guys start to understand how significant that timing for fertilization as well as the events that and the techniques that we're applying to this tree impact the quality of the response of that second flush because you can completely mitigate shorter needles, shorter internodes by that candle pruning process if we're irresponsibly fertilizing and we don't understand. Now, another aspect of that discussion that I really want you guys to focus in on is how clean and concise the approach in this manner that we use at Mirai that Mr. Kremura used in Japan to multi-flush pines is compared to all of those articles that we've all read over the years where we start pruning with the weakest first and then seven to ten days later the medium and then seven to ten days later the strong or we break this in half or we break it by three quarters as they're elongating. Do away with all of that stuff, right? Because there's no way that any of us, or I would say the majority of us in our daily lives can implement those kinds of systems that are so based on immeasurable things. What is strong? What is medium? What is weak? How do you decide that? Is it dependent on the tree? Is it dependent on the size? All of those things that become inconsistencies, we're doing away with all of them because we're saying for a multi-flush pine, the way that we change and balance the distribution of strength across the tree is needle count, not the timing of the candles. In terms of offsetting weak, medium, strong or breaking candles. We're just going to cut them all and we're going to use the needles to balance that strength. Now before I dive into work and start getting to some of your guys' questions, I just want to give you guys a little bit of insight. Now this is a pine that I picked up at Golden State Bonsai Federation last year when I was working there. It was an auction tree. Nobody wanted an old black pine. Might have been a little bit too high for most people, felt to me like a legitimate investment. Even though it doesn't have awesome movement, we've already made one bend in the trunk here via the same technique that we utilized to make the second bend on the Big Ponderosa Pine project we did. Exact same wedge cut to bend this trunk and put that first implementation of movement into it. Clearly the tree did not hiccup at all from that operation. It was performed in the early spring and now we're looking at making a second bend probably this fall where we'll reposition this wire, re-kind of tool things and we'll take the tree the opposite direction to give it multiple pieces of movement and really enhance the quality of this black pine. However, now that we know that it's survived that operation, balancing the strength and this is the biggest thing that we start to see in multi-flush pines is you get this ridiculous super strong long candles in the apical region and then when we come down to these lower branches here, you start to see these really tiny minuscule buds and you're saying, man, how do I close that gap? How do I make all of these areas of the tree equal in priority significant enough that the tree allocates resources to those areas? We're saying we're gonna cut all those candles, reset the system and then we're gonna pluck down to the weakest significant branch. That was how I laid it out for you guys. Now let's take a look at this tree. I'm just gonna rotate this for you really nice and slow and see if you guys can identify some of those potential areas that could be that weakest significant branch. And to quantify it. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . when we were talking in the, and I'm just going to remove these tags so that they don't get in our way. When we were talking on the whiteboard, one of the things that I kept saying is the weakest significant branch is not a branch. So we're not looking at this tiny weak shoot right here and saying, okay, I'm going to pluck the rest of the tree down to this tiny weak shoot. What we are saying is a weakest significant branch is a region. Maybe this branch is our weakest significant branch. Maybe this branch, tucked in underneath the apex, not getting a lot of sunlight, maybe this is our weakest significant branch. And if we look at, on an individual shoot basis in here, and I'm just going to take one shoot and kind of get a general idea of my needle density on this, I'm looking at one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, ten, twelve. I've got almost twelve pairs per shoot, okay, on this one singular shoot. I'm guessing that throughout this I'm going to have shoots that have fewer. I'm going to have shoots that have less. I'm going to have shoots that have more. The goal is to take all of this stronger area down to as close to this density of the weakest significant branch as we possibly can, but we establish that threshold, ten to twelve pairs, we will not go below that. Now we're at this point in time where we're going to be candle pruning, and you guys should be asking yourselves, but wait, you said when you prune candles, you take it even farther, down to the basement of eight pairs per shoot. And that is true. We want to exacerbate the severity of that operation. We want to exacerbate the severity of that operation. Assuming we've been feeding responsibly, and as you guys look at this, you'll notice there's an abundance of fertilizer on this tree. Okay, we've been gearing it up for this operation. We can safely take this down to that eight pairs per shoot threshold, completely close the gap of the strong and the weaker branch, reset the system in terms of the candles, and I'm guessing the second flush that you guys are going to see, which we will document throughout the course of this summer and fall, I'm guessing that second flush is going to be absolutely beautiful. Probably not totally unified in strength, but it's going to be so much closer than this really obnoxious diversity of strength that we see in the apex versus down below. Okay, so I'm just going to start here with the candle pruning process. Ricardo's over my shoulder. You guys will get to see kind of how I handle this. I'm pruning strong, medium, weak, and non-emerged shoots. Now the big question you guys should have is, what does a non-emerged shoot look like? When I find that, we're going to zoom in, and I'm going to show you guys how I handle this. But I'm just going to dig in here, and I haven't really thought much about design on this tree because the strength is so incredibly lopsided. So I'm going to go ahead, and I'm going to cut everything first. I'm going to come back, and I'm going to needle pluck and kind of establish that general density, and we'll look at design once we're kind of through this first major kind of event of candle pruning. So while I'm doing this, if you guys have questions, let them rip. Kindle, let them fly. Yeah. Tom's wondering if you remove the fertilizer at the time of decandling. Good question, Tom. So we definitely do not want to be removing the fertilizer at the time of decandling, assuming that that fertilizer has been on the tree for four weeks prior to this operation. Because what we know about fertilization is the first component of fertilizer to be completely washed out of the system is the nitrogen. It's the most water-soluble. It's the most easily and readily- diluted and taken out of the system. That's actually the component that nitrogen, that's the component that contributes to foliar elongation and foliar development. So if we make sure that we've applied that a month prior, then when we cut these candles, technically the fertilizer that's on the surface should be void of nitrogen. That's what's going to give us that reduction in the internode and then in the needle length. And so the other components of that fertilizer, for example, calcium, iron, magnesium, any of those components take a lot longer. Take, say, four weeks before they even start to become available. If we start taking those pieces off, all of a sudden we're going to be losing those other components that are equally as significant to nitrogen, but that aren't impacting the length of our second flush. And that's doing more harm than good, because the roots in the vascular system, to facilitate the second flush of growth, need those components to break down and be made available. Continuing on to the next question, we have a question from the audience, which is, how do we make sure that we have the right amount of fertilizer that's available to the plant? How do we make sure that we have the right amount of fertilizer that's available to the plant? How do we make sure that we have the right amount of fertilizer that's available to the plant? How do we make sure that we have the right amount of fertilizer that's available to the plant? Continuing on the fertilizer conversation, Douglas is wondering, how do you determine whether or not it's warm enough to add the first round of fertilizer? Ah, so that's a really good question. If we're still experiencing freezing conditions, then we're going to be holding off on fertilizer. And that is just a given based on the fact that if we're experiencing freezing conditions, the temperatures are such that metabolic activity in the tree has not ramped up to the point where it's going to be taking in that nutrition. But more importantly than that, if we're fertilizing with organic feed, we need the most amount of fertilizer available to the plant. We need the most amount of microbiotic activity to be ramped up, to be able to decompose that fertilizer and enable those nutrients to become available. If we don't have that, it's just a waste of fertilizer. And it won't harm your tree, but it definitely will be a waste and could clog up the surface of your soil with kind of a caked, mucky stuff that the microorganisms are not breaking down quite yet. Okay, so I want to tune in here super close. See if we can get in here. I've got one of these unemerged buds. And these, on this tree, I'm assuming, are going to be considered unemerged buds. And these, on this tree, I'm assuming, are going to be considered unemergeable because of the fact that we've got such a lopsided amount of strength. Now, notice how these guys around it are all candles. And then you have this guy here that's just this pointed little bud. Okay, that did not have the resources or the allocation of resources to actually turn into a functional piece of growth or a candle. These are the guys that we can come back in and just snip the tip of it, still leaving those few millimeters that preserve those adventitious buds at its base. We just snip the tip of that. And now what's going to happen is those adventitious buds, once we open this up and needle pluck and evenly distribute the needle density, those adventitious buds will come out with candles equally as strong as any of the candles around it. And it's one of the magical pieces of multi-flush pine being able to come back and reconcile those places that are or were weak and haven't necessarily produced growth. We can fix all of those things with a dedicated approach in order to be able to get this tree to rebalance, redistribute, and more importantly, revive really significant branches that have lost a lot of their strength. Okay, so I'm just, I'm needle plucking based primarily on feel right now. And this is for, obviously, if you're decandling, say, anywhere between 60 and 100 multi-flush pines every single season as a apprentice in Japan, you're not counting, by any stretch of the imagination, you're not counting how many needles are on each of those. You're not counting how many needles are on each of those. You're not counting how many needles are on each of those. You're not counting how many needles are on each of those. You're not counting how many needles are on each of those. You're not counting how many needles are on each of those. You're not counting how many needles are on each of those. You're not counting how many needles are on each of those. You're not counting how many needles are on each of those. You're not counting how many needles are on each of those. You're not counting how many needles are on each of those. You're not counting how many needles are on each of those. You're not counting how many needles are on each of those. You're not counting how many needles are on each of those. You're not counting how many needles are on each of those. You're not counting how many needles are on each of those. You're not counting how many needles are on each of those. You're not counting how many needles are on each of those. You're not counting how many needles are on each of those. You're not counting is we're starting to tell the tree, hey, those stronger areas that had 30 pairs per shoot, those are transpiring at the same rate as the weaker branches that only had eight pairs per shoot. And all of a sudden the tree's like, oh, so what you're saying is those strong branches, after you cut that candle, remove that apical dominance with that hormone, and then you come back and you pluck those needles so that the same amount of moisture is being lost via that needle, which means the same amount of nutrition is being delivered. You're telling me that's the same? Got it. Now the candle that's going to be emerging from those adventitious buds is going to have the same priority, same delivery of water, same delivery of resources. All of a sudden we start to even out that strength distribution. And it's so cool to see multi-flush pines come back to this point where a lot of times they will get out of balance because they haven't been cared for, because we were sick, because we were busy, because last year we had a disease. This is very common. You get dothostroma, you start to experience some conditions. Maybe you had branch dieback, maybe you repotted it, and you didn't feel comfortable pruning the candles, and so you let it go, and you're saying, oh man, I lost all of the value and quality in this tree. Now, with a multi-flush pine, you never, ever, ever lose the tree. You're always able to bring it back, and that's what's so encouraging about this technique. So you're needle plucking and decandling at the same time? So I'm needle plucking and decandling at the same time, and it's a little bit rough because I've got so many branches tied in one area. So what I'm going to do is I'm going to put just a little bit of structural wire, and I'm going to move a few of these branches so that you guys can see and I can actually function in this. When we bent the trunk, we stacked two branches on top, and that's what's causing a little bit of the problem. Is wiring after decandling an okay thing to do? Totally okay. Totally okay. As long as we don't damage those needles that we left, and that's really kind of that key piece because we've already removed the candles, we've already needle plucked. If you go in and you further damage or reduce the foliage mass, you're going to start to put that tree in a position where it doesn't have the foliar mass to sustain itself in terms of survivability, and that is a risk. So bear that in mind. But it's the most open and it's the most available that those branches are ever going to be. Let's see here. I shouldn't go with six. Talking to you guys and doing stuff at the same time. I had to get on it to get the four cut. All right. So why is right now a good time to do this? Why is right now a good time to do this? Yeah, like what signs do you look for? Yeah, yeah. So, and I discussed this in the whiteboard talk, and I hope you guys picked up on this, and that is I don't actually have a fundamental, horticultural reason why or what the signs of the tree are that say it is okay right now. But here is what I do know that I can give you guys. Right? At this point in time, every single species has a moment in the year where they make a transition, right? So from the transition from winter dormancy to spring growth, active spring growth, the transition from active spring growth to summer dormancy, the transition from summer dormancy to active fall growth, and the transition from fall growth to winter dormancy. Right? So when we're pruning these candles, we're pruning these candles at that midpoint of that spring growth session, which is to say if we remove that growth, that tree is still actively metabolizing, and it has a period of time before it hits that summer dormancy that it can produce that second flush. Right? So if we wait too long and we prune a multi-flush pine, what ends up happening is we won't get a second flush or the second flush needles will be extremely small. Because that time. That time that it takes those needles to elongate hinges on how long this tree is going to be growing, hitting dormancy, and starting growth again in the fall. And that's why June in the northern hemisphere, particularly this far north, early June, if we go farther south into like Florida, Texas, et cetera, you guys are pushing late June or maybe even early July because you've got a lot more sun being closer to the equator to be able to continue to perpetuate and drive that growth earlier. So you have an extended timeframe that that, that elongation and that production of growth is happening. But we want to capture that period of growth when we perform these operations. So how do you know it's gone too far and you've missed the window? Yeah. How do we know it's gone too far? So typically I start to look at the development of the candles. And I'll show that to you guys. Let me get through this here. Four gauges, no joke. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Four gauge, ain't no joke. . We don't mess around over here. We don't mess around. . So I'm just going to take that up. I'll lay that back down a little bit differently. Okay. I'll wire that. I just wanted to show you guys as I'm candle pruning this. Okay, what was that question again, Kendall? . How do you know if it's too late to do this procedure? ah if it's too late okay so typically what i'll do is and use as a reference in terms of timing for for being too late particularly when you guys start pushing uh the time frame on your shohin multi-flush pines like a shohin multi-flush pine in japan we may wait as late as uh august 1st you know like in in the first week of august it's pretty hardcore now i know there are people in florida that are pruning their multi-flush shohin pines um in early august for us in the northern portion of the country if we pruned our pines in august we would not get a second flush that would emerge and fully mature in fact what we would get is we would get a bud at the location that we pruned on that new piece of growth so if you prune it all off you just get a bud at the base but it doesn't actually fully mature so we would get that that bud at that location that we prune and that would be it now that's a big big little piece of insight for you guys in terms of what happens if i don't want necessarily a second flush what happens if i want to allow for thickening elongation or branch development but i don't want the full length of that candle how do i handle that you wait until that tree makes that transition where it's not going to be producing that second flush and then prune to the desired length and you'll get a bud there that will start growing next year but the signs that indicate that for the most part are fully hardening off of the new growth once that new growth has fully hardened off it is lignified now it is sharp it is dark it is well attached we're starting to see a point where if you prune that you cannot guarantee that you're going to get a second flush to emerge and fully mature that year so when you're needle plucking how are you prioritizing removing the needles are you doing a balance of top and bottom nice question nice question is that you or is that somebody else that's a combination of people okay cool you guys yeah so um when i'm needle plucking obviously you know and this and this is the you know the the the the the the the the the the the the the the you know and this and this is the you know and this and this is the this is the kicker about bonsai. You hear so many people talk about either the function or the aesthetic, but not meshing the two. I'm dealing with both function and aesthetic in everything that we do here at Mirai. This is part of the practice. And I've had a lot of people tell me, you know, it's interesting because you're really design heavy, but other people, other professionals are really horticulturally, you know, prioritized and really horticulturally focused. That is the most, the biggest misconception and one of the things that I have a significant desire to change the opinion of, because if you're just thinking about horticulture and you're not thinking about aesthetics, or if you're just thinking about aesthetics and you're not thinking about horticulture, then I would say that you're doing bonsai a disservice. Ricardo, are we in close here or can we come in close? Notice how small, so I'll come back to that. Notice how small these buds are, but notice that we have these mature needles at their base. If I cut that right there, leaving a portion of that tissue, and I've got these needles to continue drawing, sap to that location, this will produce candles of the same strength and size as the tip of the branch. It's so crazy. And I know some of you guys are probably like, there is absolutely no way you are totally, totally crazy. And I'm not. And the reason that I know this is because we used to have pines in Japan, and I told this in the strength perpetuation stream from BSOP. We would have pines in Japan that literally would not produce spring growth. Three quarters of the tree would not candle out. We would have pines in Japan that literally would not produce spring growth. We would come back in and we would prune these weak interior pieces and all of a sudden those pieces of growth would be candling out with the same strength as any of the strongest locations on the tree. So coming into this weaker area that's been below this other branch and obviously been low on the totem pole of priority for this tree over the course of its development because it's been so low. Coming in here, rejuvenating this and then coming back and designing to open this up, if I deem it a priority in our design, this is the best way to start to re-motivate this piece. To engaging with the rest of the tree at a similar strength. So what was I talking about that I was going to come back to? Oh, how do I know what needles I'm plucking? So we're considering aesthetics and we're considering horticulture at the same time. I'm always going to be removing needles off of the bottom. Now, one of the things that you guys want to be extremely sure about, and if we can zoom in on this, notice how I have nice even radial distribution around even the bottom. This is the bottom of that shoot that I've candle pruned. Now this is a beautifully plucked, evenly distributed amount of needles. But I maintain that bottom. We don't ever want to pull all of those needles off and create a shoot that doesn't have that 360 degree distribution. However, I do want to be pulling off the needles that are hanging below that, at least that horizontal line of where that shoot is being positioned and presented, so that I make sure that that line between my branches, the definition of the bottom of the branch, between those branches is nice and clean, and we see that definition in our tree. So I'm starting with those bottom needles. I'm then coming back and I'm removing those top needles and the older interior needles. Now I don't ever want to pluck off all of the old needles. So what you guys will see here is you'll see a mixture of third year needles and last year needles. And we're pruning off this year's growth. Now what's going to happen when that second flush emerges, those third year needles are going to fall off and we're just going to be left with last year's needles. But those third year needles do have a function in the tree up until the point that they are no longer necessary and are shed by the tree. So we don't want to pluck them all off now. And one of the biggest, most misunderstood aspects of energy distribution in pines is that theory that we'll just pluck off all the old needles. You never want to do that, ever, ever, ever. There's no point in a pine's development where you have the ability and the go-ahead to pluck all of the old needles. That is a really poor application of technique and a super big misunderstanding of how trees grow and how those needles function in the allocation of resources and, more importantly, hormonal distribution at the tip of the tree. Eric's curious if the bottom needles will ever grow back. Bottom needles, if we pluck them off, they would have to come from a new shoot that's emerging from the tree. So if you pluck off the needles off the bottom of a shoot, then the only way you get those back is when that next shoot elongates and it has that even distribution. So when you look at all these candles, let me just kind of cut one of these off. So I'm just going to hold this here for Ricardo. When you look at that, it's got an even 360-degree distribution, granted a long internode, which is why we cut the candles. The reason that this would ever not have needles on the bottom is because we plucked them off. And that's the only reason that it would not have needles on the bottom. For folks that are in the East Coast and the spring's been pretty wet and cold, do you think that this work could be pushed out a month? Oof. So, again, and this is where multi-flush pines, we're really having a firm understanding of why we're doing what we're doing when we're doing it. If you push this out a month on a tree that you would normally prune at this time of the year and you're pushing it out because your tree is just not, you know, elongating with the same strength that you're typically accustomed to, what's going to happen is the needle production of those new shoots, because you're pruning it out a month and we are in the Northern Hemisphere, is going to be significantly shorter than you may want on that tree. Now, maybe you're saying, I'm going to push it out a month to get shorter needles. Maybe I'm dealing with a shohine or a medium-sized pine. If that's the case, cool. You're doing it for a very good reason. You're trying to get shorter needles. If you're pushing it out because your tree isn't growing strong right now, there is a chance that you may not be candle pruning that tree that year because it's not giving you the indicators that it has the health to respond the way that you need it to respond, okay? Jonathan's curious if there are locations that are too far north for decandling because they don't get enough sun. You know, that's a really interesting question, Jonathan. And I know, so for you guys watching at home, it is like a million degrees in the studio right now. Very hot. And these studio lights are baking me like a potato. And we've just realized that we're going into the hottest part of the year and we haven't thought about any kind of cooling system for this place. So over the next couple of streams, there could be a lot of sweat. A lot of perspiration just glistening. As we work that out. Just shining. Yeah. Everybody in the room is shining. HD. HD. That's right. You can see the bead of sweat on my forehead. So if you talk to Aaron Packard, the curator at the Pacific Bonsai Museum, they have that really massive, beautiful, and if you guys don't know about this pine, I believe it's an Amy Liang pine. Who was a very well-known bonsai practitioner. I think I want to say she's from Taiwan, but I'm not quite sure. But they had a massive pine. It was also in the Artisan's Cup. It's just a wonderful, wonderful tree. I've wired it. I believe Matt Reel may have prepared it or wired it most recently. But it has had a lot of hands on it. It's seen a lot of really, really, I would say professional quality level work. And it shows the fruits of that. Aaron's only able to decandle that every other year. Because it's such a large pine. If he cuts it at the beginning of June or even the last week of May, which I would say is probably the earliest that you could be decandling a multi-flush, he may or may not get candles that are proportional to the tree. More often than not, the candles that emerge and the needles that form are very, very short. And too short for the tree. So what he's found is if he does it on an every-other-year basis, because they are so far north and their springs are very cool and wet, if he does it on an every-other-year basis, it allows the tree to accumulate enough strength to have the momentum to go through that operation and produce a flush of needles that actually is proportional. And when we start talking about proportion, you guys have to understand the emphasis and the priority around proportion is to say that you want a needle length or you want a solar panel that has the size that enables that tree to get the resources that it needs. So we're all probably sitting there saying, well, dude, Pacific Northwest, best place to grow multi-flush pines. You get nice short needles and you don't even have to try, are you kidding me? But quite the opposite on a tree that large, if you have a trunk this big and a tree this tall and needles that long, it's hard for that tree to get enough photosynthetic resource or food, sugars and carbohydrates, to feed itself. That can actually cause the significant demise of that tree over the course of two or three seasons. Greg has a question. Greg says, let's say we do this technique and we miss a couple of tiny buds and then we notice in a few weeks they're pushing candles, should we remove them or just let them go? So if it's in a short amount of time, I would say go ahead and cut them and you know that you're just going to have some smaller needles on those. No harm, no foul. If you see it two months later or a month later, which is probably more common because those needles, and the weird thing is if you miss those, they continue to elongate and they get obnoxiously long and you're like, oh, I didn't cut that. Well, what's happening is all of the resources and the priority that was being put into the candle, when you take that candle off, it's still being put into that candle regardless of what you do. You're stimulating the growth of those adventitious buds at the base by removing that auxin, but any growth that's left or any candle that's missed that has older needles around its base and can continue to maintain sap flow, any of those that you miss, right, they're continuing to get that strength. And so when we start looking at that, right, you just got to weigh how long did you wait before you were able to identify it. Maybe the best course of action is to leave it, potentially prune those long needles back in the fall when you do your shoot selection, and you won't even notice it next season. You can candle prune it as normal. Brandon is curious. He says, if the weakest significant branch is 16 to 18 needles, can we use that number? No, no. So we're saying that our threshold is 10 to 12 pairs if we're balancing strength, 8 pairs per shoot if we're candle pruning to exacerbate the severity of that operation. Those are the reference numbers that you can consistently use. So if you've got 16, 18 pairs on your weakest shoot, that's perfect, beautiful. Pluck it down to 10 to 12 if you're just balancing energy. Pluck it down to 8 if you're candle pruning. And what that does is that continues to keep the interior open to sunlight and air circulation, which allows those interior branches to maintain strength, which allows them to photosynthesize, which allows them to transpire, which keeps water and resources moving. And that's a really significant thing, but that's a great question. And there's a lot of those little tiny nuances in this whole thing that you guys, as you're coming up with them, keep asking them, because these are all the questions that you've probably never been able to get a firm answer to. I'm basically giving you and demonstrating this for you. This is not... It's not rocket science to prune candles, but it is rocket science where it can become a lot more complex when you start bringing all of these other variables in. And this is where most of us get really tripped up and struggle to understand how we apply this knowledge to those exceptions to the case. Chris is curious, how do you accommodate developing a thicker branch growout without losing interior buds? Yeah, that's a really interesting question. So a thicker branch growout. And for anybody who's ever done a lot of bonsai reading... Let me get this guy turned down. For anybody who's done a lot of bonsai reading, you guys would be aware of the concept of sacrificial branch. Now, say for example, I wanted thickening in the apex, and I've got this big, long, strong shoot here. I could very easily allow this shoot to continue to elongate unchecked while I'm candle pruning everything else around it, to maintain that short, tight, compact ramification of the other branches, while this is giving me the thickening and increase in diameter of all of the growth below it. Now what's going to happen is it's going to cause a massive amount of swelling in this area. So we may choose to come back to a finer branch behind it, as opposed to using the growth in front of it. But it's very, very common to let that grow and elongate while you candle prune everything else. And we can have branches on the tree that have all of the candles pruned. We can be leaving some at the tips for elongation, thickening, etc. There's any number of mixtures of approach we can take on this tree, and all of them will work because multi-flush pine are just that capable of changing gears and accommodating what you're trying to achieve as the designing artist. So we got a question about timing in the decandling process. Again, Rich is curious, what do you do if your pine is fully flushed out and hardened off? Do you just skip the decandling process? Fully flushed out and hardened off? Where are you, Rich? Where are you? Are you in Texas? Are you in Florida? Are you in Brazil? Where are you? Are you in Australia? Are you in South Africa? Because if we're talking southern hemisphere, and I know there's a lot of people tuning in from the southern hemisphere here, you guys are watching this and this is not seasonally appropriate for you guys. Now it's been interesting to work in Australia and work in the southern hemisphere, and see how, how could I say this politely, I guess inconsistent the understanding and approach to handling your black pine, red pine, multi-flush pine work is. And it's not a fault of your own, it's because Japan's in the northern hemisphere, all techniques are based on timing in the northern hemisphere, and you guys really do have to accommodate and kind of adapt those techniques to your environment and your timing in the southern hemisphere. So if you just fast forward six months into, say, the beginning of December, and I don't know if it's actually the beginning of December, but I'm sure it's within that range of late November, early December, possibly to January that you guys could be performing the same operation. It should function and work with the same impact as it does in North America, and I see no reason why it would not. We've got some questions about... Did he come back with where he's at? Not yet. Okay. Oh, VA, where's that, Virginia? Virginia? Oh, is this Rich Bozek? Is that you, Bozek? If you're in Virginia and you're saying it's fully opened and matured and hardened and stuff, I guarantee you at the beginning of June you're not quite there yet, you still have the ability to candle prune. There is no place in North America right now that you couldn't candle prune at this point in time and get a second flush. Not in Florida, not in Texas, not in Louisiana, not even down in Latin America right now you could be candle pruning and absolutely you're not too far along. So I would say you're good to go. So we've got some questions about types of multi-flush versus single flush, pines. Should we dive into those videos? Yeah. So I'm going to continue to decandle here because I want to show you guys the product of that strength balancing across as much of this tree as I can get done tonight. But what we did is, we went through the garden because one of the big questions and common things that we've experienced in kind of touching on this whole idea of pines is, what do we do with our short needle single flush? What do we do with our long needle single flush right now? What about this species? What about that species? So we've prepared some videos of short needle single flush in development, short needle single flush in refinement, and we've done long needle single flush to show you guys where we're at and what we're doing at this time of year, again, to help connect all those dots and help you guys understand how you should be handling your trees right now. Take a look at these videos. When you come back, hopefully I'll be a branch or two farther along and we'll reconnect. So one of the biggest questions that we're continually getting from you guys is, okay, we're talking about multi-flush pines, and then we're talking about single flush short needle, and then we're talking about single flush long needle, and it creates this spider web of confusion in our minds. And so, as we focus on multi-flush pines tonight, and the decandling process, I wanted to take you guys back to those other species of pines that we've been continually referring to and just clarify where we're at in their cycle of development and what we should be doing right now at this time of year to help you guys understand this full breadth of knowledge that we're trying to convey to you guys and help you develop these trees. So here we have a ponderosa pine. I'm actually going to rotate this so you guys can see this tree. We have a ponderosa pine. This is the primary species of our long needle single flush pines, and you can see the needles are rather long. This is actually fairly short for a ponderosa pine. They will continue to get shorter the more that it occupies this container, but if you notice the new growth, you notice that the new growth is extremely short at this point in time. This is very deceptive because if we're not careful, if we fertilize now, if we overly pluck the needle mass now, if we came in and we pinched the candles or did any kind of growth reduction right now at this time, while these are still very soft and elongating, what we would get is we would get a doubling or potentially even a tripling of this needle length, this single growing season from these needles. So our goal with our single flush long needle pines right now is to be hands off unless we're fertilizing to try and increase the prevalence of back budding that will eventually expand our needle mass. Now this tree has been fertilized. This tree has already back budded. This tree has a significant amount of needle mass. So we're not fertilizing at this point in time. We're not touching the foliage. We're not reducing the amount of photosynthetic surface area. And what that's going to do is it's going to give us a much shorter needle by the end of this growing season. Our long needle single flush pines will be done elongating when you see the third year needles drop. For us here in the Pacific Northwest, that happens right around the beginning of September. So use that as a clue to understand when you can fertilize, when you can go in and clean up the shape of the tree, and when you can go in and do styling or pruning moves to improve the quality. So here we have a Scot's pine, Pineus sylvestris. This is a short needle single flush pine. Now we've talked a lot about whether or not we're developing or we're refining. We know in the refinement process, which you guys can refer to in the shore pine stream, where we pinch the candles to transition the energy from strong to medium to weak. But we also talk about that concept of developing a short needle single flush pine. And this is a short needle single flush pine that is in that development process. Notice how long the new growth has become. And we're allowing it to elongate, to open up, to accumulate energy and get back in that energy positive. And then once we're in that energy positive, if we start to see those back buds popping, we're going to come back in and we're going to prune this growth back, leaving at least a few pairs of needles on that new growth, knowing that location where we've left those needles is where we will absolutely guarantee ourselves a bud to grow next year. But the hope in making that prune is to redirect the energy back towards those interior buds that we've built up over this spring season by aggressively fertilizing and allowing this growth to take place. So this is a short-needled single flush pine in the developmental process, still elongating, still hardening off, still reaccumulating energy. For this moment in time for this tree, our hands are off, we're aggressively feeding, but we're not going to be doing anything until this new growth fully opens up, expands and hardens off. We don't want to be doing anything until that happens. Signs of hardening off. Needle elongation stops. Color darkens. Firmness of the needle solidifies and its attachment to the vascular tissue solidifies so that you can't easily remove it from the shoot. So once again, color darkens, needle gets sharper, and that attachment to the vascular system solidifies. Hands off right now for short-needle single flush pines in the development process. Now right next to it, we have a multi-flush pine that is on the verge of being ready to be decandled. Now this is a little bit smaller tree, so we're going to want to wait a little bit later than that, than that, for that first week of June to be decandling so that we get a second flush of growth that has proportionally smaller needles to work with this size and shape of tree. Okay, so we'll probably be looking to do the decandling process on a multi-flush pine of this size the third or fourth week of June to get that second flush to be a little bit shorter than it would be if we decandled it right now in the first week of June. But you can see the stark difference between this multi-flush with these elongating candles, inner node, and this single flush short needle that we're allowing to elongate, harden, and then hopefully with the development of back buds, pruning at a little bit of a later date to get that pushback of energy into the interior. So here we have a short-needled single flush shore pine, and you guys actually saw the pinching process happening to this tree. I pinched this on a stream and showed you guys how that refinement process for our short-needled single flush pines is approached both from the application of fertilizer while we're pursuing that movement of energy from strong to medium to weak, as well as the way that we manage those elongating candles prior to the needles separating from that central stem and starting to elongate themselves. This tree has been pinched three times this year, and you can see how evenly distributed the length of these candles are. Now there are a few locations in this tree. For example, this shoot up in the apex, some of these guys. That clearly opened up too much prior to us being able to pinch them and reallocate that energy. That is a response to that shift of energy from pinching the other candles throughout the tree, and these were probably medium or even weak candles in the beginning of the spring season when they first started to grow that's received that energy because of the other pinching that's happened across the strong and the medium. So this is not a problem because once these open up and harden off, we can come back and prune these, leaving some portion of the tree in the middle of the spring season, and we can start to see the new growth, just the same as we would with a single flush short needle pine in development. But for the rest of this tree, the energy is extremely well balanced based on that pinching distribution, taking that strength out of the strong and transitioning it to the medium, taking that strength out of the medium and transitioning it to the weak, and now we're finally at a point where we no longer have the ability to pinch. We're still actively fertilizing, trying to get that new growth to finally open up, harden off, get back into that energy positive. And we can go back and we can prune any of these shoots that elongated outside of the shape of our silhouette once they were no longer pinchable anymore. So I know there's a lot of questions that you guys are directing towards Kendall of real specific situations that you're experiencing with your pines and trying to really stay on the multi-flush pine kind of topic and whatnot. I hope that that was able to answer at least some of those questions. And if we have time at the end, we'll field a few more questions that might be outside of the realm. For now, we're going to kind of stick to this operation and this functionality of our multi-flush pines and anything that would relate to the videos that you just watched in terms of the single flush, okay? But you guys came back just in time because I'm starting to get, and if we can come in close here, starting to get a lot more of these buds that have not elongated. Now, this is a really big, strong one. There are several smaller, weaker ones that are going to be difficult to show you guys on camera, but I just wanted you to understand. Strong, medium, weak, and then that concept of the unemerged and just coming in and taking that off, still leaving that small portion of new tissue where the adventitious buds are stored. This is how we get that to produce a second flush that will actually candle out, okay? So I also want to go back and it's a little tough because I start at the bottom and work my way up so that you guys aren't actually able to see the fruits of the distribution because all the needles are falling on this, but I'll just kind of come through. And notice whenever I'm handling my pine, I'm always coming from the bottom. You could do as much as you want here and not cause any damage. The second that you insert your hands like this, all of a sudden you start breaking needles, you start breaking branches, et cetera. Coming from the bottom, all that does is keep all those needles propped up and perked up and it looks really beautiful by the end if you're constantly focusing on putting your hands in in that fashion. So that's just a little tip for you guys. But you can kind of start to see how we're evenly distributing that energy. There are branches that I do want to prune off of it. I'm going to go ahead and take a look at that. I'm going to go ahead and take a look at that. I'm going to go ahead and take a look at that. I'm going to go ahead and this tree. I'll come back and talk about pruning a little bit later towards the end of the stream, but this is really what we're looking for. Just this nice even. We've got more branches on some, fewer branches on the other, so it's not totally distributed. We've got longer needles on some. We'll come back and talk about cutting those and what that means. But for the most part, this is what we're looking for in the candle pruning needle plucking process to maximize the impact and the response that the tree is going to give us to this operation. What will aftercare for this tree look like? Aftercare. Yeah, it's a good question. Aftercare is a good question. Aftercare is a good question. Aftercare. Yeah, it's a great question. So we know that we're reducing the foliage mass by like 70, 80% in this operation. And what that means is our first piece of knowledge about aftercare is that it's not going to be using nearly as much water. So our aftercare of our pines can't be going back to watering them the same amount that you were watering them prior to the candle pruning process. Otherwise, one of the big responses that you can get to overwintering your pines is the yellow, the base of the new needles on that second flush will be yellow. But the tip will have that green color. And you're saying, gosh, what's going on? Is this a fungus? Is this an insect? No, that's overwatering. And that's a very easy thing to do to lose that balance of water and oxygen because that transpiration based on that foliar reduction has virtually not stopped, but come to an extremely slow crawl. And even though it's hot, you've really got to temper that balance of water and oxygen. And how you're watering those trees or else you're going to have some pretty significant problems. Okay. So aftercare, we would want to be putting this out in full sun, give it as much sun as you can possibly give it. You're going to be watching the watering very carefully. You're not going to be fertilizing. You're not going to be fertilizing. Okay. And then you're going to be keeping your hands off of that tree to a large degree, unless you're going to be doing some wiring, knowing that you do have the potential to damage some of that remaining foliage mass. If you're good with wiring, your skills are good, you're able to insert your hands from the bottom and work on the tree, then you can wire this because it's the most open the structure is going to be for you compared to any other point in the season. Whether you've got new candles in the spring, whether you've got the new shoots in the late summer, this is the only time that you're going to have the tree down to this really minimal quantity of needles, a good time to be applying wire for your ease of application. And you're going to be holding off on touching this tree for a fairly significant period of time until we see that second flush start to emerge. Now, this is one of the big pieces as well, because what you guys are going to see from one location is you're going to see three, four, five, six buds emerging from one cut site. That's exactly what we want. That's part of that third piece of criteria, bifurcation or enhanced ramification as one of the reasons why we do decandal our multi-flesh pine. So the last thing that we want to do if we're trying to get shorter needles and shorter intermodes, is going in and thin down the number of shoots that are being produced. Because the strongest shoots that are being produced on any tip of any one of these cut sites, those are going to be consuming most of the energy that are being, that's being delivered from the roots to that foliar mass. So if you go in and you start taking those buds that are consuming that energy off, what ends up happening is all of energy because it's based on needle mass now again let's come back to this distribution of needle mass is what's dictating strength distribution in the tree strength and pines comes from the roots transfer transpiration of water from the needle mass is what's driving that chain of moisture and nutrition to that area so when we start to have that happen all of a sudden we get this big elongating shoot we pinch it it goes into all of the other pieces of growth at that tip because the needle mass is dictating that allocation of energy we want to leave that strong shoot to pull out all of that strength and that'll be a shoot that will most likely cut off when we come back in the fall and do our shoot selection okay so you don't want to be touching you don't want to be thinning you don't want to be cutting candles in half or pinching let it go don't fertilize and let it grow lots of Sun lots of accurate watering when it needs it and you're keeping your hands off so in terms of selecting needs to pluck is there a certain percentage you look for in terms of new needles two-year-old needles three-year-old needles that you go by yeah don't try to grab on to this too tight okay don't try to just pulled off a bud talking to you guys grabbed onto it too tight don't try to grab on to this too tight don't make this don't make this an operation where you guys are getting super anxious about that concept of leaving some not taking some okay I make sure so for example in this shoot right here last year's needles are these very long ones you see these shorter needles behind those longer ones I've got two pairs okay those two pairs are the older needles that I'm leaving okay I've got I've got a pair on this shoot I've got three or four pairs on this shoot so I'm not counting how many older needles and how many newer needles that I'm removing I'm just leaving some and taking some leaving old taking some of last year's needles to balance out that energy and as long as you leave some in those locations where they're available where they're not compromising the aesthetic then you're gonna have the the the benefit of what those do for hormonal allocation and in continuing to deliver a consistent amount of energy throughout that branch for the tree so Rudy has a red pine that was repotted this spring says that the buds came out in very different strengths and sizes bigger and smaller would they still do candle to reset energy distribution or so if your biggest candles are very very strong Rudy if they're if your longest and strongest candles are aggressively strong absolutely absolutely because what's basically what the tree is saying is all right so we had that happen and this is how it is finished and now we are ready. how I'm responding. Stronger areas are going to get stronger, weaker areas are going to get weaker, and that's why we do this operation. If the tree in its kind of entirety is generally weak and most of the candles are weak and when you're seeing longer candles they're longer but they're not long because they're strong, they're just longer because everything else is so weak, then you may want to take the season off and even hold off on needle plucking. Just allow the tree to recover because that's saying I've been impaired by that repotting process to some degree. And so what we're doing now is similar to red pine, it would apply? Red pine, Japanese black pine, in North America we're able to apply this to our pitch pine, to our Virginia pine, and we're also able to apply this to several pines in the southeastern United States including Texas and Florida. So when I say that, there's such a broad range of pines down there that nobody's ever pursued as bonsai. And I do have students in the southeastern United States, in Texas in particular, who are starting to look at those native pines and work with seeing what can happen if they candle prune them. So we're just slowly obtaining that knowledge as people in those regions are exploring and applying these techniques and knowledge of why to this operation to see if they can make those native pines a lot more usable as bonsai and it's working. So that would be like the loblolly pine or the long needle pine. Or there's work being done on the sand pine right now in Florida. Now I've always wondered why nobody does any exploration with a spruce pine, which is also a southeastern native pine. Very, very unique, interesting variety that I haven't seen anybody work on. Maybe there's somebody out there who is. If you're out there and you are, apologies for not giving you credit. It's not something that I personally have had contact with and seen. But I wonder how many species of multi-flush pine there actually are. Are in the world when we come right down to it. Now, when we're starting to look at potential species for multi-flush pine, how would we even go about identifying the potential for that? Well, naturally, coastal growing pines are going to have a lot more of a likelihood. Coastal growing pines closer to the equator in particular, because we have like a shore pine up here in the Pacific Northwest, but we don't have the growing season up here to have multi-flush pines natively growing. In our region, even though it's a coastal pine, it's a very much a single flush pine. But when you go down to Florida and all of a sudden you see the loblolly and you see the slash and you see the sand and you see the long needle and you say, okay, I cut the candles on this and it works. Well, that makes a lot of sense considering Japanese black pine is a coastal pine. Japanese red pine is a coastal to foothill pine in Japan. You're talking about lower elevation pines geared towards longer growing seasons. And I'm assuming, although I can't confirm, an adaptation to regenerating growth from what I would assume is harsh coastal storms, particularly if you look at Japan and the technique for decandling black pine happens in June. Well, if you look at where the monsoon season is and when most of the tsunamis hit the island of Japan, yeah, you're right in the wheelhouse of June. That's interesting. Now, did the people that originally developed the candle pruning techniques, were they watching? No. Were they watching? No. Were they watching? No. No. No. No. Were they watching typhoons blow in and saying, oh, we should go decandle our pines? I don't know that. I don't know if anybody actually knows how this technique got started. But it is interesting that in the June season, when the monsoons are hitting Japan, also happens to be the time that we prune multi-flush pines and get that second flush that's phenomenally better quality of growth for bonsai. Can we talk a little bit more about the wind window? A lot of folks have questions about missing the window or the candles don't look like they're developing long enough. So what is the window? What do you look for? How do you know if you missed it? Yeah, that's a good question. So in the Northern Hemisphere, let's just say that if you're in the far north, for example, Canada or you're in Seattle or you're in maybe Maine or some of those really far northern portions of North America. I believe it's the northern hemisphere. I believe Minnesota may also be able to benefit from this, although you guys typically get more heat and with more heat means your timing shifts a little bit. So for those, for the northern, far northern states, we're starting in late, like last week of May, first week of June for our bigger black pine or our bigger multi-flush pines, okay? So the smaller that this tree gets, so say the middle of June, I'm going to be dealing with medium-sized pines. End of June, beginning of July, I'm going to be pruning my shohin pines. And that offset of those two to three weeks significantly impacts the length of that second flush because now I'm condensing the time from pruning to the point that that tree shuts down its growth, its foliar growth, and goes into summer dormancy, or the foliar growth transitions to that fall growth. That's when we see that second flush stop. That's what dictates the needle length. So if you guys are down in Texas, if you're down in Florida, if you're down inwhere, you're in the Southern Hemisphere, you're in the middle if you're down in Alabama, Los Angeles, those southern states, you guys may delay your candle pruning to the middle of June or maybe even the third week of June because you've got more heat, right? You've got longer day length. You've got a longer growing season. That means your growth is going to come out and be produced faster with those conditions. So you've got to push that pruning date back to maintain the needle length that's proportional to that tree, right? So we're talking about not only north-south, but also in terms of north-south, what those environmental factors are that are contributing to the rate that your tree grows. Tim is wondering what triggers the summer dormancy. What triggers summer dormancy? So typically, every tree has to have a point in time where it transitions its allocation of resources from roots to foliage to that foyer to vascular or foyer to roots if we oversimplify it. Movement of energy, to prepare for winter, okay? And this is what sets up our growth to be occurring. It's also what establishes our winter hardiness that's going to give that tree the ability to resist damage due to frost or freezing. So that switch in growth habit where now the priority is no longer generating new solar panels that are going to be functioning at a high metabolic rate. We've got a decreasing daylight length. We've got most likely a decreasing temperature, although daylight length is the biggest trigger for summer dormancy. So we've got those triggers that are saying, hey, guys, we're headed the opposite way. You don't want to be investing your money in new solar panels with a shrinking amount of daylight. Let's go ahead and store those resources up, and when that daylight length starts increasing again, we'll generate solar panels again, right? And so it makes sense if you think about it from that perspective that it's just the tree being a smart business person in terms of making sure that it's got resources to function at a maximum rate when those conditions are right for it to function that way. Sujata is curious about growing Japanese black pine in the tropics, where it's hot all the time, and it rains for many months out of the year. Is it a worthy idea to try to do that? Absolutely. So Japanese black pine in particular, if you look at some of the more, what I would say, ideal locations, I mean, Japanese black pine grows all the way down on the island of Okinawa, which is very tropical in nature. There's pampas down there, which is very tropical in nature. You're obviously in India, Indonesia, etc. On the coastal areas, you're very familiar with pampas as a tropical plant, but also a lot of ficus and species of that nature down in Okinawa. And the black pines that you can grow down there, or in the southern island of Takamatsu or Kyushu, even though they experience winter, they really enjoy that coastal, tropical, hot, humid environment. That's when they really thrive. And so in the tropics, you can grow black pine, and you can actually, in a really long growing season, you can not only see the squeeze two flushes of growth, that first growth, and then you cut it and you get that second growth, you can actually squeeze three flushes of growth where you could prune that second flush, and you could get a third flush. So you could go from one to two to four in one season in a tropical region. Now, what is the timing for that in the northern hemisphere? I do not know. I do not know. I've never actually practiced it myself, but I've seen it done. And that's a really, really interesting opportunity that you guys have in tropical regions to take what I would consider multi-flush pine to a level that they have not been developed at to this point. I would say you guys have an opportunity to go above and beyond what's happened to date. Now, one of the other things that I wanted to talk to you guys about, because we're talking about timing and its flexibility so much, the other thing I wanted to talk to you guys about was pruning too early. Okay, because we're saying, okay, yeah, that last week in May, what about the third week in May? What about the second week in May? What about the first week in May? Now, what happens when we start talking about pruning multi-flush pine really, really early? Multi-flush pine actually have two stages of growth or two forms of growth, right? Just like a juniper has juvenile and mature, so does a multi-flush pine, juvenile and mature. So if we prune this thing too early, and it's not set up or it hasn't developed the vascular system yet in its new elongating candle to actually have those adventitious buds have the vascular sophistication to turn into a mature piece of growth, what will happen is those adventitious buds will turn into juvenile pieces of growth, which are very long. The internodes between each needle are extremely long. That central stem is very minty green colored and never really lignifies solidly, and it's got these little leaflets at the axle of each bud that never go away. So it's a very low quality of growth, very similar to a juniper when we call juvenile growth, not really a desirable growth. It's the same when we talk about multi-flush pine. So you've got to be careful with that. Now, how early is too early? And how do you know? I don't know that yet. These are the areas, in my mind, when we start talking about bonsai evolution of knowledge, these are the areas that bonsai, because Japan kind of identified a lot of the techniques and set the time frame for what works for them, we have a lot of exploration. So what we're trying to do is to be figuring out how these things work for us in conditions other than Japan, outside of Japan, and all of the different regions of the world that bonsai is now being cultivated in. And that's becoming an expansive, really expansive quantity of countries and different geographic, horticultural, climatic regions. Each of those is going to have different indicators and different timing for this application to be effective. And it just comes down to understanding the why, having a very basic idea of when, and how. And that's what we're trying to do. We're trying to figure out when, and then starting to manipulate that and experience that and play with that over the course of years. But the thing that you guys can latch onto, northern hemisphere, beginning of June is always going to be that jumping off point. That's your reference to start your exploration. Balancing of the strength occurs by plucking the needles, not by the way we handle the candles, except for we need to prune all of the candles at once. And so those two things allow you guys to start establishing a more uniform distribution of energy, as well as generating a candle length that's going to be more evenly distributed. That's all you need to launch into exploration of multi-plush pine. Chris is wondering if it matters if needle fascicles are elongating or opening before decandling. Needle fascicles. Does not matter. Does not matter. So for this, I mean, when you guys look up here, this was going to be kind of my reward, but I'm going to do it now just to show you this big monstrous candle. Ah! Notice that that has a little bit of a difference. Hasn't even started to produce actual needles. Right now, there's a very big reason why this pine is a little bit behind and this is a little slow. Notice this abundance of flower cones that are on this. Okay? Anytime a tree produces a fruiting body, that takes a lot of energy and it delays the production of the foliar mass. Any ponderosa pine that we have that heavily flowered this year, the needles are just emerging. Whereas if it didn't flower, they're actually starting to elongate and form and it's a lot more advanced. Same thing with a multi-flush pine. But it doesn't matter that this hasn't opened up and started to form the needle fascicles as independent pieces of the growth. What matters is the timing and the strength. This is a strong shoot, the timing is right for where we're at, for this size of tree to be pruning this at this point in time. That's all that counts. So Linda's in Florida and Linda removed all of ... Hi Linda! linda linda removed all of her fertilizer uh-huh already should should she reapply nah nah you're good linda i know that you've been probably feeding like spot on or even better than i could recommend so i'm not worried that your trees don't have what they need i just wanted to make sure and saying you know don't remove that fertilizer um there are professionals in in the western world and even inside the united states that promote the removal of fertilizer after one month or every time you fertilize you remove the old application and put on a new and that that is fundamentally crazy crazy do not do that because the things that your tree needs to be healthy beyond the production of green mass needles that all comes after a month right not even it's not even ready to be taken up it's not even in a broken down form by those small little microorganisms that we love so much inside the soil it's not even happening prior to that four week mark so if we take that off we're robbing those trees we're taking all that resource from them we can't do that to those trees you know that so another thing that i'm doing here and something that i wanted to draw your guys attention to kind of kind of as we moved up the tree but this feels like a very appropriate place notice how many branches are emerging from one junction uh right here on this piece of growth so we've actually got one two three and then this piece this bigger thicker piece and let me cut that wire so that you guys can see this that bigger thicker piece is considered a piece of growth originating from this note that's four branches coming from one location on the tree now this tree has never been pruned by us it's never been decandled by us and it's been a long time since it's been decandled period but when you start to get these concentrations of branches in one location so much energy from all of the photosynthesis of each of these individual branches is funneling through this junction where they're all originating all of those sugars and carbohydrates start to accumulate in that junction to try and get into the main vascular system of that branch if we leave that junction as is with four branches there and all of those resources pumping through that location that location swells significantly because there's got to be room for all of those sugars and carbohydrates to go somewhere and it starts to focus and concentrate and grow abnormally large this is what causes structural problems via inverse taper so we've got to take these junctions and i've been doing it without talking about it because we had so many other things to talk about you've got to take these junctions down to at the very very most three at this point in time because we are removing so much foliage but ideally over the course of the next say year or two we would take it down to two and two is the sustainable number of branches at any junction that you can have and not get structural issues so this time i'm going to take this down to three now when i look at this i want to be saving branches that give me a lot of quality and some of that quality is based in strength some of that quality is based in the presence of interior branches and ramification and some of that quality is based on its emergence and that shape of the crotch with that more primary branch so if we look here and we notice we've got this branch here that has this beautiful beautiful acute crotch right here are we in time? are we in time? yeah beautiful acute crotch right here that feels like a really good branch to leave the problem is notice that there's no absolutely no ramification in here now if we leave it and we open that up to sun and we candle prune it we fertilize it heavily there will be adventitious buds that are going to form there but if we take a look at these other branches we notice we have such a more significantly developed secondary tertiary branching on these branches now also notice the obtuseness of this angle this structurally in terms of that crotch is very poor ramification is very good i'm going to say even though the crotch is poor i'm going to go on this structure as being a more valuable component i'm going to take this guy off now i'm also looking at the fact that i've got this branch here that's going to be probably contributing to the shading out of this over time so this feels like a much more sustainable design option for me and then what i can do is i can fan this this direction to compensate for that removal in the future as i design the tree and these are all of the things that are just flowing through my head naturally as i'm working on trees you come to these situations you reason through it right some people get really attached i really like that branch that's a really great branch i feel like that branch and i would be friends and that's not really where we need to be right we need to be looking at it objectively as which one's got the better structure which one's got the better angle which one's going to contribute to the shape of this tree that's the one that we're going to save that's the one that we're going to keep but we've also got to be thinking okay i've got growth around it i've got branches here i've got branches there i've got an alternating structure which one contributes and and gives the most to that entire totality of thought i just want i just i just really went that was deep yeah i did i went that happened we had a follow-up question on fertilizer you got i was gonna say we just had a few people that i'd like to see the trunk bend a little bit in detail you were talking about the fertilizer okay yeah okay um yeah let me let me let me come back to that that sounds good uh when do you take the fertilizer off um so if you guys have a healthy functioning tree you probably should not be removing your fertilizer because what ends up happening with organic feed on a really healthy tree that's got a tremendous amount of microbiotic activity built up is it just somehow magically disappears it's gone and so for us if we have a tree that we've fertilized twice and when we come around to fertilize it a third time if we still have the first and the first application of fertilizer present and relatively intact and the second one hasn't even broken down even moderately that's telling me that you have a problem in your container now that problem isn't something you need to freak out about the problem isn't something that you need to go get a product to solve but what it's saying is your balance of water and oxygen or some portion of that system is not quite where it needs to be or it's saying you just repotted the tree and you've removed a lot of that microbiotic activity it needs to replenish address that situation if it's been in the container a while and you're not getting that decomposition you're lacking microbiotic activity got a problem balance of water and oxygen probably the most significant if you did just repot it just wait you got to give it time for those microbiomes to reoccupy okay let me finish this branch we'll come back to the trunk bend i'm surprised nobody's asked about pruning needles yet well since you asked right here they come so um one of the big questions you know if you guys ever go see the coke exhibition in japan one of the big questions is is it okay to print to print the needles you know this is like one of those um this is like one of those rules like you can't cross wire but nobody when they're looking at um and don't get me wrong i'm not promoting crossing wire but uh there was um i had a we had to laugh we had our sale and uh we sold a few you know obviously we sold quite a few trees um but a few people posted pictures of their trees on facebook showing crossed wires in the wiring at mirai now i don't know if they were uh defending themselves because they had been chastised for crossed wires i don't know if they were saying like hey this is what i've been told and at mirai they do it different any way that you go about it it does not matter to me because yeah we we cross wires from time to time we cross wires to give structure to finer branches who don't have a shoulder that can facilitate supporting that wire right and that would be the reason that we would cross wires at mirai oh so anyways there's got to be a reason why we would be pruning needles just like there has to be a reason why we would cross wire why would we prune needles we would be pruning needles to open up light penetration and air circulation to the interior portion of the tree or to weaker buds okay so we would cross wires to give structure to finer branches who don't have a shoulder that so you've seen me cut a few needles that are excessively long on this tree all i'm doing is just taking away that extra mass that's blocking things from getting into the interior portion of the tree that would be why i would say cut needles now there's a stipulation to cutting needles if you repotted this spring you cannot cut the needles this year and if you're going to repot next spring you cannot cut the needles this year okay keep that in mind so within that year frame or you're going to repot you cannot cut the needles right and what you'll see or actually what you're going to roll the dice with is if you cut those needles you actually stop you break that chain of water and that tension that's moving resources from the roots to the foliage mass when you cut that needle and it can cause a total loss of water through the rest of that tree based on the impact of the fine roots and their connection to the tip of that needle okay so that's the one stipulation all right let's come back to that and we're going to talk about the trunk bend here so i'm just this branch i'm saving i'm not going to candle prune it i want to get this as strong as i possibly can because its position is very very significant i'm going to let these elongate i'm going to fill this branch up with strength and i'm going to actually going to take the strongest pieces of the candles that are left on this and i'm going to be grafting them into the base of this and regrowing a branch right here so that's what this branch is for i can't twist this and manipulate this enough to be part of the shape as is so i'm going to come back and i'm going to do that and i'm going to do that and i'm going to do that and i'm going to do something else okay but when we look at this trunk bend what we had here was an a dead straight trunk i mean this thing was rocket straight right up through here and what we decided is that we want one bend as close to the base as we can possibly get it and one of the problems with making a bend on a diagonal slanting trunk line is that a lot of times this block or brace will slide up the trunk and there's no way to focus the concentration of the bend on that area so low on the tree so by having this branch here we were we were able to cut just above it make that bend and use that branch as the stopping point so that that block was able to support that bend okay so we did a bend here now probably what we're going to be looking to do and i'm going to just rotate this slightly and raise the branch here is we're probably going to come back and we're going to try to make a bend up in this upper section now that's going to take just like a ridiculous ridiculous amount of pressure and we're going to try to make a bend up in this upper section now that's going to take just like a ridiculous ridiculous amount of pressure and strength probably via mechanical operation like a jack to be able to pull that back this way but what it's going to do as far as our movement is it's going to be taking you here here and then back there okay and from that point we've got one more move in the apex back and all of a sudden we get this beautiful wonderful movement through the tree okay that's the thought process in the trunk bends starting to actually you can like see stuff now gary is curious to be able to tell us what you could use any of the woody branches you cut off for grafting um you could not use anything that i've cut off for grafting because none of the growth the growth that we would be using for grafting would be this year's growth not candle pruned this year's growth elongated and fully hardened off either this fall or next spring okay so if you candle prune what happens is you set back the maturity of that vascular system because now that growth starts in june as opposed to starting in february march and it won't be mature enough to be placed as a piece of as a scion inside of that really woody vascular tissue of a mature black pine and have any chance of surviving that transition so we like to let that that that year's growth run which is what i'm saying with this branch right here i'm going to let this growth run get these really nice and strong particular particularly after pruning the rest of this these things are going to just go boom they're going to elongate and get all of that strength because we've just cut all of the oxen out of this tree let those harden off and those will be my grafting subjects if i candle prune those can't use them would have to go to an exterior source for grafting subjects multi-flesh going deep going pretty deep here guys super tuesday super tuesday tim says the candles on my pine are way more mature than the ones you're pruning should i still try to wait or should i be trying to force three flushes i live in louisiana um so what i would tell what i would tell you tim and that's a really good question and this is the same thing that my students from los angeles say like for example our our pine one defining concepts courses this coming weekend friday saturday sunday we'll be doing candle pruning almost almost exclusively in multi-flesh pine work and a lot of those people are coming los angeles san diego uh... alabama the southern united states and all of them are like guard pines look like this like in like march and it's and it's june what what do we do we you still are going to be pruning the candles of that new growth at that point where they emerged leaving a few millimeters but i would probably recommend that you even postpone it a little bit more depending on the size of your tree because you're in an area where the growth is so much more ramped up based on the heat humidity that you experience You want to make sure that you cut it at a time that's going to give you the needle length that you desire. And if it's a tree of this size, you're probably going to want to wait until that mid to late June mark for the appropriate needle length of a really developed pine. William's wondering how you would treat a Japanese black pine with quote-unquote wet feet, yellowing and not pushing. So, one, we would need to back off on watering, obviously, right? Number two, if you've got that issue of yellowing and it's saying, hey, I'm not drying out, I'm not really growing, something is wrong, the balance of water and oxygen has been thrown off in the system, you've got to regain that balance of water and oxygen. And what that means is, typically, in a container like this, we'll have drainage holes closer to the edges. You would just want to take that. Obviously, if I'm looking at this tree, it would be a little bit more difficult to take that out. Obviously, if I'm looking at this tree, it would be a little bit more difficult to take that out. Obviously, if I'm looking at this tree, it would be a little bit more difficult to take that out. If it behooves me to put this side up in the air as opposed to down, because it's going to weaken it, I would just want to tilt this with a block underneath it and leave it like that. Now, what that does is that encourages a greater amount of gravity to act on that soil column and remove moisture or water from that soil column. It's imperative, though, that we have holes near the bottom edge so that the water can escape. That's the best way to remove that excessive water when a tree is not drying out and you're seeing those signs of too much water, not enough oxygen. Hold back on your watering. Maybe pull it out of the rain if you've had a really wet spring slash early summer. All of those things will contribute to regaining that balance of water and oxygen, and it may take a couple months. You may really have to watch that. It dries out. You set it down. You thoroughly water it. Put it right back up. Allow that balance of water and oxygen to reestablish. And you'll know it's reestablished not because the color is going to improve, although it will, but you will see new buds forming. You'll see new growth. You'll see new growth happening. You'll see the tree kick into gear. That's a significant indication you've reestablished that balance. Good questions. Good questions tonight, you guys. This has been awesome. I'm excited anyways. I'm feeling good about it. Nice. Yeah. What time we got? It's 7.35. 7.35. All right, I'm going to keep rocking. If you guys have more questions, ask. Yeah. We're going to get close to the apex. Clearly, I'm not going to get this done, but I want you guys to kind of see the distribution of needle mass throughout this tree. And if you guys have multi-flush pine questions, now is the time. Because if you start asking them when we move back to another species, we're going to have to kibosh that whole thing. I guess you could also bring them to the impromptu Q&As, which... Do we have an impromptu Q&A this week? Are we... That's a good question. Just to show you how organized we are at Mirai. Yeah, we... No, it's been a crazy week. We are working very hard to get the new Mirai 2.0 website dialed in. I cannot tell you when it's going to launch, but I know that it is getting closer. Well, let's follow up about the live Q&A. Yeah, follow up about the live Q&A. I got some questions for you. Okay, what do you got? Mike, this is a question from a while back, but we're bringing it to the forefront. Bring it on back, bring it on back. Mike says, I have a large black pine that had a mild case of dothostroma. Yeah. Treated it, now it's healthy. The spring growth is strong. Can I still decandal? So, that's a really good question, dothostroma. I mean, in general, when you have a pine that's suffering from a fungus or an insect, the last thing we want to do is reduce its foliage mass. However, with multi-flush pines, in particular, with dothostroma, we want to reduce its foliage mass. However, with multi-flush pines, in particular, with dothostroma, we want to reduce its foliage mass. However, with multi-flush pines, in particular, with dothostroma, that's affecting older needles from the previous year when it starts to show in the fall or winter or early spring, you'll see it on the older needles in particular, then you do have the ability to candle prune if you're able to arrest the expansion of the disease and if the tree does not defoliate. Because a lot of times what happens is dothostroma-infected needles, depending on how bad the infection is and how strong or weak the infection is, will not be able to defoliate. depending on how bad the infection is and how strong or weak the infection is, will not be able to defoliate. depending on how bad the infection is and how strong or weak the infection is, will not be able to defoliate. On a really weak tree, it could defoliate three quarters of the tree. That's a very common occurrence with dothostroma. So as long as you have needle mass, older needle mass, so that you decandle it and you're not defoliating it, then yes, you can with a strong pine and you'll see that rapidly increase the quality of the pine because all of those disease needles eventually next year will be gone for good and then you get a pine that's really off and running. Is pitch pine single flush or multi-flush? So I treat pitch pine like a multi-flush and we've tried our very, very hardest to get some good pitch pine material to show you guys how we work pitch pine. And it is truly an elusive species to get your hands on because there just aren't that many really good, beautiful pieces of material both being collected and also really existing in places that they're capable of being removed in a legal and sustainable manner. And so because of that, we don't, you know, we don't want to encourage any kind of illegal activity or we don't want to support illegal collecting or unsustainable collecting. And so we've kind of foregone the pitch pine dream for the moment anyways. Well, David's curious when would be the best time to air layer that? Air layering a pitch pine? Wow. I. I mean. So I would air layer a pitch pine after the first flush had elongated and hardened off, which I'm guessing is going to be happening over the course of the end of last month throughout this month, depending on where in the United States you are. And I'm guessing if you have a pitch pine, you're probably in the northern United States. So you're probably waiting another month before you air layer. But understand that when you air layer a pine, you're talking about two to three years before you get root production if the tree survives and does produce roots. And that is a big if. If. Pines are extremely difficult to air layer. They do not readily produce roots from that tissue. They will form a callus and the callus may sit idle for several years. There are a lot of nuances to air layering pines and unfortunately nuances that I personally am not knowledgeable about enough to tutor you on that. But I will tell you that air layering a pine is that's a big task to have success with. But if you're going to do it, do it when the tree is in an energy positive state. That's when the new growth is hardened off and reaccumulated energy. That's really what you're looking at. That might have been David from Sydney. Oh, OK. But David from Sydney, would he have a pitch pine? I wonder. Maybe not. He asked a question earlier. Eric is wondering how much Akadama you use in the soil mixture for black pine in the northwest. Ah, yeah. This is a really good question. You know, when we start talking about soil for our multi-flush versus single flush pines, our multi-flush pines typically tend to be, like we said, coastal in nature, although the pitch pine is the exception. And actually, before we move on, I'll just give you guys a background about pitch pine. Pitch pine typically occur with a little bit more elevation. I mean, not always. They do have that, what I would say, like climactic regional diversity, much like a Japanese red pine, where they can go lower elevation up into the foothills and slightly higher elevation. But the pitch pine, its ability to produce a second flush actually comes from its adaptivity to fire. And if you guys have ever seen pitch pine or worked with pitch pine, you would know that pitch pine can actually produce brand new buds all the way back on the trunk, on that really thick old bark. New buds form in the fissures of that. And that is based on fire adaptation to reproduce growth so the entire canopy of the tree can burn. And it will produce new growth from the bark and not skip a bit. And so that's really where we start playing into the pitch pine's ability to be a multi-flush is that adaptation. So anyways, something interesting to note about pitch pine. But as far as our soil components are concerned, most of the time when we start talking about our multi-flush pine, we're talking about trees that generally have a higher amount of desire for moisture than we would consider our single flush pines to have. So with our single flush pines, we're talking about trees that have a higher desire for moisture. So with our single flush pines, we'll use a 1-1-1 Akadama Lava Pumice, and we'll use a 1-16th to a 1-1-4 size range, particle size. But when we start talking about multi-flush, we can still use a 1-1-1, although we can deliver more nutrition and get away with a little more moisture content. So we can up it to 2-1-1, two parts Akadama, one part Lava, one part Pumice, and open up that availability of resources a little bit. And we also use 1-16th to 1-16th. So we use a slightly smaller particle size, which gives us more moisture-retentive capacity. And for multi-flush, that combined factor of increased nutritional retention with increased moisture retention does a lot of good towards giving these species what they need to be producing multiple flushes in a single season. So this is David from Sydney's question now. Oh, it is? No, I have it. I have one now. Oh. Tight. It was from before. What up, David? Hey, David. He's wondering, do you have any tips for handling Monterey pines in terms of pruning and development? Radiata. Radiata. So the big question with radiata that I cannot answer is, can they be successfully candle pruned and reliably produce a second flush that fully matures in a single season? And I've heard yes, and I've heard no. And I don't know, because I actually don't have Monterey pines. I don't know if you've ever had a Monterey pine here. Again, Monterey pine's a lot like a pitch pine. You want a Monterey pine, that is a hard pine to find. Every collection that I've been to where I've had the opportunity to work on Monterey pine, for one reason or another, nobody there was familiar, which doesn't surprise me, but nobody was familiar with whether or not you could candle prune them. I would start off conservatively, and I would probably candle prune a really strong shoot, but look to be pinching and controlling growth via the single flush that I have. I would start off with a single flush short needle method on a Monterey pine and see where that got you, see if that pruned shoot buds out and produces a second flush. If it does, then you would build up a lot of strength via fertilization the following year, and if you were ready, you could dive in a little bit deeper with maybe a few more branches, maybe the strongest parts on the tree to try and control that growth, and you could kind of dip your toe in the water without fully committing via that method of exploration. And I would always, always encourage exploration. Try that out. See what happens. Understand how the tree works. Radiata for you guys in Australia, obviously a major candidate for bonsai. They grow better for you guys in Australia than they do here for us in the United States. Significant, significant species that you guys should be doing more with, and it'll be interesting to see how that works out for you. Keep me in the loop on that one. William's wanting to know the right technique of removing the needles. Do you cut them off at the base? Do you tear them, roll them? No, we're just pulling. We're pulling straight out, so I'm not pulling back into the interior of the tree. When I pluck a needle, I'm grabbing the needle, and I'm just pulling that needle straight out. Notice that I'm not grabbing a gigantic number of needles at once. This is fairly controlled because I want to focus on that aesthetic distribution evenly around the 360-degree circumference of the shoots, so I'm going to cut these candles here, and then when I come in and I needle pluck, I'm just pulling them straight out towards me. Multi-flush pines, for the most part, don't adhere to the bark of the tree like a single-flush, short-needle pine, like, say, for example, a ponderosa pine. At the wrong time of year, a ponderosa pine, if you grab a big chunk of needles, you'll pull off half of the bark on that branch as well, and that can cause the death of the branch or the weakening of the branch, and so a lot of people choose on their white pines or on their single-flush pines to go ahead and prune. This is one of those unemerged buds. Boom. Here's another one. Boom. And here's one that's just barely emerged. You got that, Ricardo? Boom. Okay. So, on a multi-flush pine, you don't need to worry about that. You do not need to worry about that. And if you guys, you know, in saying that, you could run across a tree that has a very soft bark or has a lot of moisture moving through it at the time of year that you choose to needle pluck. If you see excessive bark coming out of that branch, if you see excessive bark coming out of that branch, If you see excessive bark coming out of that branch, if you see excessive bark coming out of that branch, if you see excessive bark coming out of that branch, if you see excessive bark coming out of that branch, cool, decrease the number of needles you're plucking off. If it's really, really bad, hold off. Wait for a little bit longer. Allow that vascular tissue to solidify a little bit because all that's happening, when you remove bark when you're plucking needles, you're either taking too much, you're pulling back towards the trunk as opposed to pulling them out of the sheath towards the tip, or you've got so much water moving through that system that there's a real, or you've got so much water moving through that system that there's a real, weak adherence of the cambium and phloem to that central core of xylem, and the cambium and phloem tear off with that needle. And so when you think about that and when you're looking at that, be aware and adapt to that. But there's no reason to freak out. People tend to freak out about that stuff and get super panicked and, oh man, now I've got to cut the needles on all my pine. No, that was that pine at that time in that place based on how you pulled it in that season. And that's it. And I'm always shocked, too, in the United States how many professionals promote what I would consider to be experiential knowledge as opposed to actually solidly vetted, tested, well-applied horticultural knowledge. You can't pull the needles on a ponderosa pine because it'll tear the bark. Well, yeah, wrong time of year, you bet. Even at that time of year, if you pull them one pair at a time instead of five, you're good to go. And if you pull them in the right direction, you're good to go. So I don't feel some frustration around that. Ryan has a question. Nice name. I like that. I like that. Anybody named Ryan is a winner in my book. They said, when grafting Japanese black pine on ponderosa, is it normal to have the Japanese black pine scions not push growth for a long time? It is. It is. So let's just be really clear and frank about grafting black pine onto ponderosa. Grafting black pine onto ponderosa is a bear. It's a bear. And not because they're not compatible. They are absolutely compatible. The roots of a ponderosa pine may be the only pine that I've seen that has as strong of roots as Japanese black pine, if not stronger, because Japanese black pine is a very strong rooted tree. But what ends up happening, because you are meshing so many different factors. You're meshing the strength. You're meshing water needs. You're meshing two different sizes of vascular tissue. That scion of that black pine and the core of that ponderosa, that ponderosa's vascular tissue is ginormous, right? And so those potential, what I would consider to be physical incompatibilities and not horticultural incompatibilities. Require that you work a little bit harder in the grafting process. And what that working harder means is not sharpening your knife a little bit more. It's not, I mean, obviously you have to have good technique, but it's not shifting your technique at all. It means that you're going to need to be applying more grafts to a ponderosa pine with black pine than you think that you want. And probably more grafts by a large amount, because the best that I've heard anybody, who is really talented at grafting, the best success rate that I've heard of anybody who's talented at grafting getting on putting black pine onto ponderosa pine is 50%. 50% is the best we've ever gotten here. 50% from what I understand from Mike Hagedorn is right around the best success rate that he's been able to get. And there are trees that'll be perfectly healthy that I'll graft one year. Not a single graft will take. I'll graft it the next year. And. And 50% will take. And I can't tell you why. Because they're all being fertilized and prepared to be grafted in the fall. All of the grafts are being prepared. You're matching strong graft to thicker area, medium graft to slightly thinner area. And we don't graft weak grafts to weaker areas. But matching that strength, matching that vascular tissue, having a sharp knife, doing all of the things right. One year it works, one year it doesn't. I do not know what dictates that, but it is. It is something that for a lot of the ponderosas that we've grafted with black pine, we've had to come back two, maybe two years, three years to get that done. And what we've been doing a lot with lately is grafting Scott's pine onto ponderosa and seeing what happens with that. And that has proven to be miraculous. Very high success rate. Very beautiful meshing and combination of foliage to trunk characteristics. It's really been a nice one. That might be one for you to try as well. So. For grafting pine in general, do you use scion? Is that right? Scion, mm-hmm. Scion or approach grafting technique? So that's a really good question. For grafting pine, my experience and even back in Japan with Mr. Kimura, when you try to approach graft pine, it's extremely difficult because you have so much sap. Even in the dormant times of the year, when you have sap flow at its very lowest, you have a very short window. You have a window of time to operate to get the two cambial layers of the approach graft, which would still be on its own rootstock, meshed with that cambial layer of the parent tree that you're applying the graft to before that sap gets in between those two and seals off that junction. And so it is really tough to get an approach graft to take on a pine. Now, we have them. We have trees that are approach grafted entirely with pine. I've found the best success doing a scion graft as opposed to approach graft. What time of year do you usually do that? So I'm doing all of our grafting in the late fall. In the Pacific Northwest, we don't get a really, really warm, super strong growth in the spring because we've got that prolonged wet rain in like 40, 50 degrees for months and months, which also perpetuates a lot of disease. One of the things that we climactically deal with here. And so we actually have a much better success rate grafting when we graft in the fall. And protect those trees from freezing in the wintertime. You can graft in the spring. That's kind of what I would say the gold standard for grafting approach, particularly if you're in an area that has a nice warm weather, warm spring, rapid ramp up into growth, then you're going to have a higher success rate grafting in the spring and the fall. So it just depends on where you're at. I have a student down in Los Angeles who's grafted with me up here in the fall for four or five years. Now he is grafting in Los Angeles. He says his success rate in L.A. grafting black pine onto ponderosa pine is exponentially higher and they do it in the spring. So it could just be a regional thing that's really making it pretty cumbersome to be grafting here in the Pacific Northwest. It's possible all kinds. I mean, like, you know, we're sitting here exchanging a lot of a lot of questions and banter and information on this stream. I had a good friend of mine, Peter. Peter Warren, who's a professional. And. And who, you know, he and I were in Japan together at the same time. Peter Warren asked me when Mariah Live first started, he said, don't you think you're going to run out of things to talk about? Honestly, each of these topics that you guys have asked about, whether it be how you handle pitch pine stylistically or horticulturally, that's a big one. Those are two different streams. How you graft, whether we do approach, whether we do scion, whether we do a black pine or red pine, a white pine or we do a juniper, all of those are different. What season we do it in, how we air layered the deciduous tree versus if we air layered a juniper versus, right? All of those things accumulate. Bone size depth as an art form is so deep. I don't ever see an end to the exploration because we're not just trying to. I'm not just trying to create for you guys what I learned from Mr. Kimura. I'm trying to give you that and everything that we're learning on our own as we're innovating here and continuing to drive the use of different species and the knowledge of horticulture and design forward. I mean. I don't see any end to this stream and the questions that you guys have. I don't see any end to showing you a professional, really high level approach to a lot of the things that you guys are asking about and wanting to see. And so I see a pretty prolonged future for Mariah. I'm actually overwhelmed with how much I can't show you guys that I want to. So, you know, years and years from now, we'll say, yeah, we did it. It's all deadly. All deadly. It's all deadly. Grant's one. I'm wondering if they can decantle a pine in the wild to test its multi-flushness. So any pine that's in the ground. And I mean, I guess, you know, let's quantify that, too, to the effect that if it's a pine growing in an environment that is really, really tortured, you're probably not going to get the kind of nutrition you would need for it to respond the way you would want to. But any pine in the ground is going to have a dramatically, I would say, a dramatically greater amount of strength because of its expansive root system and the strength coming from the roots, particularly in pines. And so you can get away with more and have trees respond slightly different when they're growing in the field or when they're growing in the landscape or the ground. So you would have to buffer the results that you got from that. But yeah, I would say, for example, I can't prune a ponderosa pine in the ground and get it to produce a second flush. So that feels like that's a really accurate indicator for me. Oh, I pruned a ponderosa pine. I get a bud close to where I prune. It doesn't produce a second flush that fully matures. That's an obvious, not a multi-flush pine. But maybe there are species, for example, I would be willing to bet that an Austrian black pine, if you pruned it in the ground, might be able to produce more buds that would produce a second flush that year, whereas in a bonsai container, you might prune it as a multi-flush, and maybe a handful of those shoots would mature, all the other ones would do nothing. And that's why we say Austrian black pine can't be considered a true multi-flush, because you can't depend on the technique to give you that response. So you got to be careful. You'd have to buffer that, Grant. But you're smart enough to figure that out. And I would say that using trees in the ground is going to be probably a far safer and less expensive way to make mistakes and explore. So maybe you give it a try. Let us know how it goes. Tom has a Japanese black pine that's yellowing every spring. They say they're repotted at moving organics. There's no movement or growth. Do you have any other tips other than sun? What's the pH of your water? And what soil did you put it in? I mean, so when we start to look at yellowing growth, we say yellowing growth is a sign of either excessive water and not enough oxygen. It could be a sign of lack of nutrition. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It could be a sign of lack of nutrition. It could be a sign of lack of nutrition. And we've talked about how a very basic pH, for example, 8.5910, can lock up that iron that allows nitrogen to be processed, which is what creates the green color or the chlorophyll that captures the sun energy and creates sugars and carbohydrates. So if you have a very basic pH, you may have an iron deficiency that's preventing nitrogen from being synthesized into chlorophyll. Those kinds of things are very easy to solve just by understanding the quality of your water. And one of the things that I've done is I've actually taken samples of the soil with root, packaged it up, sent it to an extension agency. For us here, it's Oregon State and Colorado. It used to be Colorado State. Down in California, I could do it at Cal Poly, where I went to school. They would do an analysis of it in their pathology lab. And then they would send it back. And they'd say, oh, by the way, did you know that you have a soil pH of six or, excuse me, no, soil pH of 4.5, which is super acidic? That happened to one of our junipers out here. And I was like, holy crap. How could I have a soil pH of 4.5 when our water is right around 6.5 or 7? Well, I used a copper spine to make a big root then. The copper was in the soil. And although minimal amounts of copper aren't significant, right around the base where all of that copper was sitting and oxidizing, I was getting a high copper concentration throughout the pH and caused a major health issue in that tree. Little did I know. Crazy. And all of that was just like, I'm out of possible solutions. I'm going to send it. I'm going to have it analyzed. Hopefully, they can tell me it's pythium or phytophthora or some rare oogly-boogly disease. And I'll try to find a solution for it. And it was something as simple as, you have something in your soil causing a pH issue that's detrimenting the health of the tree. Tom mentioned he's using nails, iron nails, to help with iron. Did that cause a pH issue? Well, I think that probably the bigger issue is the pH of the water. Because even if you're applying iron to the soil, if the pH of the soil is basic enough that it's locking up the nitrogen, then even applying iron nails is not going to work because you can't get the iron from the soil up to the foliar mass of the tree if the pH is incorrect. Now, if you took liquid iron and you sprayed it on the foliage and you directly applied liquid iron, like the horticultural grade liquid iron, then you would probably see the foliage green up almost immediately. But that is very much treating the symptom and not the problem. And I'm guessing that the problem for you, Tom, is based in your water. I'm assuming it's based in your water. Eric is wondering if you would needle pluck brown needles. So it is. If you have brown needles and you have an unhealthy tree, the last thing. And so in saying, hey, listen, guys, we're going to pluck the needles on a multi-flush to distribute the strength. If you have a tree that is weak, if you have a tree that is diseased, if you have a tree that has a heavy insect infestation, if you have a tree that has anything wrong other than being super stoked to be alive and being a kick-ass bonsai, don't pluck the needles. Because this is the photosynthetic mass that feeds the tree. This is how the tree creates food. The more you reduce this, the less food that is created for the tree, the less the roots are fed, the less the roots are able to take all of that stuff that those microbiotic pieces in the soil are breaking down the origin of our immune system in the tree and put back into the foliar mass. So if your tree is in any way unhealthy, do not pluck the needles. But if you got a few brown needles and the majority of your canopy looks like this, I mean, even when you guys look in here, Ricardo, if you can just blast in here, you guys will see there's a lot of brown needles up in this tree. It hasn't been maintained. It hasn't been cleaned. Some of these probably have a little bit of disease on them. But for the most part, this tree is very healthy. I feel very comfortable with the candles being what they are, pruning and plucking, even though I've got some brown needles. So it depends on what type of brown needles, to what extent, to what degree, what the other foliage mass looks like. That's how we would need to answer that. Okay, let me shake this out. I'm not going to get all the way through it, but I'm going to be able to show you guys enough of an illustration. I keep promising all of these time, lapses of these trees, the juniper from last week. I'm still waiting on that. I also had an oak from the growth perpetuation that I really want to time lapse the wiring of. And this is another tree that I'm sitting here looking at and saying, boy, to show you guys the finished product of styling and wiring this tree after this major work so that you could see the fruits of this labor would be pretty amazing. Whether or not that happens, I'm not going to promise it. But I do want to focus on what the epicenter of this stream was about. The epicenter of this stream was about showing you guys the decandling process, talking about the fertilization in preparation for the decandling process and the timing to get the response of shorter needles, shorter internodes, and bifurcation. And the purpose of this stream was to then show you the needle plucking to distribute the energy so that we had the same amount of transpiration occurring across the entire tree, pruning all of the candles, strong, medium, and weak to reset the system so that we get a uniform flush of growth, in that second push that'll be happening over the course of the next, say, four to six weeks when those new buds are emerging and their elongation over the next three months. Okay? Do we have any other questions before we blast out of here for tonight? Yes. Grant is wondering, on a Japanese black pine, should I leave needles where I'm hoping for back buds? Ah, so if you have needles on the interior and you want back budding to form, then those needles are going to hold a higher likelihood of possessing a bud that will turn into vegetative growth. Yes. Leave those, strategically, lateral locations. So when we say that, let's come back into this and say, for example, that might not be the best. See if I can find something to illustrate this. Okay, here we go. This is going to be on a micro scale, but say, for example, I cut this candle and I'm talking about pruning this, or I'm talking about needle plucking this. Now, I obviously don't want buds forming off of the bottom, so I can remove those. I also don't want buds forming off of the top. What good does a bud coming off of the top of the branch do for you? It does absolutely nothing. So if this is the way that my branch is shaping, I take off the bottom, I take off the top, and then when I roll this, notice that I've got these lateral needles behind it. Well, if I'm playing on the budding that I already have here, if I go here and then I stagger to the other side, I could pluck this one, which would hopefully push that there. And then if I get a bud here, which I already have, I can remove this side. And you can actually control, to a large degree, how those buds emerge based on how you leave those needles post-plucking. So if you guys are super intelligent about the way you handle this needle mass and you handle resources in your multi-flush pines, there's literally no end to what you can do with this species and this genre of pine. So, I think you guys are doing a good job. What else you got? One more question. Yeah. Bones Eye Guy is wondering, when you say, don't touch or fertilize if the tree is weak, does that include some... Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. Don't touch or fertilize if it's weak? It says when saying don't, do not touch, no fertilization, et cetera, I'm assuming that was referring to your conversation about the tree being weak. No. So don't touch, don't fertilize is after the candle pruning process. So once you prune the candles on a strong tree that has the... That's right. That has the strength to produce that second flush, don't touch the new growth as it emerges, don't thin those buds down to two, don't do anything to it, let it all go. Let the strong ones carry out the strength. We're going to remove those in the fall when we come back and shoot select. Don't touch, don't fertilize. Fertilization will cause elongation of the internode, will cause elongation of the needle. Those are the two reasons that we candle prune, shorter needles, shorter internodes, and then bifurcation, okay? So don't touch after this process. Don't fertilize, don't touch. If your tree is weak, right, there still could be an opportunity for fertilization assuming that the weakness is not directly correlated to a root issue. Maybe it's a response to not enough sun. Maybe it's a response to not enough water or reestablishing a balance of water and oxygen in the container. We can lightly fertilize to help a tree along once we start to reestablish that balance, okay? So there's two different directions that that question was coming from. You were coming here. We were talking about this lane over here. That was my misunderstanding. All right. So, but does that include supplements like liquid kelp, the no fertilization? Yes, yes. It includes all of those things. All of that supplemental nutrition that enhances the tree's ability. Now, when you start to talk about kelp, if you're not fertilizing, kelp is the worst thing you can be applying to your tree, right? Kelp is an activator that stimulates uptake of nutrition. If you don't have nutrition and you apply kelp, you're telling the tree, take in nutrition that does not exist. You can actually cause significant nutrition. Okay. You can actually cause significant deficiencies via the application of kelp. And if you look at the container of any credible kelp product, which should be cold pressed, if you get any credible or not cold pressed, cold extracted, if you get a credible kelp product that's cold extracted, it will tell you on the bottle, do not apply unless you're engaged in an active fertilizer routine. That alone is an equalizer for determining what kind of quality kelp you're using. Because if they're telling you that they know if you apply this stuff, it works. And if you're not fertilizing, it can be bad news, right? All right, that's it. We there? Okay. So one last time, I'm just going to rotate. This was our weakest significant branch. Needles don't look super attractive on it. They're a little thinner. They're a little smaller. But when you start to look at the density here and the density here of this much stronger area, we have closed that gap pretty significantly. And if you refer to the apex where we still have all of that density, now you start to realize how we pull these weaker branches into a closer amount of needle mass to those really, really strong areas. So as I rotate, there are places that have more branches. And so they have a little bit more of a density. I'm assuming any shoot that we grab out of this entire tree, we would probably be probably be right in that 8 to 10 pairs of needles. And I'm just going to challenge myself here. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. We got 10 on that one. Let's see this one. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. I over plucked that one a little bit. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. There's 8 on that one. So I got 10, 8, 7 within 3 needle pairs just by going by visual side of density. That's really where we want to get to for this operation to be proficient in something that you do without having to take 3 or 4 days. It'll put your mind at ease. It'll be a quick operation. But that density, establishing that count and quantity, doing that right the first time and using that as your reference, really good tool. To be able to execute this correctly. Don't touch your single flush short needles quite yet. Whether it's in development or refinement. You're at the end of pinching in the refinement. You're still elongating and hardening in the development. Definitely don't touch your single flush long needles like your ponderosas or limbers. They're not quite ready yet. Limbers will be dropping their sheaths very soon. That'll tell you that they're fully hardened off. Very similar to a Japanese white pine. We will do a stream that shows you that exact occurrence. So you understand what we're talking about. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. All the time being, if you candle prune, no fertilizer, no touch, multi-flush pines, candle prune, needle pluck, good to go, guys. We're all right? Yeah. We did it. We did it. Okay. Thank you guys very much. We appreciate you immensely. We couldn't do this without you. And this team, we all think this is pretty much the coolest thing that we could be doing. So, or at least maybe I'm putting words in your guys' mouth. Agreed. Agreed? Nice, thank you. Agreed. Nice, thank you. Arthur? Silence. I agree. There we go. Have a good rest of the week, you guys. And we'll catch you next Tuesday. Any updates on upcoming Q&As, we'll let you know via email and social media. But have a good week. Bonsai. And we'll see you next week. 
