Ah, yeah, what's going on, everybody? Oh, man, let me tell you something. Let me just tell you something. Let me holler at you for a minute here. When I moved to Oregon, Randy Knight told me, and I hold him accountable for this. He told me, he said, listen, never gets super hot here, never really gets very cold, and if it snows, it's gone by the end of the day, okay? Okay, categorically false in every single statement about Oregon. We are almost at the end of our 13th year, and we have experienced record lows, record highs, and we now are the holders of the record for the only time it's ever snowed, and not just a little bit, but a lot in April. Unbelievable, okay? But here's the big, here's the silver lining, here's the good news. It is spring. Look, winter, if you gotta go out with a death rattle, that's fine, things are moving, repotting season's almost done, and it is time to work on some of those conifers that we have delayed the work on, we have allowed to obtain and amass the resources. Over the fall season, with their growth on last year, we talk about freshly repotted, we talk about trees that needed a year off from the refinement, pruning, clipping, foyer reduction, inciting of a second flush, defoliation, parcel, you know. When we talk about a tree's recovery, we understand that that first flush of growth, staying on the tree, that flush of growth, having the fall season to photosynthesize, amass sugars and starches, build vascular tissue, and invigorate the tree, this is how we're gonna do it. Okay? This is how a tree rebuilds itself without having that foyer mass managed, and this black pine, Telperian black pine, you've seen it from the beginning of the initial two structural stylings to get it first done, you've seen it through three separate streams where we've managed the decandling partially, we've managed a greater bulk load of decandling, and then we came back and we said, hey, for all of the effort that we have put into this thing, we've pushed it, we've pressed on the gas pedal, it is time to pull our foot back off the gas and let the tree recover, and now here we are again. And spring is a magical time for multi-flush pines, because we understand, hey, even a multi-flush pine, in refinement, when we are dealing with colder weather conditions, when we are farther north in the northern hemisphere or farther south in the southern hemisphere, we might save that common fall activity of shoot selection and needle plucking to balance energy that we would apply to a multi-flush pine in refinement, we might save that. save that knowing that shoot selecting and needle plucking will compromise winter hardiness and we might come back in the spring to do that shoot selection and that needle plucking to be applying that structural wire to be handling all of that growth and guiding it right and that's a tree that we're keeping in refinement that was decandled but when we let a multi flush pine periodically every five or six years a multi flush in refinement has got to be allowed to grow freely not be decandled we take our foot off the gas of trying to manage and hold that tree where it's at and we let it open up we let it accumulate that foliage mass we keep those long needles we keep those longer internodes and we build that vascular tissue which gives us a tremendous amount of interior back funding a lot of stored sugars and starches and allows the tree to get its feet back underneath it so we can once again engage and that's exactly where we're at with this tree. Okay. We gave it some time off after pushing it hard through the styling, through the decandling, through the beginning of refinement, took our foot off the gas, allowed it to recover, and now in the beginning of spring, we reset the system. Okay? And let me just remind you, when we talk about multi-flush pines, we say, listen, the beginning of the refinement cycle, when we talk about the refinement cycle, is at the point of acquisition, we balance the strength through balancing needle density, or in the beginning of spring, we balance the needle density, we do that initial work to get the structure and everything taken care of, and now we are back into the decandling cycle. So let me go ahead and just give you a 360 of where we're at. You can see we did a lot of that, and when we last touched this tree, the only thing that we actually did was decandle the strongest areas out here on the tips, and I'll show you those. These, decandle the strongest areas out on the tips, and that's where you see the shorter needles on all of the long sacrificial branches. Let me go back around. You don't see anything here. When we come back around, you see it on the tips here. Notice this, notice the shorter needles, notice the shorter needles, right? You see it on the apex here. Notice the shorter needles in that barren. We needle plucked, we went ahead and decandled, we've literally got like 12, 15 shoots at these decandled sites. These are really, really dense with shoots, short needles. We knew we wanted all of the other areas of the tree to recover, and we also knew, hey, we will, we'll handle these longer areas because they were so vigorous in that developmental state to allow elongation, to allow thickening. When we decandle these, our tree was getting to a point where we recognized we could not perpetuate that decandling process, needle plucking process, and refinement process. It needed to reinvigorate itself and regain its energy. By pruning these developmental pieces, we understood that that was going to inject energy back into the interior. And now look at the candle growth that we're getting, we're getting on every single shoot, all the way to the interior here, very beautiful candle growth as far as Pacific Northwest, even distribution, not having a super ultra hot climate. This is very, very good. Manageable, not overly blown out, we've got a lot of back budding present, and we're ready to take that next step. In addition, having the tree reinvigorated and having transitioned that energy from these tips that we're no longer seeking, that developmental task with, we have the ability to make that next transition. And that's really where we begin, okay? So our focus, when we start to see these pieces, we see these shoots, we see the empowerment of the tip that would lead. And let me just rotate here for a minute. We see the empowerment. Now there's two candles, both of them very strong and healthy here, right, to take over. We see the empowerment of those shoots that we can cut back to. At least 50% of the foliage mass that exists on the tip has got to be present. In order for us to reduce it, we're gonna be taking off those developmental pieces, right, cutting back to transitions, reducing some of the structural flaws yet again to advance the shape of this tree, laying out some of these shoots no longer flat, but now starting to embrace the angle of the black pine. And we are taking this tree in the spring to that next step of aesthetic appreciation, transition from development to a full state of refinement, and we're gonna be balancing the energy down to the weakest significant branch through needle mass across the canopy to begin the process of truly stepping into the next phase of refinement. Let us begin on the lowest branch, okay? So when we talked about this tree and as we've been building this tree, there's been a constant juxtaposition of these two lower branches. Are we gonna go to the right and have a little bit more of a harmonious? We've talked about coming back on dynamic because the tree has some interesting characteristics. Base is here to support it. We don't have a big, rigid, solid, thick, massive root here to really go full harmony. And that's where I think the dynamic might be a very interesting selection with the apex coming back and that defining branch on the right. Now we're gonna shorten that, but I think any way we go about it, this branch on the left does not have the capacity really to be that asymmetrical defining branch. And in fact, I think this being a small iteration of a branch is a very important selection process for the tree. And I'm gonna go ahead and make that transition right now. We built this interior shoot, okay? And this has been a process that we've been talking about. We say, listen, pines are built, not created. We said, we don't know if we're gonna go to the right or to the left. Let's see how things evolve over the course of time. Things have continued to evolve to a degree where this is definitely not going to be that piece that lends itself ultimately to the final shape as far as the asymmetrical defining branch. And that felt so good to finally acknowledge that, make that determination and say, ah, let us go ahead and commit. Let us, you know, get our feet underneath us and let's start pushing in the direction of that rightward defining branch, okay? Now, when I make these cuts in the spring and we're talking multi flush pine, I'm saying I'm gonna patch any of these cuts, right? Now we know we can clean up broadleaf deciduous with a razor that we get it all nice and fine, et cetera. When I make these cuts, as long as they're concise and clean, and you'll notice I used a knuckle cutter or a knob cutter to remove that piece to get that nice good inset cut right there. And you see that spherical knob cutter, right? I use that, yeah, there you go. I see, you see that spherical knob cutter, okay? I use that to get a nice inward cut right there and then I paste it. We got sap flowing right now, candles elongating, metabolic activity moving at a really high rate. It's not necessary to shave it down, but to get that cut correct. And if we hit it correctly, let's just paste it and call it good, okay? So that's the first big structural move. And I'm gonna go structural first. I've got several talking points here and then we're gonna work into secondary tertiary, okay? So this is the first one. The second one comes over here and we know we've got a multitude of things that could potentially transpire over here. And again, I wanna remind you, the front is not the front of the container. It's slightly off, right? So I'm here, there's the front of the container there. We're offset here. Notice the jog in the trunk that we emphasize there, right in that sort of 1 3rd or right in the middle of that, okay? So that means some of these pieces that feel overly long may not be overly long when we're looking at the actual front. And I still have the wires lined up here so that you can kind of line that up. I know it's a little tough to see, but that means I'm ready to take this piece off as well. You know, this has been a piece that we've kind of constantly been working with and constantly been massaging and developing. It is time to transition and I have a beautiful, beautiful, beautiful junction. Again, if we are going to transition, I have to have 50% of the mass that I currently have at the tip present in the chute that I'm cutting back to. And you see, I've got a beautiful density here, maybe even more than 50% of the mass that I'm taking off. I'm gonna go ahead. I'm gonna come in with my knuckle cutters, really nice, concise. I don't wanna cut too close. Okay, I don't wanna cut too close. I just wanna get nice, leave myself about an eighth of an inch and I'm happy for that to take over. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna pace that. Man, that felt good. That felt, that one was enjoyable. Okay, now I recognize that in terms of these other branches, we've got bigger cutbacks that need to happen across the board on the chutes that have elongated because we let this thing become reinvigorated. We've got a lot of interior budding that exists. We've got a lot of opportunities to continue to advance the shape of this tree. And we're gonna have to, with these reductive cuts, we're gonna have to make those proportionally reductive across the tree. So if I cut back here, I'm gonna have to cut back here. I'm gonna have to cut back here. I'm gonna have to cut back here so the whole branch shrinks a little bit. Let me show you this because this branch is massive. Now it's a big tree, sure, but we're trying to regain proportion of the tree. Notice how big that is. It's too big. Makes the trunk look small. We recognize that our nodes are long. We recognize needles are long. But we've rebuilt the strength, and it's time to rebalance. We can cut back to those interior smaller chutes and really reduce things, okay? Time to come back and reduce this upper piece, right? Because this upper piece now is the same length or even slightly longer. Again, the piece I'm cutting back to, at least 50% of the density of the tip that I'm cutting. I'm gonna go ahead, I'm gonna take this really big, nice, and I wanna leave that structural across the bottom, if at all possible. Again, I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna take this piece nice and clean. Nice and clean, boom. Oh, gosh. I've been waiting. We've been waiting since we started this tree to make these moves. This is truly an exceptional moment as far as being a bonsai practitioner. When you have grown branches out to be proportional, to build interior ramification, to build secondary scaffolding that starts to show a pad formation and allows us to reduce, it's a powerful, powerful moment when we actually have the opportunity and we get to indulge in the pleasure of reducing these things. Let me go ahead and show you what that does. Look at that. Look at how that pulled that in, right in the middle there. Now that defining branch has that presence. That's what we've been waiting for. We've been longing for that. Now here's the other one that we've been longing for is this apex. And I would say this has been the toughest. Now, this is always what I go about trying to discuss, you know, what I discuss very diplomatically and that is, you don't want to grow a developmental piece until it is the correct thickness that you want at that moment in time. You grow a developmental piece until it is 60% or 70% of the way there. There are times when I'll even say grow it till it's 50% if you have an abundant amount of ramification and the expansion of that ramification, especially in an apical region, is gonna cause that to thicken at an accelerated rate with that needle mass, with that expansion that will allow it to catch up. We are absolutely there where we have built a significant amount of tissue in this upper portion that's healing the big cut. Our callus on the backside here where we cut the stump is starting to close really beautifully. Our callus here at this transition is really closing. And now we get to come back and this is the moment where we're gonna really see. And let me go ahead and just rotate for you so that you get to enjoy this as much as I do because I think this is a really special moment. Okay. Let me make sure I'm all in a good position just to have that cut be clean. Boom. Okay. That's the moment. That's the moment where we make the big transition in the apical region. Okay. Right up, I leave myself just about an eighth of an inch. That's the cut, accuracy of the cut of utmost importance. Now we have that apex and we can start to really build. Okay. Oh, I'm so excited. So, so, so excited. Okay. Let me paste this and that starts the structural reduction. Okay. Now why do you start with structure? Why am I always harping on structure? Why is structure so important? Well first and foremost, we understand right that the defining branch that's the tone in terms of length, sets the tone in terms of angle of drop or rise, sets the tone in terms of density, sets the tone in terms of path division through secondary scaffolding and style, sets the tone, through tertiary handling, both in the tips, as well as the density, as well as pad thickness. So when we talk structural, going through and making these big length reductions allows us to grab onto the concept for the design of the tree in a way that really does empower us to have a lot more sort of say and success in the design. Okay, I have a few pieces back here I've contemplated and considered further reducing. I don't know that they're quite ready, so I'm gonna continue to keep those pieces that haven't given me that kind of structural progression. But after I do these obvious reductions, now I wanna move into thinking about structural flaws that we've continued to utilize, that we've built with, that are contributing to the current shape of the tree, but are going to start to bite us, you know, as structural flaw isn't a flaw necessarily until it's starting to cause inverse taper. And I have one of those moments happening right up here, and I'm gonna get rid of just this little bud on the trunk, a product of vigor, not something that we need, okay? But up in here, in this back rear portion, we have a location where we have a bifurcated, really beautiful, longer, granted longer structural branch, but a bifurcated, really beautiful piece of growth here. And then we have three branches that are more or less competing for the location. A location that allows us to maximize the number of branches that can occur on this piece, okay? Now this is a little hard to see, but I just wanna kind of walk you through the logic of this, okay? I have this branch on the right that occurs at an inner node that is exactly opposite of the branch on the left, okay? So my branch, let me show you here, my branch on the right, go ahead and come in where Lonnie's at, zoom out a little bit, Lonnie. Yeah. Yeah, if you just zoom out, I think you'll see it better. Yeah, there you go, perfect, okay? So my branch on the right here and my branch on the left here are completely at the same junction. I have here that if I take out the correct, and this is when we look at structural flaws, it's such an interesting thing because I might have two bar branches, I might have two bar branches here, I might have a junction, and I have two more branches here, right? If I take out one of these, that still might be, if I take out one of these, there we go, if I take out one of these, I still might have something that leaves me with a trio-looking piece here. Well, watch this. If I take out the correct one, now I have this down here, I have a inner node above it, and I have a bifurcation here, and that's the moment that we're looking at, okay? Because if I take one of those four branches, right, and it's one of the, the right or the left, is existing in a bar with the other one as well as high enough to be a bar with that bifurcated tip. But one of those is down low enough that if I take out the correct one, it's low enough, there's an inner node here before I get to that bifurcated tip, and I can save three as opposed to cutting both of those off and leaving just the tip, okay? So what that does, though, is this is a big built-up branch right here. This is a huge built-up branch. This branch, on the grand scheme of things, occupies a massive, let me just show you, a massive amount of this back piece, and let me continue to rotate, okay, let me let it go, occupies this entire space. I'm gonna be losing all of that, all of that, all of that foliage mass, and guess what? It's the move, it is the move, it's the move, because by removing this, I stop the continued swelling, okay, and I'm just getting the wire out of the way. Nice clean cut, okay, and now you can see what we got here. Lonnie, be sure to let people in on this little fantastic hole that we've just created in the canopy of the tree. Okay, so now we have that big space. I've got this piece out here on the tip, I've got this piece back, and I've got my, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh. I've got this piece back, and I've got my, oh, oh, oh, oh. I've got this piece out here on the tip. I've got this piece back. And I've got my, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. bifurcated piece right here let me patch this and then watch what happens ok I've eliminated the one bar branch that was in competition with everything that exists on this now I come back here now I come back here and I flare ok and I'm going to flare this into this space and I'm going to occupy that space now with a much much higher quality branch short compact interior you won't even miss it we've reduced the structural flaw and this is how we make these transitions in the canopy of multi flush pines to remove things that are starting to cause swelling to to remove things when we have a tree that's built up strong and really dense to open up space redistribute and move that design forward and you've got to be making these decisions the one thing that I think impairs bonsai practitioners more than any other aspect of a tree getting really big large and healthy is the correct assessment of branch elimination reduction and handling in the pruning process ok the selection process of branching that we're going to remove to make the space to enhance the design you've got to pull branches off of the structure off of your secondary scaffolding in order to be able to create the space for higher quality branching to be built ok and that's not saying that this was a bad branch this is a phenomenal branch I mean when we look at this branch let me just hold this here ok when we look at this branch we've got buds back in here that are going to create secondaries we've got a great secondary here we've got a trio on the tip that we would have to reduce but we've got a wonderfully acute crotch we could flare this in that direction we could move this out we could out have the space for this to grow that's a great branch right there ok but this was the branch that was growing in a location that formed a bar with multiple other pieces and it was the missing link it was the key pull this out you keep everything else and redistribute to occupy that space you're left with a higher quality tree that no longer has a structural flaw and will not get worse but in fact now improves alright so those decisions in terms of the structure of this tree are really a big part of where we are at in this process ok so I'm going to go through and I'm going to make some assessments of the structural pieces in terms of reduction if there's a talking point will blast back out most of it is going to be really tough to see because it is very much a dense tree but I want to come back after we tackle the structural stuff and I want to show you how we go about the secondary reduction then to move back into our scaffolding to further create scale divide pads shrink shrink and reduce those areas where we've taken off those developmental tips so that we put ourselves in a position to handle the secondaries and finally the tertiary is on a level that distributes the energy needle plucking even distribution region to region for this tree to be set up proportionally for this tree to be set up aesthetically and for this tree to be set up physiologically or horticulturally to really thrive this year and move into that refinement cycle with a completely reinvigorated next level of aesthetic evolution I'll see you when we get finished with that structural elimination and we'll talk about any moves that we need to make. We need to document. Ok so let me bring you into another structural circumstance here where we really do see an opportunity to advance the quality of the design of a tree. Now this is kind of a this big long branch here, this contributes. This contributes to a great degree, a significant amount of foyer mass. I've got a smaller piece above it. I've got another piece here that's kind of crammed in that I can slide over. And we always want to make sure we have something to fill the space that we create. But you see this piece and it's kind of sitting over these other pieces that exist below it. But here's the real crux of why we want to remove it. When we get into the inside of this, notice how there's no ramification on this entire piece until we get out to the tip. There's a big coarse cut here where it was originally shortened. There's a bar branch right there. So at best, we have two pieces of secondary scaffolding, a bare branch. Now we could graft on this, but I've got a short, compact, highly ramified interior piece here. I have a short, compact, highly ramified structural piece right here. When I start to see a tree, get to a point where it's really aggressive and really strong and really healthy and it's larger than it needs to be and we're regaining proportion, we're going to be cutting off pieces like this that don't really offer a high level of structural quality because when we remove them, what we replace them with is a tighter, more compact version branch. We're able to redistribute. We're able to compress. We're able to enhance what is possible below it. This is moving the design forward. Now when we talk about the building of a tree, let me just patch this before SAP starts to run. When we talk about the building of a tree, we say listen, we work on a tree for the first, say, five, six years. Pines are built, not created. We go a full cycle around the vortex, right? First, styling focused on structure. Second styling focused on secondary scaffolding expansion and delineation. Third working, we start to work on refinement and the tips. And then we allow that designed to mature okay that's basically what we've done now we expedited the process we put the gas on in the beginning of this tree we took our foot off the gas now or for a year at the end of that cycle now I could have taken my foot off the gas for one more year in the beginning and pushed hard but it would have gotten us to the same space and this is what we talked about last year when we said listen we're gonna hold back that's the move on this tree is knowing when to not do something right but when we when we put our foot back on the gas whatever that may be we want to be considering these reductions okay but you don't have to wait you don't have to wait you can be doing this each time you work the tree if you're just removing a little bit I got a structural flaw here it started to thicken as we've expanded because it's got more secondary scaffolding I'm gonna have to take this off now right but I'm not gonna touch much else oh I've got this one I'm gonna have to go ahead and touch this the tertiary ramification has expanded and it's thickening now I'm going to take this one out as I'm shoot selecting and needle plucking, right? We don't want to do it all at once, right? Necessarily, we don't have to wait each time we improve the tree. But when we put a tree out into the pasture to graze and get fat and strong and healthy again, we do come back and see these opportunities over the fall season where the swelling has really been magnified, where the quality of the structure has really declined compared to what's being built around it. Perfect time to make these decisions, compress, reorient your branching, and kind of fill those voids, okay? We're going to continue. Okay, so we've finished the primary structural reductions, right? We pulled a big piece out of this area here. We've pulled a big piece out of this area here. We've pulled a big piece out of this area here. We understand we took off those tips. And then we had another really big move on the back of the upper apical region where we took out a branch that existed right in here. Now, you look at that and the density of that is so thick that you're like, gosh, I can't even tell. Exactly, right? That is when you know, when you look at it and you say, yeah, I mean, I see some space, but I can't even really... Perfect. You can't even really tell. That's the perfect moment to have built to a point where we can... where we can take out a structural flaw and fill it and you don't notice that you've reduced, right? Or that we can cut out a poor branch that has no interior ramification and replace it with a short, tight, compact piece. Now, this same concept transitions to the secondary model of branch scaffolding as well. They also have short internodes and compact growth on high-quality branches. And we've got to be making decisions because we had all these long shoots. We wired them out. Some of them had bar branching. Groups of three were too long, and we were able to we were fostering a bud that then we started producing more ramification you know now we're at a point and a perfect example of this is right here right on this defining branch okay because we said hey listen I have to do something with the reduction of that tip now I have this branch here and then let me show you if I drop this I've got another branch right next to it that I've been cultivating and really sort of preparing to take over this location now if you'll notice this first branch comes off of the top of my primary structure here bends down and comes out into position not a bad thing it's not a bad thing at all I've got pieces up here behind it that are structurally sound these shoots are growing right off of the base but I'm starting to get a swelling right here where this branch and then this branch behind it right here exist at a junction very very close to one another okay but when I look at this I've got this big long inner node here I've got a big long inner node here okay And ultimately, when I think about this and we zoom out to the bigger image, right, I've got a massive branch here that sticks out and occupies a massive amount of space. I want to create proportion, and this big branch on the lower level is so big that the trunk actually looks small. I mean, look at how big this tree should look, and look at how small it does look, right? And this means if I can take out this big, long inner node, big, long inner node, aggressively grown tree, and these inner nodes are where the growth started one year and stopped where those adventitious buds were set up, and I can transition it to a much tighter, inner nodes are shorter, I've got multiple branching in a much closer span, and that's going to be building a much more compact and controllable, reducible length over the course of time, I have got to be making that decision, okay? So I'm going to rotate this to where... Where I can appropriately reduce this, and we're going to go ahead and we're going to make that decision that allows us to be able to transition out of this piece that we have been using in this location, solve the issue of a mounting structural flaw that we need to always be very considerate of, and replace it with a much higher quality branch that we've been building in its place, better oriented on the outside of the curve as opposed to the upper portion. Let me come. I'm going to go back with my knob cutters here, and just get a really beautiful cut, and I'm going to lift that tissue, bam, right there. Okay, take that off. Now this swings, and I'm going to have to rewire it. Now this swings into this position, right, where that branch was, I swing this into that position, and we regain proportion, it starts to shrink down, this big, huge branch that we have, that have developing down here as the primary structure. Let me show you the hole that that left, but also show you the reduction. Notice that you see this now, this will be pulled into that space, and we're going to start to reduce everything on the tertiary level, or excuse me, secondary level for length to regain a proportional pad. And guess what? We start with the defining branch. When we move to secondary scaffolding establishment, size of secondary pad formation, and stylistic decisions, let's really invest some time on that defining branch to get it of the appropriate size, scale, and nuance of secondary reduction that we can carry throughout the rest of the canopy of the tree. And look at that, a big long line, there we go, yeah, that big long line, huge internode, really coarse junction right there, right, obtuse, and then we're going to start to reduce everything on the tertiary level. And we're going to replace that with a much higher quality branch that was growing literally right next to this one, but instead of having that kind of a vibe, now look at what we get, beautiful, beautiful acute crotches, beautiful acute crotches, yeah, show me that, yeah, boom, acute crotches, better buds, better shoots, more compact, right, we've got stuff right up here on the top, I'm going to go ahead, I'm going to take that out now, so that that doesn't continue to swell, we're making decisions that are very, very definitive for this portion of the tree, okay, let me just clean that up, paste it, okay, now, so when we look at the defining branch now, that is way more, I think, appropriate for what we are after, still does it feel a little bit long, still feels a little bit long, guess what, hey, pines are built, not created, we've been working on this pine for four years, we say the fifth year starts to show really nice aesthetic appreciation, by the end of this year, in the fall, when we see shorter needles, shorter internodes, we shoot select needle pluck and balance energy, you're going to see this tree hit that first time where you're going to say, gosh, that is pretty darn hot, I don't want all of that length, I'm still building some of the pieces to shorten the longest, thickest branch there, but we have created a massive, massively quality branch there, and I could see in the future, that branch being reduced, and the branch above it actually being the defining branch, I could see this being the defining branch, I could see this big piece coming back to these secondaries here, and really pulling in, we have got to build those pieces to that point, we're not quite there yet, but a massive, massive reduction, and now we see, notice the width has decreased, we haven't organized and finished wiring, we've only gone through the structural as set, the secondaries are now decided, but we have some pieces in here that are going to fill in some of these spaces, and these are going to make a huge difference, when we drop these down and in into this space, and we start to create that division from the piece above it, look at what we have here, we're going to build that, that's what we've been really pushing in terms of those developmental goals, to get more of what we've already created happening inside of the canopy of the tree, and it's just a slow, but also when we think about it, rapid process, rapid in terms of the progression that we've made, now this allows us to come through the tree, and it's just a slow, but also when we think about it, rapid process, rapid in terms of the progression that we've made, now this allows us to come through the tree, and it's just a slow, but also when we think about it, rapid process, rapid in terms of the progression that we've made, now this allows us to come through the tree, and it's just a slow, but also when we think about it, rapid process, rapid in terms of the the rest of the tree and really start to make decisions and let's go ahead and let's just look at a few areas where I think the secondaries are kind of taking over okay right here I have a branch coming from the upper canopy that is at the same level as one of my lowest primary structural branches I love this branch it's one of the ones that we wedge cut and we pull down shows tremendous thickening and hierarchy and that generational component of it and I start to look at this and I take out that length and I come back come back up into here that takes out a huge amount of foliage blocking one of the most primary pieces of the trunk that's a no-brainer in terms of reduction we'll come back and we will shorten and notice what we're shortening to buds that have now become 50 percent notice 50 percent of the tip to reduce I've got a nice healthy interior bifurcated branch that is 50 percent almost exactly if you look at it I've got the equivalent of 50 percent of the tip to reduce and I've got a nice healthy interior bifurcated branch that is 50 percent of the tip to reduce and I've got a nice healthy interior bifurcated foliage mass here equivalent foliage mass here of that bud here it's exactly 50 percent of my tip that is why I can go ahead and reduce we're always building those interior buds we lay that structure out buds form they produce needles we start to decandle they get stronger and stronger denser and denser boom take that coarse piece off right this is the the primary improvement of the structure this is the secondary improvement of the scaffolding okay I love that location right there I'm very very happy very very happy with this piece right here I'm going to go ahead and I think this is a great counter to that big long branch and until we shorten that branch we would never reduce this branch okay we don't make trees that look bad for a period of time in terms of they don't look their best because oh I'm gonna I'm gonna shorten this but I'm still building that but I know when I reduce that I'm gonna want to reduce this anyways bad idea bad idea you don't know what's going to happen with that you don't know what's going to happen with your defining branch that notion of I'm going to shorten and anticipate what the tree is going to look like what the tree is going to do and I'm going to take away planning for that to somehow be correct when I eventually see what happens when I don't even know when it's going to right like don't do that don't do that okay as long as that is there this is here I'm happy with that okay we've already taken away that piece we have some length back here the back is big the back is very very big this is the the 180 degree of the front here and we are really starting to get a little bit of a back branch on the tree now do we want the back branch to be this big no you don't want the tree to grow in depth now you have to have proportional back branch but look at how big this is this is almost as long as some of my defining pieces in the front again I've built these pieces look at what we've built here okay we've built 50 percent of the tip to reduce 50 percent of the tip to reduce I've built this beautiful bifurcated branch to take over notice these pieces are here I've got 50 percent this interior piece this is exactly the density of this or this it's exactly 50 percent now I know I'm going to be cutting that big long piece off back to a highly ramified tight compact interior okay over here I've just got a long shoot happy to do that right here I've got a really poor branch exceptionally poor branch and when I have this exceptionally poor branch I've got a really nice shoot at the base of it I haven't got a really nice shoot at the base of it I haven't gotten any buds back on it I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take this out too in the spirit of reducing the significant back rear portion of the tree to start to really pull this into a proportion that appeals to the rest of the tree okay we know we're going to go ahead and flirt this piece above it over that brings us over to this area right here now this is a piece that's in question okay because I have built a wonderfully compact interior let me show you what we got here bring me in tight Josh okay I've built this piece highly bifurcated 50 percent it's equivalent to this it's equivalent to this in terms of that 50 percent I could take these off this is much more proportional to this piece the question is do we need this length from the front of the tree and that's what we really want to analyze okay so I'm going to go ahead I'm going to rotate to the front and I'm going to show you where that piece occurs and then we can kind of discuss if it in fact is is a a wise choice and let me get you right to the front there okay is it a wise choice or is it a wrong choice or is it a wrong choice or is it a good choice to reduce and let me just step out of frame here there I am and I want to remove this is that a wise choice absolutely okay let me let it go it doesn't really contribute to any quality kind of competes with the line here that means I'm going to go ahead and say gosh if I can reduce that and get a much much better much much better quality of branching to occur I'm going to do so compact build from the interior out I love it okay so we're just setting this idea of secondaries that we're going to reduce to improve the quality of our tree and we're making tremendous strides now I have another one now that the bottom is shrinking with these reductions that we're planning the top is starting to get a little bit bigger a little bit more bloated right when we look in here this branch is huge notice the size of our Apex is going to be quite small this branch is super long this piece here we're going to have to reduce on a tertiary level we'll do that to pull that into proportion but we are really starting to push back I wonder if I want to pull back from the front of the tree let me turn you to the right take a look at how far forward that front branch is okay that's this piece that we were just looking at let me step out of screen get out of the way boom that's this piece right here okay it's growing out in front of these branches now look at where it occurs structurally it occurs farther forward than these pieces that makes sense to me I don't mind that okay but when I start to look at this I've also created the same compact interior pieces on this that I've been working on everywhere else I could pull these pieces off okay I could pull these pieces off and I could really reduce it and start to show a much more compressed compact branch formation I think that might be the key to this having the kind of quality that we're looking for and there's also one more piece in here okay get back to here look at this piece right here so so so so big so so so so big right look at the quality of that piece no interior branch could I graft yes I could graft is it at a bifurcated tip yes it's at a bifurcated tip but I have a stump here and it's starting to swell okay I have a wonderfully compact branch back here that I can pull into its place I need to make sure that that branch is not giving me any kind of length that I need in the current design of the tree and as I look at this and we just start oh look at how that pulls in okay I let that go that's really long now look at this behind it look at how that pulls in that upper portion so it's not so long now let me oof and and and look at how much bigger the trunk looks when we reduce the length and size up here and then it gets small again right these are two pieces that I think we can dramatically improve through reduction to really enhance the quality of the tree okay now that means that I've got another one here I'm going to rotate forward okay look at this I've built a nice quality compact interior go ahead and bring me in tight Josh I've built a nice compact quality interior 50% here's this 50% of it here 50% of it here these have got to go these have got to go this whole thing has got to go we're really starting to make some big big changes let me let me start by reducing those pieces so that we can see what's happening and let's progress all the way to the apex in terms of this secondary reduction to really start to appreciate the amount of improvement and enhancement of quality that were officially pursuing because this is going to be a very dramatic shift for this tree you all right all right all right starting to establish proportion now. Look at the space that has occurred, and we want to be really considerate right here, because we opened up a lot of space, but we know that this is coming down into here, this is coming down into here. So we have pieces that are going to occupy this space. We also have this back in the back that's going to raise up. We also have some secondary tertiaries in here. So when we come out, we move in, we need to have that depth piece. That's what we've got back in here. We've got those pieces building. I feel very, very good about where we're at. But what we start to see now is the apex. Oof, man, this has gotten really, really heavy. Really big, really heavy, coming off an ideal, absolutely ideal point in terms of where it originates from this apical region. Coming to the back, I can flirt this whole thing over to the front and bring that around, but it would create this big looping branch. I have the kind of opportunity in these chutes to occupy those spaces. I'm just going to shorten this upper piece, and this is where my secondary handling starts to get a little bit more nuanced, because now we're starting to talk about pieces that haven't necessarily bifurcated as much in the apical region. We've been letting it grow, but watch this. Watch this. Watch this reduction here. Just small little moves. It's going to pull it right off of the top here. Bam. Nothing big, but it pulls it right off of the top of this piece that exists inside of here to be able to allow it to photosynthetically thrive. Let me just show you that. There, that's a better illustration. Took it right off the top of this branch that exists here. These pieces are going to drop down and be utilized. Now we have the same thing here. Watch closely. Now we're looking towards the rear portion of the right side of the tree. Notice how long this is. Very, very long. This is in the upper apical region of the tree. We don't want to continue to get longer and longer and longer. Up in the apical region of the tree. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to pull this back as well. Pulling this back, compacting this piece. Let me make sure. Structure, structure. Yes, I love what I've got there. We've really built a beautiful tree here. Now watch. I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to pull this off. Bam. That piece comes out. Now look at what gets to fill in. Now these pieces, instead of having this big mass sitting over them, these pieces down below. They're going to get to fill in. When I start to look here, do I want this to be as big? No, I don't want this necessarily as big. I kind of want to take this into here, but this is where we've got to start checking ourselves. Are we accumulating too much momentum in terms of reduction? Or are we making reduction for the sake of improving the tree? We always have to check ourselves. Let me just take a look at the wide. I see this. Yes, these pieces are going to flare laterally, so they're not going to be nearly as big there. Okay, and I know that's getting very, very large. Let's continue to push in. Okay, and once we verify, you say, nope, nope, we're still on point. We're making things better, not worse. We're improving. We're not taking away. This is going to be a higher quality, not a lower quality product. Awesome. Let's rock and roll. Let's do it. Okay, so I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to come back to here. Come on. There you are. Okay, so I'm going to go ahead and set myself up and just unwire a minute. And I come back in. Make that reduction. Okay, yes. And the crowd goes wild. Oh, my gosh. Okay. So, I'm going there all right man that's changed a lot man that has changed an awful lot okay i know this is still big we're just gonna have to shine this on we'll come back and do some shoot selection and cleaning up in tertiary you don't even need to say that we'll just come back and deal with those areas there's not much i can do about this piece let's see here just look at that from back in here feels still proportional in all honesty because up in this upper apex here you know when we start to if you get into the momentum game and you see this branch right here you know these are going to be slightly shorter but when we say slightly shorter you're saying hey i'm going to lose that kind of length okay not a big difference but you see that this is the branch that bridges the apex to this outer bend right here that one has got to stay long now that's not this is not a super quality branch let me let me just come back here and i'm gonna i'm gonna pull the curtain back on the wizard of oz and i'm gonna show you okay let me go ahead just bring me in tight josh okay i'm gonna pull the curtain back and you see oh yikes okay that's okay that's okay because this is gonna build this is gonna ramify this is gonna bifurcate if we really wanted to we could graft in here okay probably not now we're probably a little late we might be able to get away with it but ultimately i'm not super concerned because i'm going to replace with a higher bifurcation and a much more quality branch that we build over time again this apex is much younger and we need this length okay so there's a a continual thing that i talk with my students about and it's called the runaway train of momentum in bonsai it feels so good to cut something off and see a positive change that we say oh that was awesome do it again got even better yes let's roll boom boom boom boom boom boom boom boom boom boom boom boom and we get to a point where we zoom out and we go oh shit i just did that i just took that tree all the way back to the beginning i just cut that tree to within an inch of its life i thought i was doing good right and and you've got to pull yourself out of that this is a this is a lesson learned in bonsai to have the wherewithal mentally to be able to recognize each decision is impactful each one has to be right and the runaway train of momentum is real it's real for me it's real for you you got to pull back and look at those things and this is one of those where as we see it getting better we're cutting to tight compact we're shortening and it's improving if i lose that i'm going to have to pull back and look at those things and this is a lesson learned in bonsai to have the wherewithal mentally to be able to recognize each one of those my apex is completely underdeveloped i have to rebuild what i would be cutting off if i cut that otherwise my tree goes like this and like this and that's not bad but my tree needs to go here and here and that's what this is providing me okay now the branch underneath it here is in the same boat i've got a really nice tight compact interior piece that i'm going to build it's not there yet i gotta leave it okay i look up in the apex there's nothing to shorten up in here i've got a really nice tight compact interior piece that i'm going to build it's not there in fact i'm i'm just starting to rebuild the apex after cutting off that tip awesome so when i look through the rest of my branching i have one more piece down in here that i'm kind of wondering do i need this kind of mass or would showing a little bit more of the trunk in there that feels very tempting to potentially improve this area through a slight tip reduction which i'm going to say is the longest piece and i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to make that move i think that's going to enhance things and i've now i've pulled back on the momentum right i've recognized ooh danger zone don't keep don't keep going if you're not quite sure okay let me just pull back on this very very uh and i would consider this a very controlled action okay to pull back on that that's awesome okay and that kind of ushers us into a more tertiary model of controlling the growth and checking the growth because now that i've got a lot of work to do i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to go ahead and work to this in this way all right so this is third time that i've been doing this all right so what i've been doing is that i've done all of the secondary scaffolding i want to come back at this point in time on a tree that i've allowed to accumulate and amass health and i've left unchecked and recognize hey i needed the needle mass where there were threes i didn't take it down to twos last year i left it boom left it hands off don't do it okay cool i've got to take threes down to twos now i'm looking at quality of crotch i'm looking at quality and strength i want lateral even if we've allowed the tree to grow and gain health for a year is still the same degree of considerations right we want the same strength at the tip we want an acute crotch as priority number two and I say same strength desired strength as well as equal strength among the two shoots if possible acute crotch between the two because we know an obtuse we've cut out several obtuse crotches where the obtuse crotch was created by taking away that strongest tip of a very raw tree and we say listen strength is number one shape of crotch is number two I'm gonna take that obtuse crotch because I know I'm gonna be building buds back by removing that strength then I'm going to replace that obtuse crotch with bam now I got it cute we've looked at it okay and finally three lateral orientation third priority because wire can change it we are gonna come through and have to wire this thing right so as I start to look at this same strength on the tip here let's just start with this piece and where we're at I've got a group of three right here I've got a group of three right here here, okay? Got a group of three right here. Now, I would love for these to be lateral, okay? They've got the same strength. In fact, these two are, I would say, and if we bring it in close, we can see this. These two are moderately strength. This one's actually a little bit more vigorous growing off the top. I'm not saying I want to reduce vigor, but I want equal strength in this. I don't need this branch to be any stronger. The shapeness, the shape of the crotch is acute, whereas this one would be obtuse to either one of these. The orientation isn't necessarily there, but I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to make that decision and take my threes down to twos. Now, why? And let's just be sure we understand. Why can I do this now, but I couldn't have done this last year? Well, we needed the needle mass, right? Because we wanted the tree to recover. We took our foot off the gas. There wasn't the needle mass to cause structural flaws where we left threes, even over uncontrolled growth in the fall. So we weren't doing any structural detriment to the tree. We were using the needle mass to help the tree photosynthesize and recover because we needed to reinvigorate the tree and gain strength after working it so hard for those three years prior. And then the other thing is, when we're contemplating doing this big transition from these developmental pieces back to the interior, we don't know what's going to be left. We can assume, but we don't know what's going to be left. It's always best. Don't proactively do something in terms of removing or reducing foliage mass until the tree is ready and until you're doing it to the pieces that are going to influence the information, okay? So I've got shoot selection on a tertiary level that I need to be performing in terms of the tips from fours and fives and threes down to twos, okay? But I also have these areas inside of the tree, okay? Inside of the tree where I've got these abundant buds and branches that are occurring in these junctions. Let me just find a really, I think, a really solid illustration of this so that we can kind of start to see what we're dealing with. This is a perfect area right here, and I'm going to let Lonnie get set. So when we look at this branch, I've got my structure here, okay? And I know that the green is tough to follow, so follow my finger here. I've got the structure here. Now, I have a branch on the foreground here. I have a branch on the background here, okay? You see that one moving? Yeah, there you go, okay? And this one here, that's a bar branch. I've got a branch here without a bar branch. I love that, okay? I've got two bar branches here on the interior. I've got two bar branches here. and I've got a group of three on the tip okay so I have a multitude of pieces now we just said hey listen I need the length on this I can't I can't really shorten this and I want to just look at this one time to see if in fact we do need the length on this because this was one that in in the in the fear of the runaway train getting the best of me okay so that would be that spacing right there and this also feels like it bridges the gap between the back of this tree and kind of some things that are happening and this foyer mass that exists out here I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to save the length on that okay and that's a big decision because if I'm going to save the length on that I can't leave all of those threes same strength that's what I'm focused on so let me go ahead and come back to where you can see it Lonnie if you want to come back up into here cool okay so same strength these two tips I said I wanted the length of the length of the length of the length of the length of the length of the length of the length awesome I'm going to take this piece off now I've taken my three down to two boom okay now that decision sets a chain reaction in motion because this piece is going to come here which means I've got my shoot here with the tips I've got my shoot here with the tips where do I want my next branch I don't want it growing over the top of this I want it growing in the opposite direction okay so I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to say all right now I'm going to make the selection here BAM okay now I've got my shoot selection here that's guiding this next smaller tip to be growing in the correct location okay the one above it is a standalone I go boom boom boom boom I come back to here on this one which means I take away the piece opposite and now I've gone through and I've worked on my tertiary level to refine reduce you and eliminate structural flaws on a branch that I have thus decided that I need this link now some of you might be saying well what if because that's such a long branch what if you wanted to reduce the length of that over time wouldn't you save those groups of threes now that we're at a stage of density when we look at tertiary branching we have to understand yes I probably will cut back to here okay I've got my small shoot here yes I probably will cut back to that as that bifurcates to get rid of these big long pieces over the course of time this has to be built to 50% of this to do so and will be compact and highly ramified it will improve the quality of the tree I don't need another branch there I don't need two of these there to make this compact highly ramified and capable of cutting the tip off back to that so don't worry about needing to save something there and here's the thing there's still bugs at that Junction that when I do cut back to it will proliferate I'm going to cut back to it will proliferate because we understand that that world there's all kinds of adventitious buds set up on a multi-flush pine okay so we understand how we're handling the tips we understand how we're coming back into the structural and secondary branches and making decisions where up to this point hey bar buds bar branches when they're fine and we're building we're seeing which one's going to perform not a big deal we let the tree proliferate needle length is long buds are strong we've got a lot of energy and we're in the spring season we're taking back structure we're taking back secondary we also have to go ahead and make those decisions on tertiary that is where we are at right now with this tree in terms of its necessary work okay now we're at that point where we can go ahead and thin and really start to alter some things about the tree all right so I'm going to go through I'm going to do the tertiary refinement of these pieces cutting back my fives fours and threes down to twos making those decisions of bar budding and bar branching on my secondaries and my fourths so we're ready to wire and needle pluck to even out the distribution of energy and accomplish that highest level aesthetic okay so we've gone through the tertiary simplification of things we made a few minor tweaks took off a few more uh secondaries that we saw we missed when we got into the nitty-gritty uh and we've left a few pieces you know again each of these branches is in a different state of development secondary tertiary and we recognize gosh I didn't know this had evolved that bud had turned to this shoot over the course of last year and and that changes things or we can use this or I'm going to leave these two and I know I can shorten this kind of overly course you know less structurally sound piece next year after these ramify a little bit for your mass expands Etc but for the most part we have simplified the the shape of the tree to a significant degree and you can see that we're starting to really have an identifiable beautiful uh structure and form and proportion to the entirety of the tree that we can really piggyback on and start to enhance now the move to take this tree to that level is to actually go through the process we should not do this pruning in the spring without understanding the needle pluck as we wire to create an even density and needle distribution interior exterior top bottom right so we're going to go about the wiring process and the needle plucking process to balance the energy on the tree understanding that this sets us up for success we have checked primary we have checked secondary we have checked tertiary and now we've organized the growth and balance this needle distribution our black pine our multi-flush pine are set up for success moving forward as candles elongate and they prepare for that next summer event of decandling and that next stage of refinement to elevate their level enjoy the time lapse as we put this piece together and we look forward to seeing how your multi-flush pines evolve on this next level of Advanced Knowledge on how to continue to progress and build a field grown multi-flush pine love you guys thanks so much for the support hope you enjoyed it use this knowledge build your own trees this is the one of the best parts of bonsai all right we'll see you guys in the next video you 
