what's up everybody super tuesday coming at you live from the skeleton crew at mirai uh actually troy's uh hanging out for a minute because he is very passionate about olives and he and i have both been tending to this magnificent little specimen since it was repotted last summer if anybody missed that all of repotting in the summertime you heard me correctly and if you want to hear more about that take a listen to our podcast uh with bonsai scents from the trophy uh rafa from majorca obviously sort of the epicenter of olives as they're utilized and seen in bonsai very very famous majorcan olives um and he dialogued with troy and lime about a whole plethora of topics and subject matter pertaining to olives olives but one of them the summer repot we explored it ourselves we found great success with it and now we're coming back at this pivotal point energy positive ready to style anyways i'm alone uh troy obviously my company here tonight but no no sort of technical action that troy is going to be performing so i'm alone in the deep sea of technology i've got sam uh on the mic from afar good evening everybody i've got josh producing the stream from afar he says hello he's in my left ear um actually you didn't say hello do you want to say hello he said hello you got a hello from josh he wants you all to know that he says hello and he's very happy that we're all here together the olive let's get it on let's do this okay small tree now this is this is an interesting and why i wanted to focus on this tree so badly and i'm just going to rotate it um just just once uh just to kind of catch you up now again this is a fragment this is a fracture this is a piece of a much larger olive as they were removing these um from the field they take a big excavator and they break these up and they break these up and they break these up and they break these up and they slam them they crush them they break them and you get these slivers of olive that are capable of producing roots and growth that have all of this wonderful deadwood you've got the grain exposed you've got that wonderful character it feels yamadori ish and it's really quite magical what you can do with these pieces okay and so repotting it last summer we let it recover you'll notice that all of the living pieces and josh if you just want to focus on the detail cam so that we can take a look at the pieces that are living are coming out of the living section that existed kind of on the bottom side of this trunk counter to the deadwood that exists on the other side and you can see we have this one really magnificent leader this piece right here that's sort of above all of the other structure this is a very valuable piece this piece alone really encouraged me to utilize this as the olive exploratory piece because i have this hierarchy up here where i've got a piece of structure that does definitively occur and i've got a piece of structure that does the highest structural component in the apical region i have these pieces here which offer the opportunity to either peek out the right side of the design or the left side of the design and i have these pieces on the bottom that we left just to make sure that everything went well i doubt these will be used in the design but we can kind of collaborate about that and we start to say okay how do we go about choosing a design on this this is interesting we only have a few pieces it's not going to take long to wire but we need to be very very certain about the design that we're going to execute so i'm going to throw a few ideas out there and then i'm just going to kind of start to feel out the tree where we can attach wire maybe apply some wire to those structural pieces as we're deciding what to do with them we can execute it and then we'll dive into how do we handle olives to get ramification to refine the growth to get smaller needles or excuse excuse me leaves we'll touch on all of that after the design process okay so let me throw a few ideas you're going to give me your feedback i'm going to get my hands dirty for a minute and then we will engage this upper piece here do we want this to be a bonsai or do we want this to be an olive this is a major question okay after seeing that the roman olives in italy in pulia on the heel of the boot i recognize that a 3 000 year old olive has taken on all of the contortion that we know of and if we looked at olives in israel if we looked at olives in spain if we looked at olives in italy all of these are cultivated antiquity and what that means is the movement and the motion that's put into those branches of the olive tree is that it's going to take a lot of time and a lot of time is done so via pruning decisions for the harvesting of fruit fascinating to see that practice done over 3 000 years and have it look like this rugged nature-influenced yamadori again human beings can be an element of nature right so when i start to look at this i'm saying is it going to be a bonsai are we going to have a nice little apex a branch running out here and uh an apex a branch here a counter branch here in the traditional form or are we going to carry this up and are we going to start to create a little bit more of that and then we're going to start to create more of that olive vibe i feel like with this scale and the trunk as it exists it feels very authentically olive to me and i'm kind of leaning in that direction okay i'm curious about your feedback i'm sure that there's questions i'm going to open it up to questions we're going to kind of talk through the process i'm going to remove some of these lower branches and we can get going go ahead sam cool so first off um danny wants to just know can we get some basic information about this tree species age when was it potted all that and then um piggybacking on that um and then um piggybacking on that sally wanted to know if it's a mission olive ah so this is uh olea europea which is uh european olive that they they brought over to cultivate for their fruit uh it came from somewhere in california i'm not quite sure where and again it was repotted in the summer time um of last year so you can see that on the library we executed that and kind of talked about the entire thing and again a mission olive i'm not really sure what a mission olive is i'm assuming that means that the missionaries bring them up as they were migrating or moving from south to north i don't know if that's what you're speaking to and i don't know if that's in fact what this was but it definitely was a fruit bearing all the piece of a very old large orchard um and just to touch back on chat pretty much everybody is saying make it an olive make it an olive yeah a gnarly olive yeah okay and and here's the beautiful thing on this side of the trunk when you look at the front of this and let me just square this up to the booster here when you look at the right side of this this whole area is all living vein that connects to the trunk right here this is very very important to be able to see and one of the things when this was more raw soil and we had not repotted it yet i couldn't see if this was actually bark and living tissue or if it was just a extension of the deadwood now as as it spent some time outside of the container you can see the definite difference in texture you can see the bark you can see the living tissue and you can see where it connects on the back let me just show you okay where you see that bark come up and you see it come across to here right when we repotted this in the summertime this was all roots in here and we just hoped that this apical leader had a sap line that was established that moved down into the actual rooted environment where we had those lower roots it worked out really beautifully for us and that's fantastic okay but being able to see that living next to that dead even for an all of a broadleaf evergreen we talk about it with junipers as a point of validation for the design that contrast obviously you don't get the contrast that's gray the deadwood's gray and we love the fact that they're gray it's beautiful we could heighten the contrast by bleaching the deadwood and making it really white so that it's white against that gray i don't know i don't know how i feel about olives and bleaching deadwood and all of that stuff um in the same way that we do with junipers i've seen it a lot i still haven't made my mind up about how i feel i've seen it done well i've seen it done poorly i've seen it look beautiful i've seen it look terrible you know still working on that cool um i just also want to say um for folks just joining us in the in the chat we have a lot of you here tonight and i'm so excited about that we are so excited that you guys are choosing to spend your quarantine time with us and i just want to ask that we try to keep our questions as on topic to olive styling as we can tonight um yeah and if you have if you have questions q a on um on thursday 10 a.m 3 p.m live q a come bring those questions that are off topic to the q a and we'll happily answer those exactly so um david wants to know when is the right time for the first repot of broadleaf evergreens so olives as a sort of a unique species mediterranean based and we see this with other mediterranean species for example and and i'm going to say this i'm not going to say i promote this um but a pomegranate is a mediterranean deciduous variety and pomegranates can be semi-evergreen if it's in a warm enough climate like los angeles a lot of people have said hey my pomegranates stay semi-evergreen they don't ever lose all of their leaves so when we look at pomegranate a lot of people in japan will will repot pomegranate in the middle of summer it's again it's not something that i would do i do tend to find spring to be a desirable time for pomegranates but when you see that mediterranean regionality and the specifics of trees that come from that those summer repots or peak season of heat repots kind of fit with that mediterranean category it's not universal it doesn't apply broadly to mediterranean varieties of plants by any means but when we start to look at what makes the olive unique as a broad-leafed evergreen having the capacity to be repotted in the summertime the fact that it originates from a mediterranean environment is what makes that possible now if we're talking about a camellia we're talking about a eleagnus right another very common prominent broad-leafed evergreen we're talking about quercus or the oaks another very common broadly evergreen species springtime as the buds are swelling is the ideal time to be repotting those species and it's another time that we need to make sure that we have the heat after that repot to be able to really ramp up and amass metabolic processes to recover from that repotting operation cool uh terry would like to know can you can you tell us what type of climate olives can tolerate who can keep these yeah i mean so the pacific northwest not your ideal olive climate right needs a greenhouse in the winter time we do have mild winters um that we can periodically leave olives dried in um we've rolled the dice with that in the past we didn't do so this year and i'm glad we didn't because we got into the low 20s and there is a threshold for olives particularly in a containerized environment generally warmer drier regions are where olives really thrive but again pacific northwest we have a great time cultivating them they will grow faster in warmer climates they will grow i would say with more vigor and sort of almost like an indestructible nature in warmer drier climates They are very versatile. As long as you can give them winter protection, you can virtually grow olives anywhere in North America, Europe, etc. But they do need that winter protection, and ideally they would be in a region where you can get that summer heat. The UK seems to be an area where olives probably have a little bit of a harder time because they just don't get that heat in the summertime to really kick the olive into gear and have that progressive growth take place. But outside of that, all of the Mediterranean basin, sort of the southern regions of Europe really thrive with olive growth. Cool. Next up is Andrew. Andrew has broadleaf evergreens like boxwoods that stay under 50% shade cloth. When do you pull out the shade cloth, beginning of the season or later, May or June? Oh, much later. I want to give my trees full sun, whether it's deciduous, whether it's elongating species, larch, spruce, hemlock, fir, all of these delicate species. I want to give them as much sun as I can while the temperatures are low. So we're in the mid-60s right now. Temperatures are nice and low. It feels radically warm for us in the Pacific Northwest because we don't get any sunlight over the course of winter. So we're all so pasty white when the sun comes out that like 55, we're all sunburned. Just like burnt to a crisp sunburn. But the trees love it. They need it. They've been waiting for it. They've been starved of it. The more sun we get them, the better they're going to bud, the more even the growth is going to be in terms of strength distribution across the tree. We're rotating trees already as they start to grow to try and give that best first flush of all those stored sugars and starches coming into that growth. I will protect larch, spruce, hemlock, and my elongating species if we hit a really hot day while their soft, fleshy growth is out. Spruce will burn very easily. Doug fir will burn very easily. All of those sensitive, elongating species, water-loving species will burn. So I'll protect them. But once that growth hardens right back out into the full sun, and generally, I'm going high 80s, low 90s before I bring out my shade cloth. And obviously, there are deciduous species like an aspen, like a beech that can't tolerate that kind of heat to that degree. Maybe 85 would be the threshold for those. But for my conifers and most of my more durable, deciduous species, broad-leafed evergreen species, I go up into the high 80s before I start looking at that shade cloth. Okay, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to apply my first wire. Now, I'm going to make this an olive, okay? I think the unanimous on the chat sounds fantastic. And this big move from left to right, kind of this big sweep, we could put the apex over here. Kind of, we have that really big draw of rootage here, and we've got a live vein on the back side. Or we could come here and we could come back into this region. We could also come here, come back into this region, and kick back over to here so that we get one, two, three changes of direction. The more changes of direction, the more that that material is going to give us over the course of time as that structure thickens, as we get that robust, vigorous nature of growth, we get those primary pieces really accumulating girth, then we start to really change the dynamic of the tree. If we just keep it headed in one direction, very simple, very soft of design. If we bring it back in two, we have a one change of direction, still very simple. But once we get into that third change, I think that's where we want to be. I'm going to bring this apex up here, and then I'm going to kick it back here to really change that dynamic of that direction. And then we'll see how we can creatively use it. Use the other pieces of structure. So let me go ahead. You can see I have a preformed hook here. Let me just show you in the detail cam. A preformed hook, whether I'm using aluminum or copper, really allows us to connect to a piece of deadwood. If you look at this, there is no branch. My next branch is all the way down here. I'm not going to wrap wire all the way around the trunk. So I'm looking at this region. I'm looking at all of this deadwood. I'm looking at these knobs and stubs, and I'm trying to think, how can I creatively and attractively apply wire to this? So that it's functional, and it's the least amount of visible with the most amount of function. And generally, that preformed hook, and sometimes I can find a little fissure in some of these areas here. I may have to adapt my preformed hook, but notice how I have these cracks here. That's a great place for that little cutoff piece to anchor. I just need to customize that tip. And this is, I'm going to leave it right here so I can show you how I do this. As Sam kind of, I'm going to fudge with this as Sam asks a few more questions. Cool. Next up, we have Kevin. Kevin's wondering, what are the best times to make big cuts, and what should we apply, if anything, to those big cuts? Yeah, so in terms of olives, big cuts, generally, energy positive, as with any species, right? We want to, definitely want to be energy positive because we want the tree, with that big cut, to have a big push out, a big productivity of growth, okay? And so we're looking at energy positive. Spring is a great time. Post-flush hardened is a great time. I would say those are your two most dominant times to really be looking at big cuts because, you know, with olive, olive is very, I would say, it doesn't heal really, really well. They are so robust in the ground. They're so robust in the field, but they are relatively slow growing, and I would say relatively slow to thicken, particularly the cooler areas and the cooler regions of, you know, whether it's the northern hemisphere or the southern hemisphere, the farther away from the equator you get, I would say the slower the growth rate you're going to have on olive just in general. And so when we start to look at those big cuts, ideally, big cuts would either be turned into deadwood or big cuts would be in locations where we could potentially disguise them because there's a strong chance that they're going to be there for quite some time. It's not to say that they won't heal. They will heal. It just is going to take a lot of time. So that's where we would, again, use the cut paste to make sure that we keep moisture in, make sure that we don't allow oxygen to create an embolism in the water conductive chain and really vigorous growth of branches around that wound. It is possible to heal them. Troy, have you healed big wounds on olives? No? They've always stayed kind of, they just stayed open. Yeah, it's interesting because they are so vigorous, you would expect it to heal better, but they don't. Yeah. Hmm? Yeah, yeah. Yeah, Troy has had the same experience. Okay. Let's go ahead and come into the detail here. Okay. And so what I've done is I just spliced that wire right into that crack right there. And let me just give you a little bit of a close up here because I think this is important just to creatively problem solve. And when you start thinking, okay, and let me go, I'm going to come in all the way. Okay. Take a look at that. Okay. So now we see, we see that crack being utilized and I just stuck that wire in there. I sort of customized that length right there to get a nice clean wrap. I'm going to rotate. So you can kind of see, you see how I flatten that out right there and then it comes across. Now there is, there is space between this. Whenever I'm trying to structurally create some sort of connection point for just a randomly occurring branch in an odd area. I'm not necessarily trying to get this wire to be in complete contact with the wood that exists behind it or below it the whole time. I want a really nice arc here so that when I enter the shoulder of that branch right here, right where it connects, the contact of that shoulder is where the function of my structural wire exists. So coming in there now, when we start to look at this, this gives me functional wire because this piece right here that's fed into the deadwood is totally stable. I've customized that shape. I've entered that shoulder on this side. And now we have the ability to really manipulate the shape of this piece. So let's go ahead and zoom out and let's get this piece kind of placed in a region. Now I'm going to move to the back just for a moment. Right. And the reason I'm going to move to the back is because I want to have total control. But I want you to watch this. I'm going to come to the front. So I'm going to hold right at the shoulder. I'm going to hold right where I spliced into the deadwood. And I'm just going to be watching that tissue. Now, all of it is extremely, extremely flexible, like really, really flexible. And so when we start to do these kinds of bends, we do have the capacity to put in some really interesting movement and we want the movement to kind of maintain a synchronicity, if you will, or a consistency of the nuances that exist inside of the actual stump of the piece. Now, when I'm putting this in, we said, hey, our tree moves from left to right. I'm going to bring this apex back against it and then I'm going to kick it out again. Now, that apex needs to come to the front of the tree as well. Everything originating from the back or pulling around to the front. But I'm going to use the entire length of this apical region here. Everything that I have and I'm going to need to elongate this. This whole this whole tree is going to be in development, which means we're going to heavily feed. We're not going to be pruning anything. We're not working towards secondary or tertiary branching creation quite yet. We are focused on primary structural creation. OK, so the apex comes back this way, comes towards the front. And then we said we were going to kick it back again. So the tree moves left to right. Boom comes back to the left. Boom shifts back to the right. Boom. And we've got one, two, three changes of direction. Now, as we build this apex, I'm looking at this apex being built around this kind of spire like piece of remnant of that that harshness and that ruggedness, whether it's Yamadori or whether it was cleaved off of a bigger tree. It's a traumatic event that created this. I'm going to build my apex in and around that. And I eventually see my tree being roughly this big with that apex really offset because we've got the base to be able to anchor it. Now, maybe we get up in here to the apex and it comes back to the left again. And we have four changes of direction as the piece matures. We put it in the direction of having the most changes that that singular piece that can represent the apex has the capacity to be able to represent. I'm good with that. I don't need any more. Right. For now, that's the maximum that we can accomplish with that piece. OK, now we start to look at these rear pieces. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to try to figure out another solution to be able to creatively wire this piece, open it up to questions again. And when we figure it out, I'll dialogue with you about how we get it done. Just to be clear, I'm going to be coming in and I'm going to be thinning out these nodes right here. I want to show you these nodes because they exist on all of very consistently. Most trees have these kinds of nodes. OK, so we're getting these nodes here where we've got one, two, three, four and this bigger stem as five pieces coming out of that. I'm assuming if we're talking about primary structural development, I want the thickest piece here and I'm probably going to want the length of this. I doubt I leave it super long because we've got this apex that's largely underdeveloped and everything's going back into development. But I am going to keep my stronger branches when I'm creating. Unless there's some smaller branch that has a beautiful line, beautiful angle of orientation, beautiful presence or position in the branching. If I'm in primary development, I'm going to be really trying to keep my biggest best pieces because those are the ones that have the energy that can thicken the fastest, that can add the most growth, that can develop really, really rapidly. So I'm picking my leaders, I'm picking my strongest pieces that have the capacity to really be something. Go ahead. Ready for some more questions. I'm ready. Cool. Next up, Mel had wanted to know. She said you mentioned that you had quite a few of these. But last year this was the only one that was growing well enough to repot. Do you have any news on the others? Yeah. Yeah. Troy and I were just looking at them like, what should we do with all these? Like, we have a lot. We got some big. There are some big ones, like big, big. And there's some. There's some smaller ones that are starting to amass a little more strength. There's a few that have more strength. I think the way we felt about it was that we might wait till summer to to pop them up just because we had really good success with this. And it's kind of we I guess there is a lot of confidence that comes from understanding that all of is typically handled in the summertime successfully. So I think that's what we were looking at in terms of transitions to bonsai cultivation was summertime. But yeah, there's some really fantastic pieces and they still are here at Mirai. Cool. So I'm skipping ahead a little bit because we have a bunch of questions about this. Danny, Gary and Linda, can you tell them or just tell everybody about what kind of wire you're using, what gauge and the best place to get aluminum wire? OK, so we are using aluminum wire now. Again, when when we talk about what wire are we using, we think about the characteristics of the tree. When we start to talk about soft bark trees and I would I would consider olive especially in these younger branches to be extremely soft. Right. We can just scratch them. We can just scratch it and get down to the green almost immediately. It's very, very soft bark right here. So when we start to look at that, I don't want to be using copper. Copper has a little bit more abrasive surface. Copper does have the ability to do a little bit more damage. It takes a little bit more strength. It is a little bit harder. And so aluminum easier to go on. Smoother surface. So there's less abrasion and potential to really scratch and scar that soft bark. And we generally see aluminum as as that choice for those softer bark varieties that have the ability for that damage to occur and no bark to be able to be cultivated on top of that damage to potentially disguise it or make that not an obstruction of the beauty of the tree over the course of time. So aluminum and where do you get aluminum? We historically have supported stone lantern. Which, you know, Stone Lantern used to publish Bonsai today. I know they do. They do a lot of vending of of wire and whatnot. And that's we've used that as just kind of a generic resource for aluminum wire for ourselves and had great success with it. But I think aluminum is is fairly widely available. I think. Yeah, I'm trying to think of I'm sure Jonas at Bonsai tonight has aluminum wire. I would think that Andy at Superfly Bonsai would have aluminum wire. So I think there's a lot of people that have the ability and have the inventory to bend aluminum. We do not we're not interested in necessarily just buying and selling. You know, we won't really want to. I like the copper wire that we do. I love the annealing process and the capacity to create copper wire that is just absolutely functional and beautiful. And I think we do that really well. Aluminum generally is a similar grade and a similar quality across the board. There's small nuances, but it's always soft because aluminum doesn't take an action to soften it or to anneal it. It is just always universally soft, but it also doesn't have that capacity to work harden, which is where copper, I think, does have superiority for those really strong, durable, heavy bark trees. Kim is asking, how do you bend larger branches? Do you just use heavy wire? Can you talk a little bit about bending larger branches? Yeah. So I think that there are there are concepts, definitely. The bending side of the application of wire in the thought process, structural wire versus secondary tertiary wire. Anything that originates off of the trunk is a primary branch. This is a structural branch. Anything that originates off of that primary branch is a secondary branch. And anything that originates off of the secondary branch is the tertiary branch. OK, we really set the tone for the wire of our entire tree by the way that we pair these structural pieces together, the gauge that we utilize. And we're always looking to utilize a gauge where one wire allows us to accomplish any bend that we want. Now, the thicker the branch, the thicker the wire to accomplish that. Thicker the branch, the more important the contact point at the shoulder where that primary branch joins the trunk. And that's where we're really focused. And let me go ahead and fix the detail, Kim. I'll show you how I handled this piece. And again, if we're talking olives and we're talking about kind of maximizing our capacity to be able to cultivate and wire these really unique pieces that only have a few structural points in terms of their primary structure. OK, you'll notice that I enter the shoulder here on this rather big piece that's holding quite a bit of the foliar mass of the tree. I came all the way down along this, finding a ridge, finding a protrusion so that I've got a good solid anchor. I try to keep that nice, clean, smooth line coming back up this side. And again, entering the shoulder of this much smaller piece. Now, I'm going to use this piece for depth. And I'm also going to use this piece as a little bit of peekaboo right here on the right side of the trunk. Let me go ahead and rotate and show you where I place that. And you can just see just a little bit of that right there, right in that negative space. Seeing that on the back side of the tree, boom, automatically our design gains depth. And that's an important aspect when we set the initial structure to have that depth. OK, now we kick the apex back to the left and then kicked it to the right again. We have all of this foliar mass and we've got to decide. Do I want the bulk of this foliar mass to come out to the right or do I want the bulk of the foliar mass to come out to the left? This is when we come back to the design notion. That 95% of the time in bonsai design, the branch that creates the asymmetry, the longest branch from the foliar mass on the tree, the longest point where our eye is guided by that foliar mass. OK, that defining branch generally 95% of the time works hand in hand with the apical region. OK, now this is a very raw tree. So we're saying, gosh, I don't know, right? It's the first styling. What's going to happen over the next five years? I can already tell you it's going to change in ways you cannot envision. And if you do it correctly, it will supersede, far exceed your expectation of what this will be. We bring the apex to the left and back to the right. Naturally, we're thinking, OK, if the apex is moving to the right, my asymmetrical lean needs to move to the right and it needs to be out here. We have the trunk to anchor it. We're going for that olive vibe. This is what I'm naturally thinking. We might put a little piece over in here just to have some just to have some foliar mass on this as a counter. But this may grow to a point where we change the direction of the apex back. And that is where we let the tree do the heavy lifting in the design. For tonight, I've already pushed to the right. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to use the bulk of my asymmetrical length to the right as well, understanding that that defining branch and apex 95% of the time in design need to work together for that design to have congruency. Let's see. Next up, we have Daniel. So Daniel says he understands that he understands olive roots incredibly easily compared to many species like this chunk you have. Are there any other species off the top of your head that can generally root very easily or be flat cut from anywhere on the tree aside from willow, olive and redwood? Yeah, willow, olive, redwood, tamarisk. Tamarisk is a big one. The tamarisk that we kind of consistently work with the really big hollow trunk tamarisk was flat cut in the middle of the summer by myself and one of my good friends in college. I've heard I've heard I don't know if this is true. I've heard that there are some varieties of oak that have enough water transport. And ultimately, when you look at this, it comes down to water transport or the ability to endure drought. Right. You look at succulents. Succulents can endure significant amounts of drought. And so you you can flat cut a succulent. You stick it in some sandy soil. You don't water it and it will root. Right. Olive can endure a tremendous amount of drought as a Mediterranean. So all of a sudden, with an olive, we we flat cut an olive. It can endure that drought. It calluses and it forms roots. But we can also go the opposite direction. Redwood, high water mobility, tamarisk, high water mobility, willow, high water mobility. When we start looking at those high water mobilities, they root very easily as well. So if we start looking, I would imagine birch would probably fit into that. I would imagine elms probably have some capacity. Right. OK, next up, let's see. Kim wants to know if that living tissue will ever push branching. And Bentley wanted to know that as well. If if the living tissue would ever push more branching. Yeah. So Kim says, will that living tissue push branching ever and Bentley wants to know, will more foliage come out of the living? Definitely will come will come out of the branches that already exist. But there is a strong chance that as I get more and more foliage kind of ramped up on this tree, that we will also see sprouts come out of these areas. Now, I don't want to let. The tree put its energy into generating advantageous, advantageous sprouts necessarily. OK, I really want the tree to focus its efforts. And this is one of the things about all of that we have to be very aware of is they will continue to just produce tons and tons of basal growth. They grow from the base. It gives them a big buttress. They will always go back to the base, much like a lot of our other species that do have that basal, basally strong kind of growth. So we want to continually. They be pushing their energy into the upper canopy of the tree. We will definitely see more growth. OK, now I'm working on the setting of this line right here and I'm trying to get a nice, natural contour and contortion that follows some of the movement and the lines that exist through these spaces and the lines on the backside of this tree, not because you're going to see it, but because I want that movement to be consistent with the rest of the tree if I'm making an olive and olive. Right. And again, we don't have that. Natural reflection or representation of what an olive shape would be because it's been a largely domestically influenced shape that's created this notion of natural wild olives, there just aren't natural wild olives. There are olives that have been cultivated over the course of mankind, whether it's Israel, whether it's Spain, whether it's Italy. So this is always manmade. It's super duper interesting. But again, one of the really interesting aspects in terms of that cultivation is finding that the movement that's put into them extremely exaggerated, extremely magnificent collected type of movement similar to what we're seeing in the movement of this living tissue along the deadwood here, but also very strategically placed to facilitate the very highest level of fruiting production because olives have always been very much a service oriented species of tree producing olive oil. And, you know, one of the staples and backbones of a lot of cultures around the world. Cool. Mike wants to know if you can talk about your plan for accentuating the deadwood. Are you going to carve, reveal more, et cetera? You know, I as long as this piece has and it has very natural grain because it's been torn off, the the notion of carving to make something look more natural, just it just simply doesn't register with me at all. I think you carve when you have to eliminate physical or visual mass. Now, this is a very massive piece in a very compact space. And because of that, I want to be careful to not not have too chunky and massive of a tree in too small of a space. But my feeling about it is is that it's quite conducive when we start to talk about the power that exists in terms of this piece, it's quite conducive to the way that olive genuinely look when they've been cultivated for an extent. It's extremely long period of time, very short, very stout, very powerful, dead wood all over the place, hollows, insets. There's a lot of nuances as this bark dries out that's going to come out of the dead wood again, asymmetry as that big component. Right. They lose branches. I was watching them harvest the olives when we were in Puglia. And again, that video, if you want to see the Puglia and olives is on Mirai live. You should check it out. They would hook up a tractor, had a clamp that clamped around it and it vibrated. And the whole tree. Shook and they had a net on the ground below it. And then there were people with these big, long, big, long kind of like fingers, like electrical fingers that were kind of working through the foyer mass and knocking off all of the olives that the vibration didn't get. But occasionally they would grab a branch with the tractor and they'd be vibrating and it would just tear off. And it was just like, oh, that 3000 year old olive just lost a 2000 year old branch. OK, they would set it off to the side and they would grab another and start shaking. It's like, oh, shit, that's a really old tree to just rip the branch off. That was the way it went the way it went. OK, now this changed everything. Pushing the tree to the right side changed everything. And I love it. I love this because now we're getting that asymmetry that's representing that age and that drama out of the design, I'm going to continue working towards that right side to try and set that structure in that shape. Now that I've got structural wire on this big piece and I've got it kind of headed in the right direction, I'm going to start laying out some of these secondary pieces. And really kind of talking you through strategies to be designing broadleaf evergreens and olive specifically. Let me just get a few more of these pieces out of the way. That one split right at the base. Didn't need it anyways. Go ahead, Sam. Didn't need that. Didn't need it. I didn't want it. Are you ready for a couple more questions? Let's do it. So Danny, Thomas and Gary all want to know about the soil composition for this. Soil composition, solid Akadama, which is going to be. A little controversial, a little controversial. You're going to have you're going to have people saying solid Akadama for an olive, but they're they're a Mediterranean. They're a dry tree. Why solid Akadama? Well, when we talk about broadleaf evergreen species and this goes for if you look at a coast live oak, this is another another one of these very dry Mediterranean species of oaks, Quercus agrifolia that grows along coastal California. OK. And we. We pot all of our coastal oaks into 100 percent Akadama because we're looking for the smallest leaf, the shortest inner node and the most refined root system. And we just recently potted a bunch of a bunch of coast live oaks up that have been grown in solid Akadama had kind of lost percolation because they had occupied the entire soil mass and I've never seen root systems that dense in my life. And I've never seen an oak root system that dense. That's why we use solid Akadama. I think the same thing is absolutely possible. We start to talk about olive. How do you get olive to finally ramify? How do you get olive to create smaller leaves? How do you get olive to be the best bonsai? I think Akadama is one of those ways. This is the test subject for it, because I think typically people tend to handle olives with a very dry mixture, a lot of lava, a lot of pumice, a limited amount of Akadama. I don't think this is the way to go about it because I don't think that you're ever going to get a highly, highly refined tree. And even when we look at. At least small leaf varieties, again, the Majorcan olive, very naturally small leaf variety, when we start to look at these small leaf varieties of olive, we have, I think, an under or an expectation that we've hit the peak. We've hit the pinnacle of what olive can be by seeing the great olives in Europe. My argument would be I still don't think you've seen the best that olive could be. I don't think you've seen the highest level of ramification. I don't think you've seen the highest level of leaf reduction. That's the goal of exploring this now in this in this project with this particular piece in the olives we're cultivating. That's why I went with solid Akadama. Cool. And just speaking of what you were talking about a second ago about Puglia, Dr. C says the trees in Puglia are beautifully ugly, inverse taper, coarse twisting, huge disparity in trunk and branch thickness. How do you incorporate that into your composition in a convincing way? Well, I mean, we're going to have a huge disparity in trunk thickness and branching. It's it's already there. I mean, when you look at my apex, but this this is it's great to get to do this kind of work on the stream because this kind of work, we do this at Mirai all the time where we're basically setting the bones for the future and we're going to be developing and we're going to be working on the the shape of of these trees over the course of time. Now, I know that my first iteration on an olive, nobody's going to walk away from this and be like, damn, Ryan Neal can style dope bonsai, right, because of the olive. That I'm going to make today. It's going to look like a like a sliver of what it will look like eventually. But having that notion, what kind of movement? Where does the structure come from that we create it? How do we know the direction of the apex? Where do we put the defining branch? How are we utilizing the characteristics of the tree to set the tone of that primary structure for that future piece? That is the focus of tonight. And really, as I work through this, we will come back and we will talk about all of those points. Let's see next step. We covered this a little bit already, but just in case for people that have just joined us, David wanted to know if olives are best to repot in summer. He had also heard that in reference to the pistachio. Yeah, I don't know about the pistachio. I it's a species that I think is absolutely phenomenal. I love it. I wish I wish we had I wish we had some really good specimens to utilize and that it was a little more favorable environment here. But for the olive. Yeah, that was kind of the centralized discussion at the beginning of the stream was. We're going to wait. We have a number of these pieces. We're going to wait until the summertime to pop the rest of them up. We're going to sort of avoid spring potting and move to the summer. All right. See you, Troy. Yeah. Thanks, man. Thanks for a good day, Troy. Troy says goodbye to everybody. Let's see. Next up, we have Vern. Vern says that some of the extremely old olives that he's seen photos of appear to have spiraling branches. Is that typical for ancient trees? It's not typical for ancient trees that are not influenced by man, but again, olives, when we start to talk about olives and what dictates their shape and their dynamic, it's how they are pruned. Because, again, finding a wild untouched, finding a wild Yamadori olive is virtually in fact, I don't even know if it exists because the land where olive grows have been cultivated for so long. Those spiraling branches, those are created by pruning decisions that were done a thousand years ago. Right. And continually perpetuated as that process, you go to each orchard on Puglia and you will see a different aesthetic to each orchard based on how they've been pruned over the course of generations at that specific orchard. And it's fascinating because seeing it over that course of time, you lose the fact that it was done artificially or domestically or that mankind was the natural influence that shaped those ancient trees. But what we're seeing in the movement that we put in here might not necessarily be natural to a natural form of olive growth. The only thing we have to reference is a manmade olive. That's the interesting concept about this whole species. Like, get with me there. Find that, find that, that fact that man has been, mankind has been the random act of nature that has created the asymmetry, the movement and the oddities of the forms that we know of as ancient olives. Freakily cool. Freakily cool. Rafi says that he has an olive that seems to have lost its protective cuticle during wintering as the leaves got sunburned outdoors during the bonsai shuffle. What should what should he do? Just I think now that now that it's happened and that sunburn does right happen over the course of winter protection, you put it inside a space where there's less airflow, where there's less heat and intensity and all of a sudden the tree and there's less there's less light. No matter how clear our greenhouse or our structure is, if we keep our our bonsai over winter, there is going to be less light. And in order for the tree to continue to amass photosynthetic resources, sugars and starches, it has to shrink down the size of its cuticle to be able to take in in that lower light level enough light to stay in an energy positive productivity. That's the goal inside of that. That overwintering is to stay producing energy positive quantities of resources. And that's where we start to see that cuticle become, I think, very, very easily influenced. Right. So now that it's happened, I would say go ahead, continue to maybe offer a morning sun, afternoon shade. But once it starts producing new growth, those leaves will drop. You could you could potentially remove the burned portion of the leaf. It's not worth your time. The tree will be better off if you don't. But it's not a big deal. Well, next up is Scott on a recent Q&A. You said that the olive was using a lot of water, but not growing. Has this grown any since the repot? If not, how do you know it's OK to style it? It grew a little bit last summer, but we are not in a period of massive heat to perpetuate growth here. The fact that it's using a lot of water is saying that it's actively starting to move the sugars and starches from the stored areas of the vascular tissue out to those growing tips, buds are swelling. There's just a slight amount, slight, slight amount of new sort of tissue poking its little head out of the tips here. But there's buds all along that look like they're getting ready to rock and roll. And when olive starts to grow, it almost has these two little tiny leaves that kind of come out and they stay there and you kind of see those. And then all of a sudden those just go and they just erupt. Right. And so that's what I'm seeing. I'm seeing those leaves amassed at the tip of each each branch. Cool. Jim wants to know how often you would rotate this, I assume, in the garden. So the more over the spring as the tree is pushing out all the sugars and starches that we can rotate, the more evenly distributed the strength is going to be across all of the branches on the tree. So like I was saying, you know, we've already fertilized twice and our trees are just starting to grow. Some of that was a product of needing to regain our microbial activity in the containerized environment. We had some we had some unfortunate sort of failures in science last year at Mirai. And we're trying to recover from that without without a lot of detrimental impact. And so. So we're kind of rotating and really seeking out that microbial action in the container is one of the ways that we're kind of fixing that. But when we start to talk about that tree energy positive coming out of the winter, pushing all of those resources into the areas that are most photosynthetically productive and really achieving that greatest amount of sugar starch creation, that's where all your resources are going to go if you're rotating. And I would say if you have a small collection once a week over the spring, over the fall, great summertime, you can take a little time off, maybe once a month. For us at Mirai, massive collection, tree by tree basis pieces that I need. Southern orientation to take in the sun, gain the strength and even out that balance of energy. I'm focused more on a tree by tree basis of what I'm trying to accomplish with rotation, but I'm rotating very frequently right now as much as I physically can. Cool. David would like to know how long the wire is going to stay on. Does Olive scar easily? Or will the bark eventually hide that? Yeah, good question. I mean, the bark eventually would hide it. But let's be really honest. The bark on these smoother pieces is going to take decades to actually occur. So what we would say is, hey, Olive does scar pretty easily. I'm going to be very, very careful. We talked about Olive's not necessarily healing as well as some of our other species. They're a low water mobility tree. Once we put them in a containerized environment, we really do reduce the rate at which they produce that massive, that flush of growth and that massive flush of vascular tissue. So I'm not going to see the wire biting in, say, in like two months. But if this really starts to rock and particularly over the heat of summer, if it really starts to rock, then I need to become more and more aware at the rate of new growth and the quantity of new growth that occurs, I need to understand that that equals thickening that equals vascular productivity. The more it produces new growth as it's as it's really growing this year, the closer I'm going to have to pay attention to the wire. And I'm going to be taking it off before it scars, before it even gets tight and leaves a mark. Or else I will see that for a very long time. Cool next step, Mike just wants to confirm, and this was from a little while ago, so you might have to go back in your brain to get the answer, but he just wants to confirm that you set the structure of the apex first because the top branch was separated from the bottom clump versus if you had more options. Yeah, totally, totally. But I also think when we're when we're doing a piece of work like this and this piece of work. When I say a piece of work like this, we are really kind of making all because this is this is a stump that has a bunch of sprouts. And this is what we're going to see. This is what we're going to see. If you if you trunk chopped a deciduous tree, this is what you're going to see. If you trunk chop or if you have, say, a nursery piece of stock or something coming out of the garden or something coming out of the urban landscape and you're going to get this flush of new vigorous growth on this old stumpy trunk and you say, what the hell do I do with it? This is what we're doing. And one of the big things. Is defining the line base to tip base of the tree to the tip of the apex, defining that line. So when I styled this apex, yes, it was a cumbersome area. It was separated from the rest. It was a very important piece. So we're putting priority and making sure everything's OK. But more than that, defining the apex and the line base to tip is what created the decision to be able to know where do I carry this branch? The most dominant foliar mass? Well, my apex, I said, OK, and let's come back to this on the wide. The tree moves to the right. I'm going to bring the apex back to the left and kick it back to the right. Three changes of direction. One, two, three. I've raised the quality of that material. I have the base to support asymmetry now that it's heading back to the right. Ninety five percent of Bonsai design, the apex and defining branch tend to work together to to create design cohesion. Right. And if you want to understand that more, check out design feel or design theory in the library Harmony Tension Dynamic. This is a very harmonious tree that we're creating right here. It has elements of interest that support harmonious design. So all of those pieces, all of those decisions were created by defining the line base to tip, knowing where that apex is going, knowing the changes in direction and knowing where that asymmetry is going to benefit that design. Sorry to interrupt you. I was just going to say that the design stream is called Design Fundamentals if you're looking for it in the library. I was close. I was close. You were very close. I was close. Next up is Leonard. Leonard wants to know if all the branches growing from the same point will eventually create like a knob of growth. Well, so they're not all growing from the same point. So I've got my apex coming from this upper piece. It's now hidden by this branch. So I've got one point here. I've got my really dominant branch originating right here. OK, so this is another piece. I've got this smaller depth piece that's giving me this depth right here originating lower down, and then I have this wonderful piece over here that occurs on. Its own independent. So one, two, three, four points where I have structure. So when we start to talk about the value of material, right, the more locations where we have structural primary branches originating from the tree, the higher the quality of that material. Now, this is independent of how good is the trunk? How good is the base? How good are the special features of the tree? Right. Those are their own things. But when we talk about structure, the structure of a tree, the more locations as we move up that trunk that we've got primary pieces originating from the trunk, the more variety of spaces, lengths, densities, styles that we can create, that gives us a lot of value. That's why we started with this piece, because it had so many more branching locations. Some of the other olives have one. Well, from that one, we can still create a great tree. It's a different strategy altogether. And maybe we should come back and revisit that so we can compare the two here. We've got four solid primary structural locations, none of them from the same location, no inverse taper or swelling, no structural issue. We're good to go. OK, now I'm going to bring you in here to a design decision that we need to make right now, because you see this branch coming out here and we're saying, all right, what does it look like to have an olive? Now, there was a comment earlier where somebody said olives, when you look at those ancient olives and Puglia, some of them have these spiraling branches, right, created by the pruning process. But to come up here, one of the things that you would notice walking through the orchards in Puglia is that suddenly branches just come down and then they just spiral back up. And this feels with this kind of length, if we're building a primary structure for the future that's going to thicken, I want to add that radical movement and that drop and then have it come back up. And this is the olive that we're looking for. That's what makes it an olive. So that's how I'm going to handle this as I continue to answer your questions. Cool. Next up is Kevin. So as far. As a natural style, would it be a good idea for a rock planting? Would olive be a good idea for a rock planting, depending on your region, like European olive, regionally speaking, for rock stylings? I mean, I think olive. I haven't I haven't seen a lot of olive on rock, probably because typically when you think rock, you think mountains and maybe people are like, well, olive on rock. That doesn't really make sense. But I mean. Let me just think about this for a minute before I willy nilly give you some answer, because you've asked me something very challenging. OK, here's here's let me just orient from this perspective. OK, it's not the environment that I think you would see all of typically growing. And although if you go to South Africa, their black olive definitely grows in rocky conditions. Fantastic material in South Africa, the black olive. But, you know, European olive, you can see it growing on some rockier hillsides or whatnot. It's not growing out of rock. It really doesn't have that aesthetic that we typically see in the mountains or some sort of alpine region doesn't mean that it wouldn't be a great subject for rock planting. No, I think it would be highly durable, very, very vigorous and capable of being planted on a rock with success. The aesthetic are you creating an olive? Are you creating are you using olive to represent a different species or are you just kind of creating something where you're trying to explore aesthetics and have fun? You would have to make that decision because I think naturally, you probably would not see that occur. But physically speaking, it would be a very durable species to be able to create a rock planting with. And when we create rock plantings, you have to have that vigor. Right back in the day, you used to see a lot of tiny spruce planted on rocks. In Japan, spruce can't survive on stone. They just simply can't survive on stone. Colorado spruce has a little bit more capacity, too. But even that over the course of time, generally having a reservoir or making sure it's on a slab, not a vertical stone, is how you measure the long term success of those compositions. We're really looking for drought tolerant, durable species. And that's I think where olive could be a really nice addition to a stone composition. Let's see, next up, we have Kim. Kim would like to know about pruning methods for secondary branches and growth patterns and what to avoid to keep them from growing opposing branches at a cut. Yeah, well, they grow up whether you like it or not. Olive are going to grow opposing branches. That's just the nature of it. I mean, even even as I'm wiring here at every junction, I've got opposing branches and I'm going to come back and kind of clean these up. I'm just trying to put those really nice lines because where I put these lines dictates how I prune and how I make decisions in terms of my branching structure. So follow me here as I kind of as I kind of walk you through this piece, because I really wanted this to drop as much as I possibly could. Now, where it drops, where I'm dropping this down and you can see this in the detail camera and where I'm dropping this down. Notice that I have a piece here that I've wired that's at the top of that drop. So I've got this beautiful little branch here. OK, whenever I drop, I want to give rise to something coming off of that to occupy the space of that branch dropping out of that region. That's this small piece right here. Not big enough to put dramatic movement in. I'm going to leave that there. I'm going to clean up some of the leaves that exist in this initial styling, some of the leaves that are on the interior. Here of these turns and some of the leaves that are now sort of crowding out the branching, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take those off. OK, doesn't mean that they're not going to produce growth because I'm cutting them off. Right. And then these smaller branches that exist on the inside here. I have two branches right here, one in my left hand, one in my right hand. The one in my right hand is growing into the tip. I've moved this tip back towards that piece. That means that this piece is now growing on the inside of that turn. So after putting that fundamental movement in, now I'm going to clean that piece out. And when we come back to the front of the tree now, right, depending on how I want to continue to kind of work with that movement, we've got that kind of dropping down in a little bit more, just a slight amount of artificiality in terms of a mimicry of pattern slightly in that olive way that we see those spiral branches. When we talk about movement for a very natural tree, different angles, different spaces, different planes. We don't want to see that. Continual pattern. We want to see different movement in an olive. We see a little bit more of that pattern. And this is an interesting aesthetic that we can play with to get outside of the standard sort of course of bonsai styling. I like that piece moving over in that direction. You're starting to see a little more compactness. I might work this to give me. I kind of liked it when it had a little bit more length to it. I'm just going to push that out a little bit. And I ultimately see this branch kind of creeping up into this area right in here with a really nice boom, all of that underlying tertiary ramification, visible sort of that informal cloud like growth. You now see the apex in that relating. Let's go ahead and keep working on the backside here. Cool. You ready for some more questions? I'm ready. Keep rocking. Nat would like to know if you've seen many olive bonsai that have been styled naturally and not in the traditional Japanese style. You know, I mean, there's some olive bonsai that are just undeniable because of because of their natural character in terms of deadwood. But I think most of those typically tend to be styled in the pine tree form that we that we see a lot in Japan. And there's an interesting dance between this traditional form and the natural growth habit of a tree, because an olive is still going to be an olive. Even if you try to put it in a box, it's going to be like it's so vigorous that they're going to be like, nice try. Right. And how about this? And that's where kind of an olive can override the desire of the person creating it to a degree and maintain some of what makes it an olive. OK, but I would say typically, no, I you don't see them designed in a quote unquote natural way. Now, I feel like we need to kind of do away with the quote unquote natural olive form because we recognize that all olive are domestically made and that that changes their aesthetic and that changes the nuances of forming them as a bonsai, considering that. But if we do consider the antiquity of that cultivation now removing the artificial elements and kind of naturalizing those pruning decisions for the cultivation of of the fruiting piece, you don't see a lot of people duplicating or mimicking that. This is where I think Maria, Maria Hadzik, if you check out Anima, Anima, Anima, Anima Bonsai on Instagram, we we did a podcast with her and she posted an olive from Luciani Luciani from Argentina at the trophy. Take a look. She posted an olive today. That is an olive. It's a it's a frickin olive. Her tree that she displayed at the Nolanders trophy was an olive. It was a definitive olive. Right. This is interesting. This is unique. This is different than Italy. This is different than Spain. She's from Croatia. They're doing something entirely unique. And she is really referencing the natural growth habit in the natural form. I find this interesting. I find this appealing and and huge. Huge, huge respect to her for the work that she is putting in. OK, so I've spread a little bit here and I've kind of started putting that meandering movement, some of these coming up into this region, some of these dropping down, just kind of filling the space and really setting primary and secondary. I'm not into tertiary yet, but I am trying to get it spread out. Photosynthetic efficiency, knowing that it's only going to continue to develop the more photosynthetically efficient it is and putting the movement and consistency of that style set by these primary pieces carried out through the secondaries into the space where they can function and give them the best chance to actually turn into something that can contribute to the design. I'm going to add a little bit more to this piece right here. And I've got a few little nubbins up here in the apex that it makes sense to go ahead and get photosynthetic efficiency out of. And then I'm going to walk you through how we get refinement in an olive, because I think that there is, again, a higher level of refinement that's achievable. And I think we can talk about that in a big way tonight. Let's see. I think we talked about this a little bit earlier, but just to make sure, Gary wanted to know if you could talk about the thickness of the branches versus the thickness of the trunk, if the branches will ever get enough girth to look realistic. I definitely think the branches can get enough girth to look realistic. But again, you know, this isn't this isn't your traditional bonsai species. And I don't think this is your traditional bonsai form that we're going for. And I hate to keep going back here, but it's really separating us from the box of what we anticipate to be right or correct or appropriate to say, hey, listen, if you go see the really ancient olives, what you're going to notice is that the branches are actually quite small on these trees for the size of the trunk that are holding and supporting them. Doesn't mean that's how I have to style this tree. But when we started, we kind of discussed are we going to make a bonsai or are we going to make an olive? And we said, hey, we're going to make a bone or we're going to make an olive. We're not going to make a bonsai. OK, cool. Cool. So then if that's the case, I'm not as concerned. If that's my goal, if that's my objective, I'm not as concerned with the size of the branches as I would be if I were making this into a very traditional formed bonsai. The next step, we have Mike, who had a soil question. Mike uses three parts Akadama, one part lava, one part pumice. Mike has olives and oak. So what do you think about that blend? Three parts Akadama, did you say? Three parts Akadama, one part lava, one part pumice. Yeah, I mean, I think I don't think that there's an issue with that. I don't think there's an issue with that at all. You know, ultimately, when you talk about Akadama, although most people consider Akadama the water retentive component of soil, I think Mirai members understand that that's not that's not where Akadama really serves its purpose in the container, although it does hold some water, nutritional holding capacity and the ability to really refine the root system is where Akadama gives us our best benefit. And so I still would encourage a higher quality Akadama 3-1-1 sounds good to me if that's what you have the capacity to really confidently cultivate and give that balance of water and oxygen in your growing environment of your garden and regionality, then absolutely, absolutely. There's no reason. One, you know, taking away the pumice and lava and replacing it with Akadama is not going to make such a dramatic difference that it's like, oh, night and day, what did you do? You changed a solid Akadama, but you will get a more refined root system with Akadama. Just a fact of the matter. And actually, this question dovetails nicely. Mel wanted to ask if you find that the solid Akadama stays too wet in the next year, what changes do you think you'll make? No top dressing, perhaps, or put the pots on an angle? Well, solid Akadama is not going to stay too wet because I'm the one who has to be wetting it. And so ultimately, when you start to talk about this kind of discussion around, you know, what would happen where solid Akadama would not be a good thing for the design of the tree, the Akadama breaking down. How do you prevent the Akadama from breaking down? You top dress it. And most people think, oh, top dressing is going to keep things too wet. Well, keeping moisture in the surface of the container is one reason that we top dress. But more than anything with top dressing, we're trying to slow down the loss of water off of the surface so that we get an even distribution of water through our soil column and we strike that balance of water and oxygen more efficiently, top dressing actually improves the movement of water, not impedes the movement of water. And that's where, you know, coming back to this, going back out into the garden. Right now, it's still the Akadama. I left it on top dress last summer. Probably shouldn't have, didn't know, experimental, wanted to see how things went, wanted very clear notion of the moisture in the soil. I will clean off the broken down Akadama because top dressing protects Akadama from breaking down and the impact of water will break it down. It's broken down a little bit. I'll clean off that surface layer of broken down top dress and this will stay out in the garden and just rock and roll this year. But my control of watering is what dictates that balance, not Akadama. And this is where this is where I always tell my students this. But when we were doing Kofu trees, if we put, say, for example, a client asked, I tell my students, hey, back in Japan, we would have client trees and the client would ask Mr. Kimura to enter a tree into the Kofu. And if that tree, white pine, black pine, juniper didn't get in, we didn't take it out of the show container. Now, when we put all trees into show containers, every tree goes into 100 percent Akadama just for the duration of the Kofu exhibition and then they're repotted out of those containers. It's ridiculous amount of work. It's several repottings. It's very hard on the trees. All of those questions that you would have. Yes. Yes, super gnarly repotting a tree twice in a period of three months. Not not necessarily the easiest thing on the tree, but they would all go into solid Akadama before they would go into the Kofu exhibition. And if they didn't get accepted into the Kofu, we didn't take them out of it. We just further developed it in solid Akadama. So you might have white pines and solid Akadama. You might have junipers and solid Akadama. You might have black pines and solid Akadama. And they would sit in that. We just had to adjust our watering practices. Over the course of six, seven, eight years, could a white pine exist in solid Akadama? No, because the Akadama would scale, would hold too much water, not enough oxygen. You'd lose that balance and that tree would become unhealthy for two years. Three years. Is it an issue? Not at all. Not at all. And in fact, probably gave you more nutritional delivery and better development in solid Akadama than the Akadama pumice lava. But that that just goes to show you that Akadama has I mean, has some serious, serious firepower. And when you start to talk about its ability to cultivate that root system, that gives us the refined model of bonsai that we're striving for. And next up is David. So David has an olive that tries to fruit every year. He cuts off the blooms each year. He remembers is he thinks there's a way to neuter female trees. Is this true? So generally, when you start to talk about fruiting olives and you talk about the way that olives behave, the offspring. So, say, for example, a bird comes and eats a fruiting olive and they carry the pit away. That is a sterile seed. So they excuse me. I, I stand corrected. They crap out that pit. That pit produces a tree that no longer can produce reproducing seeds. So the offspring of fruiting olive are sterile. And that is that is the only way that I know that olives become sterile and don't continue to create fruit that reproduce and reproduce and reproduce. Now, the offspring of a fruiting olive will also typically have smaller leaves than the fruiting all of itself, and that, too, is a really great characteristic. This is where you see overgrown orchards, citrus, olive, pomegranate orchards in the Central Valley of California, if they're not maintained, have tons of olives growing up because the birds eat the fruiting olives, poop them out. These little tiny olives with small, tight leaves are growing. They can't reproduce, but they but they are littered throughout unmaintained orchards. And that became a really great source of material in California for a long time. There's not so much of that now just because the development has wiped a lot of those orchards out. Cool. Next up is Mike, and this is kind of following up from something earlier. So he he's recalling from the repotting of this tree. He thinks at the time you mentioned that this pot might have been a bit larger than you hoped as this develops. Will you try to constrict the container with Lacodama to really increase ramification or will that throw off the proportion given the trunk size? I mean, I think now, you know, like you have images of what this is going to be and it's going to be so amazing. And then and then it's a little different. I think it's a great proportion of container for the size of the tree. And now that the primary lines have been set, I think that when this tree grows into the vision that I have for it, this container is going to be absolutely perfect. So I'm quite happy with the way it worked out. And serendipity, if you're following objective bonsai design generally prevails, you generally exceed your own expectation over the course of time. Bentley would like to know, if he says stupid question, there are no stupid questions. All questions are good questions. But is olive evergreen? And if so, is it a species that you'll partially defoliate? Yeah, broadleaf evergreen. OK, and let me let me let me first address design because now we're at a point where it's completely wired. Let me give you a once around and then I'm going to walk you through how I handle olive to get the best ramification. I'll walk you through how it's handled in Europe and I'll walk you through where I think we can maybe maybe make some tweaks and get even better product or result out of it. OK, so one time around, obviously everything was in the back. You see everything in the back being brought to the front. You see the back being a little bit more substantial. You see the front being relatively bare. I'm completely comfortable with that because I know I'm going to hold back here. I'm going to continue to elongate and develop there. And that's where I'm going to get that tree occurring in the front. OK, we have those consistent lines. You see the the the this very small, sparse structure now has a very, very significant sort of complex movement, motion and thought process to the design. You see my definition of the apex here as we get into this area. Again, you see the lack of branching right here. You see the abundance of branching right there. Totally cool with that. OK, and then as we come around, you start to see that branch that we really wanted to capture some of that olive nuance. And you see that movement coming down and through here, some of that spiraling. And as we start to talk about this now, I really want this piece to be quite asymmetrically long. I want it to be here. I want it to come up. I want it to have that little little poof of foliage. I want my apex kind of up in this region right here. Offset even further where I'm going to have quite a bit of my apex out in here. Right. So I'm going to have my apex out in here. You kind of see that illustration there. So where it's at here, that's as far as I can go. I'm going to grow that into this region, maybe even push out a little bit here. I'm going to have that piece right there. Boom, boom. OK, that starts to give you that notion and then this is going to be held in. These will be, you know, informal kind of little pieces here, but they're going to be tight because I'm really pushing, really pushing. Yep. OK, Josh asked me to rotate for the detail cam. OK, so I'm pushing in here, I'm pushing, I'm pushing out here, pushing in on the left, pushing out on the right, creating that asymmetry, looking to carry that all of motion and movement through it. And again, this is just the beginning. So when we talk about the creation of our primary lines, defining the line base to tip, base of the tree to the tip of the apex, this is of utter importance because it educates all of our other decisions once we know what that line base to tip and where that apex exists. Where is our defining branch that gives us that asymmetrical flow? Asymmetry equals age. We're creating an old appearance. In this tree, I need that degree of asymmetry. I've got the trunk to support it. Let's go party. OK. And then looking at all of that other photosynthetic efficiency, laying out those secondaries, laying out those tertiaries into space where they can photosynthesize, create sugars and starches. And again, that's what created the scatter pattern back here, carrying the same nuances of movement, but finding their own space to photosynthesize and contribute increases rapidity of development. OK, how do we refine a bonsai? Well, now that we're here, first and foremost, we are in development. I'm going to be heavily feeding because in development I'm elongating. I'm thickening. I'm adding foliar mass. I'm getting back budding and I'm healing, right? We don't need to heal anything. The roots have already recovered. We're looking for length and we're looking for thickness. I want those two pieces of the puzzle. So I'm feeding aggressively and I'm letting this thing explode to try and get more meat, more length, more of everything on the branches that I have. But there will come a time when we need to transition the energy from the tip to the interior, where we're done elongating, where we're done thickening, and it's time to start building branching, right? That moment where we prune back is best accommodated by allowing that tree to push out its spring growth, get back to energy positive, and when we come back and we make that length decision, partially defoliating when we prune back that tip. So this comes to that post-flush, hardened pruning period of time, northern hemisphere, end of May, beginning of June for a lot of our varieties and a lot of our species if you're farther south a little earlier, if you're farther north a little later than that late May, early June. But we're looking at cutting that tip, which starts to initiate growth of branches behind it and in the partial defoliation on an olive. Let me just take this and show you what this looks like. Josh, can you see this in the detail cam? I'm going to zoom in just a little bit more so that I can give you on a good solid white. OK. Partial defoliation would look something like this. OK, I've got this tip here, right? I'm going to come back in. I don't know. I'm going to probably prune to the desired length. Boom. Oh, I see that. Is that better? OK. All right. OK, so I'm going to, boom, prune that tip, OK, and then I'm going to come back in and I'm going to cut each one of these leaves down by 60 to 70 percent. OK, so I'm cutting a majority of that leaf off. And again, this is happening in that late spring, early summer period of time after the olive has pushed out all of its growth. And I'm going to do this to every single leaf. Now, what that means is, is I've just reduced photosynthetic productivity by 60 to 70 percent. I have cut back this tree's production of sugar. Now, it's an energy positive state. I've taken away that tip. And what that means for the tree is to get back to producing the quantity of sugar that it wants to produce, it has to actually create new branches that hold new leaves. It can't just create new leaves because there's no branches. This is the branch that holds the leaves. Well, all the leaves are now only photosynthesizing with 30 percent of the surface area. So by cutting that tip back, which initiates branching, and cutting off 60 to 70 percent of that leaf, the branch has to create ramification. And this becomes the annual thing. We prune prior to the flush in the spring to correct structural things, wire style shape. We get to that post-flush hardened pruning late May, early June, depending on how far north or south that time frame fluctuates a little bit. And then we prune back the elongated growth to the desired length. And we partially defoliate by 70 percent by cutting those leaves. So you will enhance the ramification of olive exponentially, exponentially. Now, I want to walk you through another technique that that is typically applied in Europe. And I want to and I kind of want to talk about it. OK, so generally in Europe, they say to get ramification. Josh, come in close here on the detail, please. OK, so they generally say to get ramification in Europe on their olives. What's up? OK, so I'll come back, I'll come back here. How about that? OK, I'll come back to having focus issues. OK, so generally in Europe, what they say is, OK, cool. Once you have the desired length and thickness, if you want ramification, then you need to come through and you need to cut off every single leaf. Right all the way off right at the petiole, I'm doing a real sloppy job here, just just don't take this as like a super technical execution. OK, you want to cut off the petiole of every single leaf except for. Two leaves at the tip. OK, this would be the general practice. And I would say that that's that's the general practice. Now, if we think about this, this is a different this is a different motivation. This is a different physiology that we're stimulating in the plant. By leaving the tip intact, you keep your hormonal concentration of oxen or that elongating hormone in the tip. But you've reduced the sugar starch productivity exponentially, right? You've kept a little bit of sugar starch productivity. You haven't totally defoliated, which is very debilitating for a tree. But you've partially defoliated to a significant degree. Now, what differs between what I proposed in terms of cutting 60 to 70 percent off of each leaf versus cutting this much off of all of these leaves and just leaving the tip is with the reduction of that oxen that I proposed, you are already stimulating the inflow of cytokine and cytokine in the hormone. That causes lateral branching to occur, right? You will have reduced the oxen. You are stimulating cytokine and influx, right? And by reducing sugar starch productivity by 60 to 70 percent, the tree has to produce new branches. But it already has the hormones that stimulate that response. So you double whammy that, okay? In this instance, when we leave that hormone intact and we just reduce sugar starch productivity, we are going to get a few branches as opposed to a whole plethora of branches. Right? And all of a sudden, we don't have as much ramification to select from. That's where I really like post-flush hardened partial defoliation, pruning the tip and then removing the leaf mass by 60 to 70 percent. What I initially showed you. And again, let me just bring this back up and I'll compare the two. Okay. I think the sample on this sample right here, I think that's the way to go. This is the generally accepted sample that currently exists. I don't think this gives you. Fine branching. I think it gives you ramification. I don't think it gives you fine branching. I think there's finer branching to be struck. I think it occurs in this model right here. Right? This model right here. Okay. So that gives you the physiology. That gives you the hormones. That gives you the ability to understand how we refine olives. Obviously, there's going to be multiple shoots from a singular location. We're going to have to come back and we're going to have to structurally clean it up. This is the same for any pine, any juniper, any deciduous tree, any broadleaf evergreen. We have to come back after growth. The growth has been produced and fix it so that it's structurally sound and doesn't cause structural issue. But ultimately, when we look at olive as a broadleaf evergreen, the reduction of that and the reduction of the tip gives us the most ramification at the finest level. That is how we can refine an olive to really maximize the species as a bonsai. Cool. Let's see here. Still got some questions in the queue. David wants to know, when is a good time for refinement wiring for olive? Right now is a great time to refinement wire after the flush hardens and you're doing a lot of that pruning cleanup because now all of a sudden all that stored energy, the tree has put all that stored energy into growth. You're going to have to come back and structurally correct those areas of threes and fours or those opposing branches like one of the members discussed earlier tonight in terms of their question. That's a great time. And then depending on what you're trying to accomplish in the degree of refinement, we also can take action on an olive in the fall. But we have to understand that action on an olive and reduction of an olive's foliar mass in the fall will definitely reduce the amount of growth it produces next spring. That may be what you desire if you're at the highest level of refinement or maybe you're saying, you know, I don't want to reduce next spring's growth. So I'm going to hold off on fall work. I'm going to really focus on spring prior to the push and correcting that pruning after that first flush is hardened. Cool. Vincent wants to know, could you point out the outer limits of the live vein and explain what you expect to see as far as swelling or dieback within that live vein? The outer limits of the live vein. So, Josh, let's go clockwise. My live vein is right here and you can kind of see there's just a little brownish kind of caramely tint to it, right, as it moves up this side. And you can see them. It's just a little margin of the deadwood right here and you can see that more textured live vein right there. So it's moving right up the right side, comes around the back and taps into that apical region. All of this side is dead. This is all deadwood, right? So all my live vein is over here. I also have some live vein immediately back in this region right here, but it's not going to be visible in the design ever. Will this continue to swell? I would assume so and I hope so. Generally, the live vein being on the outside of the trunk, if this continues to swell, then technically over the course of time, my trunk gets bigger. If the live vein were running up the middle here, all of a sudden running up the middle, if it were running up the middle and it's swelling, it's swelling outwards and I don't continue to get that expansion. So it being on the outside is really advantageous. Next up is George. How long will it be before you need to consider repotting this specific olive? Yeah, that's a great question. I'm so I'm pushing the limits of every species that we're working with in terms of how long can this tree thrive? And produce the highest quality results in a container. And I've pushed every species that we've worked with past the point where it's productive to not be repotting. In fact, repotting the broadleaf evergreen oaks that we did. I recognize we went a year past. We had those in the containers for five years, right? I'm assuming olive right deciduous. We typically say three years with a pine or a juniper. We typically say. Six to eight years with a broadleaf evergreen. I'm going to say we're somewhere in the middle of that in that four to five year range where we're really getting quality productivity. Good ramification and maintaining health. If we wait too long, we tip past that. If we repot too early, we don't get that reduction of growth reduction of internode and reduction of leaf. So there's that that sweet spot that exists for each genre of tree that we're trying to find. And again for broadleaf evergreen that four to five year range seems to be the sweet spot. I would assume olive would abide by that. I don't I don't honestly know quite yet, but I will I will continue to inform you. I don't see why it would be different though. Next up is David. Can you talk about letting suckers at the base run for thickening? How long would you let them go? So it depends, right? Like I don't need a ton of thickening in this tree. It's thick enough. And in fact, I have to grow the branches out in the suckers at the base would definitely reduce. The amount of energy that's getting to the to the branches growing in the upper canopy of the tree. So those suckers can really really take all of the water and all of the resources from the roots are going to pass through those suckers before they go up the trunk. And that's where you'll see them zap all the energy. They consume it before it gets up into the branches. We're trying to develop but strategically leaving a few suckers in spaces where we want that buttressing to occur or maybe just throwing caution to the wind and blowing out those suckers for a period of two or three years. And then cutting them all off and refocusing on branches up above. There's multiple ways that we can go about that. But I think I think growing suckers for a period of two to three years and then cutting them. And if you still want more thickening growing some new ones decreases the size of the scar that you're leaving behind already knowing that all of is not necessarily the greatest healer. So we're using them for a short time cutting them off growing other ones cutting them off growing other ones cutting them off. And we see that progression create. Getting that base over the course of time. Cool. Except we have David are all olives shaped like this one or could you talk about some potential shapes for all of them. Oh I mean I think that all of is very wide open it's almost like the juniper of broadleaf evergreen. I think it's very very a very free form tree that you can do a lot with. There are slender olives there are literati olives. There are big powerful olives there are super tall olives where everything's at the top there are very low olives where everything's at the bottom. Anything you can conceptualize you can do with an olive how do they typically grow because of domesticated cultivation even in the antique olives or the ancient olives that exist in from the Roman days. They're all kind of upright they're all upright to a degree this feels like a tree that I saw in Puglia underdeveloped as it is I can see the future. This tree can be it feels like a tree that I've seen before just the basic structure and the nuances of the trunk but there is a multitude of aesthetics that all of can fit. Cool and this is kind of returning to an earlier discussion but is aluminum wire better than copper for olives. I think. I think that you could absolutely use copper I knew that I was going to be approaching these very young soft fleshy branches. With odd angles where the abrasive texture of the surface of copper I could see just shaving off that bark and I didn't want to deal with that they weren't so thick where I needed the work hardening capacity of the copper. So aluminum worked well for this particular tree you notice the gauges I'm talking about using gauges. You know three point five four was the biggest gauge I use three point five millimeter was kind of the. Structural and consistently the structural piece that I used and then I stepped down to two two millimeter wire to do some of the smaller stuff and I think I ended at one point five for the smallest branches. So I was in a rain a really small range of aluminum to get done everything on this piece and that made it extremely easy extremely efficient for me to go about the work could have done it with copper and you just have to take more care. Cool. Rafi says. On his olive stump he has one piece of growth from the base that he doesn't feel like removing he was thinking of carving a channel and essentially creating a self phoenix graft that with time would give some interesting muscular vein what do you think about that plan. I mean. Sure sure you know I'm. You would have to do it to you would have to do a phoenix craft impeccably well to get it to look believable and so far I haven't seen too many people that have been able to execute that at that level. I haven't seen too many people that have been able to execute that at that level. I haven't seen too many people that have been able to execute that at that level. I haven't seen too many people that have been able to execute that at that level. There are some coke food trees that are our to new keys are phoenix graphs that have been executed at that level that nobody is supposed to know about but you know some people do you have to do it really well Rafi for it to work out I think I think to new key graft and phoenix graphs really demand the highest level of technical skill to be able to make them. Over the course of time age appropriately. Cool. Just two more here. Danny wants to know if you're going to drive growth and girth of the branches through fertilization. Yeah. Yeah. So I'm going to ramp up fertilization. It already has one application. It's ready for another one. This application was almost four weeks ago. It was in the greenhouse. The greenhouse was getting quite warm. We hit 74 weeks ago. So we kind of went with the weather and got an early fertilization in this year, and I'm glad we did. But I will hit it again, and I'll go with that heavy quantity, and I'll go with that rapidity of every four weeks and just really see if we can get this thing kind of ratcheted up in terms of its growth rate to give us that primary. And my focus this year is going to be development, really building my primary branching. If we get them to a point, which I don't see that happening, but if for whatever reason it takes off and we get it to a point where it's time to cut and start the refinement or transition, I'll definitely do it on a stream so you guys can follow along. Cool. And then our last question for tonight is from Scott, who wants to know if olive can be wired when defoliated. Yes, definitely. So in that post-flush harden, right, it pushes all of its growth out in the spring. That growth hardens off and reaccumulates energy. We're back in an energy positive. If we're going to be pruning and partially defoliating at that point in time, and again, I'm going to push partial defoliation. I don't like total defoliation. I won't support it. I won't promote it. I'm going to push partial defoliation. I don't like total defoliation. I won't promote it, right? If you do it, cool. Just don't tell me about it. I really, really, 30% of the leaf mass, right, partial defoliation. Always keep the tree perpetually moving metabolically, and you'll have more success. But that is another great time with that leaf mass reduced with space, making design decisions to be wiring and really doing the work on your olive. Absolutely. And that is all we have for tonight. Oh, thank you all so much. I hope you're all staying healthy. I hope that you're fine. And I hope you're finding this time to be really productive for your bonsai practice, whether you're just getting started and you're like, bonsai has always been cool, and it's time. I have the time right now. I'm going to start. Awesome. Kudos to you. Good time to start, right? Absolutely. We can grow your skills to be able to execute what you envision in your mind for your bonsai practice. But I hope everybody's getting that, finding that time and utilizing that time to put it towards their bonsai, because what else are we going to be doing? And it's an awesome season to be doing it. Stay well, stay healthy. Thank you all for the support. We love you very much. Couldn't do this without you. We'll see you tomorrow at 1 for the mini stream on the field-grown black pine, Thursday 10 a.m. and 3 p.m. for live Q&As, and Friday again at 10 a.m. for a mini stream on grafting. Enjoy the spring. Stay well. Thank you. 
