What's up Mirai community? We are in the Mirai garden and we're going to roam around and take some photos today with our cell phones to give you a bit of a guide on how to take photos yourself in your own backyard and yeah just some tips and tricks on how to properly capture your trees. So oh the sun's coming out when the sun comes out and it's an overcast day just wait a couple minutes because there's a lot of sun out there. There's a lot of sun out there. There's a lot of sun out there. It'll probably look way better if it's not sunny. Pretty cool all right guys so I took a bunch of photos of trees out here in the garden we're going to go into the studio and look and see how good these turned out and if we're actually making a good guide or if we're going to scrap this again all right oh hi uh Mirai I I'm here to give you some guidance on taking some photos in your backyard of your beautiful bonsai trees let's dig in so with this tree as you can tell it's very asymmetrical I shot it vertically first because that's kind of the standard way people shoot photos but if you really look at just the tree itself like the mass of the tree calls for a horizontal photograph so I took it horizontally and as you can tell everything's much clearer despite how busy this foliage is and despite how many little branches there are everywhere it looks everything's a lot clearer than in this photograph where it just looks like maybe there's a tree on this bench but again there's just like it's just getting lost in all this background stuff so you're going to get a much better result if you kind of pay attention to the shape of your tree and then accommodate for that shape with whether or not you shoot vertically or horizontally so another quick little detail is as you can tell with this photo there's a bit going on over here and just a quick little note is like if I look at this photo I do appreciate the tree but I see there's a distraction here so just being able to crop out things like that will only benefit you and the way people enjoy your tree in the photograph so with this photo I let all of the automatic settings do their thing without pressing without tapping my finger on the tree to get both focus and exposure or anything like that it's basically just guessing the exposure it's guessing the focus and it's giving me the photo that you see which is it's a bit darker than I would like because it's compensating for for the white sky and also clearly it's a fairly busy background when it's not you know this isn't a fancy camera we're taking this with we're taking it with a phone camera so the only way that you can really get that true separation of background is by taking the photo either fairly close if it's a tiny tiny tiny tree you'll be able to get the tree in focus in the background out of focus or you have portrait mode which I took this second photo of the tree with portrait mode and I had clicked on the tree to get both focus and to set exposure so as you can see the background sky is blown out but that's not important because our subject is the tree and you always want to expose for your subject in this case you have a tree so let's make sure that you can see the tree even if the background doesn't look beautiful so clearly the tree is much more visible than the background so you can see the tree even if the background doesn't look beautiful so clearly the tree is much more visible not only because of the exposure and I think the focus might even be a little bit better but also we have this in portrait mode which all of this background is significantly more out of focus now and we can clearly see the design and the trunk and all the details much better so if you compare the two yeah we can see this branching structure very clearly actually especially because the sky is blown out we got this white background instead of gray and blue all right so digging into the framing and the angle with these photographs of a 3d object which is your tree turning it into 2d and this is a concept that you're aware of given that you're designing a bonsai tree and while you're wiring it you're considering the front of the tree right and so keeping the front in mind is really important when you're taking the photo because while you might be very familiar and intimate with it you're not gonna be able to capture pretty much just the front but you're gonna keep a sense of the front because you're gonna kind of your tree, you're portraying this design to, whether it's Ryan for the forum Q&A or to your friends or Instagram or whatever it is, you're showing them the ideal front and angle of your tree. So typically that means being slightly above soil line so that you can see some of the soil in the rim of the pot. In this case, there is kind of a rim here. That's something that I had in mind when I was taking the photo. So I raised up the camera a bit to make sure that I could see that while also making sure that I had some negative space below the pot that isn't distracting. There can definitely be a distracting amount of negative space with your pot, and I tend to keep the pot fairly low to the bottom of the frame because you're essentially taking a photo of what's supposed to look like a big tree. And then, like, landscape photography, you would give the tree space as if, like, you know, it's the space in the sky and below the tree is just the ground. And typically the tree is fairly close or the trunk of the tree is fairly close to the bottom of the frame for landscape trees or landscape photography. So, yeah, so paying attention to not only the rim of the container and the negative space, at the bottom of the frame, but also kind of where your branches are ending up. You know, if I was a couple of inches lower when I took this, all of these branches would be in different places, right? So there would be significant negative space where there maybe shouldn't be. So I try to find that balance even in the garden where, you know, if Ryan was to design this tree and then I was looking at it, like, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. Like, finding the intentionality, which, you know, it's your tree. So making sure that the intentionality that you had in styling your tree is being portrayed in the photo is really important. So, yeah, so looking at this framing, we have, you know, negative space on the left-hand side, on the right-hand side. This is a fairly, you know, straight up and down, kind of formal upright-y, informal upright, kind of a balance of the two. So, you know, I don't know, I don't know. I don't know if you guys can see it, but there's a lot of negative space here where it's similar amounts of negative space on each side. And also, we're kind of focusing on the center, which, with a cell phone camera, which is what we took this on, you want to center your subject as much as possible so that you can avoid distortion, which is usually kind of, like, on the outer edges. Like, let me get rid of all this mess so that you can see. But there's significant amounts of distortion. And on a lot of cell phone cameras that tend to be kind of in this range, where if you're putting the tree outside of this area, the branches are going to look different, the pot's going to look different, and we're already sacrificing a bit with this wide angle. And the tree doesn't necessarily look like this in person, but the best that you can do is kind of center your branches, yeah, in the middle of the frame. Okay, so with this detail, I wanted to kind of explore both the kind of normal photo mode and the portrait mode and what it looks like. So obviously, well, to me, it's obvious that if you're trying to highlight a feature of your tree like this, and you want it to really look like a nice photograph, like, this is not a nice photograph to me because of all the soft edges. It just looks very unnatural and is doing portrait mode things. But if you're taking this photo, for the forum Q&A, and you want Ryan to see the details of this, this tree, this photo is better to portray the information of what this looks like, right? Like, we can very clearly see the details of this. This other photo that doesn't have portrait mode, it's very busy, and we can't really see it very well, but it's a better photograph because it doesn't look so artificial. Another good example of kind of pointing out something on your tree, is if you're taking a photo of, like, let's say, you know, new growth on your tree or the branching structure, it's easy to just walk up and snap a photo like this where, you know, I shot it straight on. You can kind of see how the branches are growing. This new growth is growing, but if you're really trying to show, you know, the structure itself, making sure that you get the right angle to to show that the distance here where now we can see, oh, okay, there's this other branch that you might not have actually been able to see where it is on this greater piece, right? Yeah, so basically making sure that if you're trying to share information about your tree that will better inform your decisions both design-wise and horticulturally, like capture it from a better vantage point. And even I personally try to pay attention to my background and with this, so the topsoil here is actually giving a better background to these pieces here than if it was over here and it would have been a bit busier. So there's a darker background. With the soil and you can clearly see these because of that background. Here's another example of utilizing portrait mode where it still is pretty busy and kind of difficult to see, but without portrait mode on you wouldn't be able to see really any detail of this. And we do have Troy over here who is always a beautiful addition to any photo. And if you have the resources, you might want to call him up and fly him out so that he can be some talent that can be incorporated into your photography. And I'm sure Ryan would also be very surprised to see Troy in your photos while reviewing your tree on the forum Q&A. With this tree, the entire time we were shooting photographs it was overcast. But let's say that it was direct sunlight and we were trying to decide, do I take this photo now, do I wait an hour, do I wait two hours? If this was morning at Mirai, this tree is facing the south and the light would be coming in from this direction. And that actually might be an ideal time with direct sunlight to photograph this tree depending on how the light landed on the foliage as well. But you want to basically pay attention to, especially if you have direct sunlight where is the light hitting your tree, kind of paying attention to if the sunlight's coming from an angle that would be ideal if, say, it was in the studio, you know. You can move your tree to a different part of your garden to make sure that you're utilizing the sun to the best of your ability to help represent kind of the look of your tree and take advantage of the natural light coming in from that angle at the end of the photo. of the sun where it is rather than maybe battling it. If the light's coming from behind the tree, you might get the silhouette, but you're not gonna see the texture of the dead wood and you're not going to see the great work that you did on all of the details of the branches. All right, Mariah, it's been really awkward and uncomfortable in front of the camera, so I'm going to get back behind the camera where I belong. And we love you very much and appreciate you, so. Subtitles by the Amara.org community 
