welcome guys super stoked to have you guys with us super tuesday we always look forward to this day except for today uh first hundred degree day at mirai of the season and the studio is feeling it in full effect uh we're gonna gut it out but you're gonna have to deal with my ridiculous towel for the majority of the stream who knows what's gonna happen yeah it's a good look who knows we had our we had our set our hair and makeup they they okayed that's right they were like yes this looks good props set go uh kindle on the mic this evening hello uh we got uh mr arthur on the detail cam tonight currently by the switcher and uh and mr junior is going to be producing the stream for you this evening i got lime on the audio as always and uh our steady trustworthy troy out on the watering hose because uh it has been been a very long you uh day of wetting down the trees today uh we got more heat coming but uh we do appreciate you guys tuning in to all our tier one members welcome you guys super excited to have you uh tier two members got some uh interesting additions to the archives that'll be coming up in the next couple weeks excited for you guys to get to join that or enjoy that uh and for our tier three members as always um we very much appreciate you guys and love interacting with you we've had a gang of tier three members walking through the garden uh over the course of the past few weeks um coming to see mirai in person that's been really fun to get to put faces uh to the names and um also we got a live q a coming up on thursday and uh based on popular request and demand the live q a is going to be extended to a 90 minute q a to make sure that we get all of you tier three members accommodated and uh taken care of because the population continues to grow it um you got any ground rules it's happening at noon on thursday i'm going to happening at noon shoot already screwed up lunch lunchtime live q a yeah lunchtime live q a that's eight o'clock in london i think so yeah don't quote me on that best that we could do with that one uh and then as far as um emails correspondence questions and the chat tonight uh we very much appreciate all of you guys reaching out it's uh it's super um morale boosting for us to get all of you guys positive feedback we love it interacting with you guys um please understand that we are a small team there is a lot of correspondence that's coming our way and we do our very best to get to it but um we are also human and uh and if we don't get back to you immediately just know that we are in the process of working at it or we've at least read what you've sent us and taken it to heart so we appreciate that and appreciate your understanding in that um same goes for the questions uh and the correspondence as you guys engage with us tier three members through the stream um just please keep in mind that kindle is doing a lot of work and we're going to be doing a lot of work and we're going to be doing our very best to filter through apply the questions when they're applicable etc and uh we know that you guys are there and we're trying to get to all of them while also continuing to deliver the body of knowledge that we're here to deliver we're extending the q a so that you guys can get any unanswered questions addressed in that q a yeah and if we have a stream where we have a bunch of questions that have gone unanswered you know maybe it's a top maybe it's a topic where there's way more questions we'll try to bring those to the beginning of the live q a i'll keep a list of what didn't get answered and you guys can review that sure sure okay so tonight we're going to be tonight we've got a big big bold piece of work that we want to be doing um on this scott's pine now interestingly enough even though this is a european species of pine one of the things that is constantly in discussion in bonsai is this concept of this modern natural something like approach versus this more traditional established design aesthetic proportion etc that a lot of us value and one of the things that we pride ourselves on at mirai is not just committing to one single singular approach to bonsai but letting the material dictate how we handle it and what form that tree should take to maximize the potential of that material in the way that it fits in as its best bonsai reflection and tonight we've got this amazing field grown scott's pine from central oregon that lends itself to that informal upright style that quintessential classic what mr camaro would call the orthodox style of bonsai and it's really nice to to dive back into that orthodox fundamental style of bonsai and we're going to be talking about that in a little bit after trying to reflect nature and take those cues from the material in every single form that they come into us and so diving back into this tonight and sharing this with you guys we're going to get to talk a lot about how that aesthetic is pulled out and how we make those decisions from the raw stock to setting the structure to envisioning this tree three five years down the road where we're going to end up with something more stable and and even advanced in its aesthetic okay so without further ado i'm just going to kind of dive in and anytime that i approach this kind of material we talked about this and if you guys are are seeing the tertiary content you got those clips last week from the nursery stock series where i spend a significant amount of time cleaning and i always call this kind of my courting uh my dating phase of the bonsai creation process and all i'm doing is making good solid clean cuts and a lot of people tend to make really uh poor cuts at this point in time removing stubs etc if you make poor cuts you just have to come back and cut it again make sure that you maximize the amount of time that you're going to spend on it and you're going to maximize your time now when we talk about good clean cuts in terms of the handling of this type of material i really have an affinity for the rounded concave cutter i know that you know the the standard bonsai tool that a lot of us remove branches with is is the simple concave cutter the straight bladed i really like the rounded concave cutter because it allows me to just get a little bit of concavity that concavity that goes in and allows that callus to form and create that flush um uh callus against the trunk or against that branch and then i'm going to talk a little bit more about that in just a minute so we don't see that big balled up scar that would occur if we made it flat and the callus had to roll over that flatness so this is a tool that i frequently kind of have a shift to and utilize as a fundamental piece of these types of stylings now what you guys will notice particularly when we're dealing with high quality field grown stock is we do end up with a lot of sacrificial pieces in here in the structure of the tree that we need to go ahead and clear out and clean out unless they're going to add to the aesthetic of the tree by leaving them as dead as they are and then we're going to go ahead and clean out and clean out and then we're going to go ahead and clean out and clean out and then we're going to go ahead and clean out so a lot of times i'll come in with a little bit bigger tool maybe a knob cutter or something and i'll take these out incrementally okay so i might bite once twice three times to get through the whole thing so that i can get my tool in the correct position to be able to create a wound that is going to heal and and disappear with time okay and i want to take that flush now notice there's some bark being bumped off at this point in time i'm not super concerned or panicked about that bark this is a young tree if i do get a large chunk of bark falling off i can always reattach it and my wound sealant of choice whenever i have a big wound or a wound that has the potential to bleed is going to be the gray putty and now you guys would know this this is called cut paste okay so what i like to do when i'm healing this and arthur are you in close for me here okay what i like to do once i get that nice clean edge before the stat the sap starts to really move i like to get a nice good ball of putty in there i like to lick my finger a little bit so that my finger doesn't adhere to the putty and i really want to focus on getting that cut paste sealed around the exterior of that wound okay so that that edge which is where the sap is going to be emerging from right on that cusp of the cambial layer the phloem and the xylem okay if we get that sealed the cut paste this putty adheres to it before the sap emerges and that creates a really nice adherence that doesn't allow the sap to bleed now pines will bleed a lot particularly in this summer season i'm going to have this close by as i go through and i start to remove a lot of this putty and i'm going to put a lot of this unnecessary stuff so that i can seal this up if you create a wound you seal a wound right now okay so i'm just going to go through here now as i'm opening up these wounds and i'm kind of getting rid of unnecessary stuff i want to be looking and exploring design options and opportunities i'm looking for interesting areas i'm looking for interesting features trying to find those pieces of the tree that are going to give me the greatest possible potential this tree was repotted first and is being styled second and there's a very fundamental reason why we chose to repot this first and style this second and this comes back to that discussion of utilizing all of the solar panels and the pieces of the tree that are already present i'm going to lick my finger a lot throughout the night as i apply this because the putty particularly on a warm day will adhere to your finger and it becomes very difficult to apply okay so we're repotting first and styling styling second in a field-grown tree because we want to take advantage of all of that foliar mass and we're also going to be developing the resources to regenerate that root system and that's particularly true with junipers but it is no different for pines or other species that need to have an engine and a motor to drive growth and that is occurring in these larger bigger pieces okay now there's another scope of work that i'm going to be focusing on as i'm going through this when i identify branches that i'm going to be using in the final structure of the tree and arthur if you can zoom me in here okay oh he zoomed in all right i want to be going through and i want to be making sure at these junctions where i've got multiple branches emerging from one junction and this isn't the first time you guys have seen this okay but where i have a junction and there's multiple branches emerging from that junction i want to be taking out branches in excess of two at any one location so here when i made that decision i've got these two branches here now obviously this is quite long but look at what i have here i've got two very beautiful branches here uh interior buds that have the ability to take over in this first structural setting i may choose to keep this entire branch so that i have the ability to draw sap through these two buds develop these two buds use this as a sacrifice and once these get strong enough take this off here this is a far superior selection than this very weak piece that i took off because for this to become strong enough thick enough and develop the kind of ramification that will give me a branch over the course of time is going to take far longer than if i don't have a very well developed prosperous branch or a very well established branch with this interior pieces of budding okay so i want to be making those kinds of clutch decisions now here at the tip you're going to see another one this was actually pruned back at some point right here okay i've got a small little guy growing off the bottom typically i want to take bottoms typically i want to take tops and i want to leave these laterally emerging pieces so that i create that pair of two that will then go to four two pairs on that and then eight and to do that across the board on this tree, okay? So I'm even going to come out here to the tip where this may be a sacrifice, but I want to balance strength across this because I'm going to lose a lot of foliage tonight as I make this initial styling. Coming off the top, coming off the top, okay? Coming off that interior, coming off the bottom here, okay? Let me show you those bottoms, right? So coming off the bottom, nice clean cuts. Never is there a cut that we make in vain. We always make clean cuts, okay? And then when I see this, I've got this group of three. One, two, three here. Now normally we would take out the center piece because usually the center piece is the strongest. In this instance, the strongest piece is on this, for what you guys are looking at, left hand side, okay? Now just in terms of this discussion, say for example this stronger piece were in the center. If you take out the center, you create a very ugly crotch here between your branching. You create an obliquely obtuse angle. We never want to create obtuse angles unless the center piece is so strong. That's the only option to pruning the branch. So what I'm going to come back and do is I'm going to take out this strongest piece because it's the strongest piece, but I would have probably taken out this lateral piece and left these two to make this crotch as beautiful as it possibly can be. Even though I'm thinking about removing it in the future, I still want to leave that intact and make the best decision possible to get that ramification because you never know where this design is going to go. What if this big, long branch forms the fundamental aspect of the design as this tree continues to evolve? Leave yourself that opportunity. Always, always leave yourself that opportunity, okay? So I've got my group of two here. I've got these two pieces that I'm probably going to cut back to, so I'm going to leave three here, two here, two here. That branch is done, okay? So I'm going to go through this whole thing after we've done some major structural selection, all right, and make those decisions. But I'm assuming that there are quite a few branches on this tree that need to go. I'm assuming that there are quite a few branches on this tree that need to go in order for us to actually be ready to be making those decisions. So I'm going to rotate this for you guys, just kind of show you the whole scope of the tree. You can get a feel for the dimensionality. You see how far this comes towards the front? That's an interesting aspect of the tree. How do we handle that? One of the things that you guys should notice first, if this is the front of our tree, and I'm just going to mark that with chalk so that you guys are always aware of where the front is, okay? If this is the front of that tree, we've got that branch smack dab coming straight out at us, right? And we would say that's an eyepoker, right? Now, about ultimately, we may be able to use this branch to the left or to the right as a fundamental part of design, and we don't want to just shed this just because. We want to make sure that this isn't something that we're going to need. So, as I look at this design, I've got this very low branch here. Notice where this is, okay? I've got this piece here, and then notice what happens between there and the top. I get up to this junction and I get up to this junction, I get up to this junction and I finish this piece here . So, after all I'm supporting the root of this branch between the middle of вы ranks Em gì and then this whole branch gets piled up against the tree to pass underneath which I see over there under the tree with a rest of watching the tree. this junction and I get up to this junction, but there's really not too many branches in this trunk space from here to here. I'm going to say this is actually extremely important for the design of the tree, right? And these are the big decisions that we make now while this tree is pinky or this branch is pinky sized in diameter instead of when that branch is thumb size or even larger and we can't physically move it anymore, right? And this is why the structural setting in the tree is so incredibly important. So as opposed to removing this, I see the opportunity, particularly in the orthodox design, to move this off to the side and get rid of this lower branch here that's really too low to offer a whole lot of quality and it's on the inside of the movement of the tree. Now as I remove this and as I'm doing some of this work, I want to challenge you guys, tier three members, why do I not want a branch on the inside of a curve? Why is that, and I'm not saying this as always, why is that kind of an accepted fundamental flaw in structure? And I ask you guys that. Can you repeat the question? Why do we not want a branch on the inside of a curve, occurring from the inside of a curve? It's a biggie. That's a big question. You got any questions, Deez? Yeah, we do. Fire away while our tier three members are giving us some guidance there. Sure. Joe is wondering where this tree's from. Ah, this tree. This is a Telperian Farms tree. Anybody who's in the Pacific Northwest knows exactly where this came from. Chris and Lisa Kirk have always grown really, really beautiful material at Telperian Farm, and this was one of the field-grown trees in a grow bag that Chris and Lisa have been producing for a long time. Now when you talk about Telperian Farm, it's a tree that's been growing for a long time. It's a tree that's been growing for a long time. It's worth and needs to be stated that one of the masterminds behind the quality of Telperian Farms material is Gary Woods. And Gary Woods is a bonsai professional in the United States that probably has, I would say, some of the most significant knowledge of how to cultivate field-grown trees and develop quality bonsai stock. Probably some of the most significant knowledge and fundamentally sound horticultural knowledge of anybody in the country. And he's not somebody who's out in the mainstream, moving and grooving and traveling all around and getting on YouTube and all of those things. And so a lot of people don't know who Gary Woods is, or maybe know of him, but don't know how brilliant that guy is. And these fantastic shapes, the methodology to getting this thickness and girth, these components of a really quality tree, Gary brought a lot of this expertise in addition to Chris and Lisa's hard work to Telperian. And Gary, we love you if you're watching. If not, and somebody tells you that you're watching, we love you. And if you're not, and somebody tells you that we talked about you, just know that we very much appreciate your knowledge and what you've contributed to the bonsai community, because it's been amazing. So it's always humbling to learn from Gary as we start to work on material that he's had a hand in, in addition to Chris and Lisa and their crew at Telperian. Hey, Alex, the brave responder, single responder. The single responder. Oh, no, Roger responded too. Okay, so Alex says, you don't want to branch on the inside of a curve because it will cause the curve to be less pronounced as the branch grows. Okay. Because it will thicken the junction. Oh, there you go. Roger says, visually, a branch inside the curve doesn't look good. Okay. And it would probably be shaded out in the wild. Ah, okay. Gary says, the inside of the curve branch fattens the trunk, reducing the curve. Nice. Graham says, it cramps the overall style. Cramps the style. Yeah. Don't be cramping my style. Cramp style. David says, the upper part of the tree above. The inner branch will shade it and weaken it. Shot my eye out with one of those branches ricocheting off. Okay, so all good, all good responses. And the one that I'm really looking for, now be aware, I'm just going to show you guys on this detail cam the way that a pine branch grows. And what you guys will notice is at the junction where it joins the trunk, it's significantly thicker than even a few centimeters away from that towards that initial piece of movement. Now that thickening and that junction, this is the branch collar. And that connection point is where all of the water and resources move through as they're moving out to the foliage, and where all the starches and sugars move through as they're moving to the roots or the vascular tissue of the tree. Okay. So that's a joining point that gets a lot more nutrition and swells a lot faster than the rest of the branch. So if you have it on the inside of a curve, okay, if you've got your trunk here and you've got the inside of the curve, and this continues to thicken, what ends up happening is you get this swelling and this thickening. on that shoulder that actually eliminates that curve altogether. But more importantly, if you've got an elbow out here and this is getting thicker and thicker and thicker, this growing on the inside of the curve creates inverse taper at that point on the tree as this branch continues to thicken. And it's why we need to consider removing branches of that nature if they're in that location at this point in time when this tree is in its infant stages of development so that we're able to set a structure that over the course of the next forever portion of this tree's life, we're not detrimenting the design of the tree. And this is a big thing to talk about tonight when we're doing this structural setting, how we set a structure that will continue to improve and the tree will continue to get better, not just for the next five years, but for the next 10, 15, 20 years. And a big part of that are those structural flaws. Too many branches in one location, branches on the inside of curves that are placed in the manner that would have caused them to create inverse swelling. And coming back to those branches that we're using to nurse interior pieces of growth that will eventually take over these all parts of structural setting. All right, so I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to get rid of this big, thick chunk here in the middle. And I want to show you guys how we go about reducing and eliminating these bigger pieces of growth. I'm going to take a few of the things around it that are causing some visual pollution that are unnecessary so that you guys can just get a straight shot in here to what I'm doing. So I'm going to go ahead and get this guy out. OK, so I'm going to come in here with my big root cutters because I don't want to create a big, massive divot. And this thing is so big that I could consider coming back in with a handsaw. But you're going to see how I'm going to use this root cutter to create a little bit of a feature and also an intelligent place that healing can occur at a lot more of a rapid fashion. OK, so I'm going to actually dive in kind of halfway through this, much like I would create a piece of deadwood on a juniper. So I'm going to dive in halfway through this laterally and just split that chunk. Now that I've got that chunk split and there's still white tissue in there because there's still sap, it's a fairly fresh stump, I'm going to come in here at the base and I'm going to take as close to flush as I can of the tissue off so that I pull out that chunk right there like so. OK, now I want to do that in multiple locations. So I'm going to come in here and I'm going to split this again. OK, now if I want to create a gin or any sort of feature on this, I probably want to be accentuating this curve right here in this line in the trunk. So I'm going to create my gin on the exterior portion of this, which is a little bit cumbersome in terms of coming in here and getting that nice flush cut. So I can come in here and I can actually reduce kind of that chunk that I just broke. Maybe several times to be able to get to a point where I can actually get down close enough to create that nice flush wound. I got some stuff in here in the way. And then I'm going to get that nice and flush. Notice how I've taken that and notice how you now pick up this movement moving out into that sort of tail location of this bend right there. OK, now once I've done that, I want to come back in and I want to sculpt this as a gin and here's why I want to leave this as a gin. If I take this whole piece out right now, I'm going to create a big massive wound and it's going to take a very, very, very long time to heal. But if I leave a gin, then I just need to get that callus to roll up to the edge of the gin. And then once that callus is rolled up to the edge of the gin, I can take the gin out and have a much smaller wound to close that on a pine. OK, so I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to work this down, create a little bit of room here, have just a little stub of a gin, clean up these edges, get that concavity and paste it. But this is the process that we go to or go through when we're removing structural pieces on a pine because it allows us to heal the wound faster by not creating as big of a distance for the callus to have to travel to close that wound. And you'll see this once we get to the end of it. Stephen's wondering if the cut paste eventually falls off. Cut paste will fall off when it's done its job. So yeah, Cynthia was wondering, so when the cut paste dries and it pulls from the edge, are you supposed to just let it fall off or do you reseal it? Just let it fall off. Let it fall off. Let it do its thing. Because what's happening, the cut paste is holding moisture in and it's also holding moisture out. Once that starts to come off, what it means is the cut paste has lost all of its moisture content. So it's not doing the same amount for the actual wound. But what it's also doing when it falls off is it's now allowing that tissue below it to expand and start to fill that area. And it's getting in the way. And so it's nice that it's flexible. Sorry, that probably just got in the way of the mic. It's nice that it's flexible in order to allow some degree of that kind of healing and that wound to move. I got those big knob cutters. There they are. OK. All right. So Arthur, zoom me in here. Take a look at this. So notice, now as I was doing this, I kind of started to look at it and I thought, man, if I leave a big hip out here, it's going to be a weird trunk line. So I went ahead and I took it in from here and I moved that significant point to the center of that wound. So I'm going to come in here and I'm going to take a nice, clean, super clean concave cut with my knob cutters out of that so that I get that swoop from that tissue down to that, in there, and then I get that rise up in that gin. Now, there's a lot of times in Japan where we would be doing this on big, big, big field-grown pines, like Zuisho white pines or black pines that were grown in the field. And we would actually be taking chisels and coming in and forming and sculpting these areas so that they would heal really nice and clean. The big piece and the big secret with this, though, is you want that margin here. As it sweeps into this gin, you want this to be relatively flat with a slight concavity into the tissue itself, yeah? So let me see how I get that. We'll come back with this. So I'm actually going to make a nice, clean cut. I'm going to roll this so you can see it, Arthur. Make a nice, clean cut into that gin right there, just to pull that little amount of tissue out. OK? Just that little amount right at the base. That's all I'm trying to take out. And notice how that creates that really wonderful, nice dip in there, right where we go past that live tissue down and in. And then it swoops up into that gin. That's a perfect wound. So what will happen is that callus will roll. It'll intersect that gin. We'll pull that gin out, and it'll fully close. Or we can leave the gin. OK. We'll leave the gin in as a remnant of a branch. This is how we treat big wounds on pines in this very first working. And if we do this right, we'll never have to touch them again. Never have to touch them again. Brandon's wondering if there is a difference between scots and scotch pine, or if it's the same thing. Probably the same thing. It depends on if what somebody is calling a scotch pine is pinus sylvestris or not. Because scots and scotch pine typically both mean pinus sylvestris. And if we wanted to really elevate our bonsai game, we'd start referring to the Latin names. But the problem is, is if I communicated in Latin names, a lot of people wouldn't know what in the world we were talking about. But this is a pinus sylvestris, which is one of the Latin names, one of the many Latin names of scotch pine. In Europe, they refer to it almost entirely as sylvestris. So when you say scotch pine to a Spaniard, or to a man, to an Italian, or to a French bonsai practitioner, they have no clue what you're talking about. None. They're like, I don't. What is a scotch pine? What is the scotch pine you speak of? Bonsai guy's wondering how long this tree's been in its current pot. In its current pot? This was repotted this spring. So we are diving in, all hands on deck for sure. OK. Now notice what's happening here. I've got these two branches on the interior here. If you guys notice, I'm going to pull this out of the way. Junior, go ahead and blast back for me. I'll show you these two guys here. Now just because I've just freshly created this wound, I'm more tempted now than ever to leave both of these. Because as this growth occurs, it's pulling resources through this area where I've got callus. And it's starting to create tissue around that area so that we can heal that area. I'm going to leave both of these branches here this time. Knowing that in the future, this one or this one, and I'm guessing it's probably going to be this one, is going to have to go. And we're talking two, three years down the road that I'll be taking that out. Nevertheless, if I'm going to use them and I'm going to give both of them the opportunity to be potential branches in the final design of the tree, I've got to come in and I've got to do good solid cleaning and thinning down for good branch structure so that I don't create structural flaws. Graham's wondering why that gin is left there. Why? Why the gin is left there? Aesthetically. Yeah. What did he say? It looks ugly? No, I'm inferring that he's referring to the aesthetics. Ah. So aesthetically, maybe it should stay, maybe it should go. But horticulturally, the fastest way to heal this wound is to leave that gin so the callus rolls to the gin. Because you guys have probably all had trees where you've cleaned it out, you've gotten that concave cut, and it looks super beautiful. And you're like, ugh. This is going to roll. And you see the callus roll and roll and stop. And then you're like, wait, no, what, no. You're supposed to keep going, and it stops. So you refresh that wound, and it goes a little bit more, and it stops. And this is a common problem in healing wounds on pines. This is how you avoid it. So if you leave that central piece or, originally, I thought, I'll leave it off to one side and let it heal to that side, take it away, and let it finish healing. Right? Once I got into it, I thought, oh, this is actually going to be better if all sides heal towards the center. Leave it there. So that callus will heal towards the center. I can remove it, and you'll see that fully heal much quicker with that piece in the center, almost as a backbone or like a structural guide for the callus to roll on than if you didn't have it. Now, I'm guessing there is probably some potential for that to be holding moisture and maintaining favorable condition for tissue development, in addition to shortening the distance that the callus has to roll. But it's an important part of healing big wounds on field-grown pines, one of the major techniques I wanted to show you guys tonight. Because of that misunderstanding or mishandling of that and the failure that we've experienced, nobody ever talks about this as a way to mitigate that problem that we all experience. So in terms of design and form meeting function, Alex is wondering, on a tree this size and a pot that short, do you ever worry about the tree tipping itself and the pot over in the wind? ALEXIS MOUSSINE- We are going to take care of that problem right now, actually, in probably less than 10 minutes. And then we won't have to worry about it anymore. Have we had to worry about it this year? Yes, for sure. For sure. This has been on a lower bench where it's not highly exposed to a tremendous amount of wind, so that we don't necessarily have to deal with the potential repercussions. But this is part of the decision, right? Your container decision takes into account function and aesthetics always. Does it look good? And does it function? Does it hold enough water? Does it hold the physical weight of the tree? Does it hold the position? Or is it a very maybe dangerous or awkward, precarious situation for the tree to maintain stability on the bench? And we're usually, particularly with a field-grown piece like this, where we're using the foliar mass from that sacrifice to recover from the repotting process, we're usually fighting that lack of function until we come back in and do this first styling. And so we have to take those precautionary measures. To make sure we don't suffer for that. So is the work you're doing and sort of the recovery approach you're going to take for this tree, can that be applied to all pines or specifically single, flush, short, needle? This is very much a, and particularly this timing, right, doing this work in the summertime, possible after we've finished a lot of our, you know, we've finished a lot of our multi-flush work. We're coming back to our single flush. You guys will notice that the interior needles on this are starting to fall off very easily. That's because all of the new growth has hardened back in that energy positive and the tree's saying, I don't need these interior needles anymore. And usually we come back and work single, flush, short, needle pines when we start to see those older needles shed. Because we're cleaning them up anyways. It's a good time to be doing work. They have a lot of vigor built up in the tree, energy positive, and so this is a very common time to do this. And so this is a very common time to do this. And so this is a very common time to do this. And so this is a very common time to do this. Now the disadvantage to doing it now is the bleeding, right, and the bleeding. I'm going to show you a way beyond cut paste if we get too much sap emerging from a wound to be able to seal a wound on a single flush, short needle pine, or on a multi-flush pine, any pine, this is a great way to go ahead and stop that sap flow. Before I keep moving though, I'm just going to remove this because I know that this isn't going to be necessary and it's really blocking the light and some of the other things that we're dealing with. And this is how they achieved a lot of the thickness of the sap. And this is how they achieved a lot of the thickness in this tree was by allowing the sacrificial leader to grow, pulling a lot of the resources up through this. And a lot of people think the length is what counts. It's not the length, it's the needle mass that's creating the photosynthetic resources that actually counts. So by taking that away, I essentially slow down or even stop the girth expansion of this trunk. Now I feel like it's enough, so I feel like it's justified to lose that and start to transition the energy to some of these interior branches that I want to start taking over in the apical creation of this tree. And we'll come back to the design process of that once we get a little bit more of this opened up and exposed. So Steven's following up on the timing of this work. Would the best time be spring or now? So if this tree hadn't been repotted, best time would be spring, hands down, right? Because we're heading, well, actually let me quantify that. Okay? Spring would be a good time. Spring would be a good time. Fall would be a good time. After we've gotten past the heat of the summer. Summer is a good time because we have this window at this point in time where our single flush, short needle pines start to drop their needles. Ponderosas aren't even coming close to dropping needles yet. So we have this needle drop that we're kind of working in tandem with, cleaning it up, styling it at the same time. Good time to be doing this work, right? But if we were looking at ultimate ideal times to reduce the amount of sap that's going to be moving through the wounds of this tree as we start to reduce branching, probably fall would be your A number one time, okay? Now here's why I say spring, although good, is not the best. With our single flush pines, in general, across the board, the more foliar mass we remove prior to this tree growing in the spring, the longer the needles get, even on a single flush, short-needled pine. Because we know that with pine strength comes from the roots. So if we come into a Japanese white pine, or a ponderosa pine, or a limber pine, or a lodgepole pine, or even, you know, a ponderosa pine, or a limber pine, or a lodgepole pine, or even, you know, a ponderosa pine, or a ponderosa pine, or a ponderosa pine, or a ponderosa pine, or a lodgepole pine, or even, you know, a ponderosa pine, or a lodgepole pine, or even, you know, a ponderosa pine, or even, you know, a scots pine, or a sylvestris, and we reduce the foliage mass by 50%, well, you have all of the stored energy from the previous fall stored in this root system and vascular system that now, instead of being distributed across that massive number of needles, is distributed across half of that mass. That means that each needle gets twice the amount of energy it would have been getting had we left all that foliage mass, and it gets longer as a result of that. It's why we never work ponderosa pine in the spring, okay? So when we're thinking about this, if I'm concerned about a refined tree, or I'm concerned about the needle length, this wouldn't necessarily be the very best time to be doing this work. As it stands now, I'm worried about setting the structure, stopping any of these areas that are swelling abnormally quickly. I'm trying to stop that from happening, so this is a great time for me to be doing this as long as I can heal the wounds. Does that make sense? Yeah, it did make sense. Okay, cool, nice. Well, regarding, you mentioned it was repotted in the spring. Tom was wondering if doing these two major processes in one year is too much, and if you didn't remove that many roots to kind of mitigate that. Ah, so we didn't remove very many roots, but the thing that gives me the tell that I can do this work is I've got good solid growth, but more importantly, the strength of the buds here, and the strength of what I've got set up for next year is really, really set up to have some really great stuff, okay? So as far as what I'm using to base my decisions on, it's the indicators that the tree is giving me more than any sort of standardized approach to how we handle this work. Steven's wondering, so what's the significance of the needle drop as a signal that it's a good time? Well, so Steven, that's a good question, and I'm going to put that right back on you. You tell me, what is the significance of the needle drop in terms of being an indicator for timing for work? Any ideas, Kendall? Okay, so I'm going to put that right back on you. You tell me, what is the significance of the needle drop in terms of being an indicator for timing for work? Okay, so I'm going to put that right back on you. Okay, so I'm going to put that right back on you. Now, think about it, think about it. So this is where, I think this is where bonsai, in bonsai we have to evolve. So you're saying, listen, why are you saying needle drop? And I'm saying, well, think about it. Think about what would catalyze the drop of needles in a tree? Why would a tree shed needles? They're shedding, the tree is shedding photosynthetic solar panels. Why would it do that? Okay, there's multiple reasons why it would, first and foremost. Let me just start off that way. Okay, there's multiple reasons why it would, first and foremost. Let me just start off that way. But in the case of a healthy tree, why would it? But in the case of a healthy tree, why would it? But in the case of a healthy tree, why would it? Anyone? Bueller? Troy? Bueller? Bueller? Bueller? Bueller? Troy, step up to the mic. Troy, step up to the mic. Troy, step up to the mic. Troy, you thought you were done with work, but you better sit down. Yeah, Troy, join us. Join us in the thunderdome. Stephen says it doesn't need them anymore. Michael says the new growth has hardened off and no longer, those old needles are no longer needed. Okay. Gordon says the old needles can drop off now. There's enough strength in the new growth. Boneside guy says it's because it's growing. Cynthia says because it has enough energy to shed the interior needle. Okay, so we're back in an energy positive, right? That's number one. We're back in an energy positive That's a big big piece to consider and we've always got a member what we're talking about here in terms of the work that we're Doing we're talking about energy positive energy negative, right? So we're in the energy positive now when you start to talk about the the the tree and the way that the tree functions right We're if we're in energy positive Then that means that the trees got enough photosynthetic mass To not just sustain but add okay, and those older needles are now developing enough of a Scarred sort of photosynthetic ly inefficient surface area from being you know It's like the lens of our eye, right? Over the course of our time the lens of our eye gets less and less functional because it gets scarred and scratched Light comes in it's deflected. We start to see less and less appropriately all of those things happen well in the world of a tree that happens in three years, right So those older needles that are taking more energy than they're creating via the photosynthetic process the trees saying hey once I get these new Young whippersnappers dialed in that are efficiently photosynthesizing and consuming far less energy than they're creating I'm gonna let go of you guys, right? But I've got to be back in that energy positive in order to let go of you guys because I don't want to risk not Having enough solar panel to keep myself alive Okay, so when? It starts to drop those needles it says now this growth is solidified Hardened off and I don't have to worry about it being easily damaged I'm gonna go ahead and let go of my old soldiers, right? and that's a really good time to come back in when it's in that energy positive and Do this kind of work because you're you're you're setting the tree up to be able to respond in a way That is favorable to the addition of potentially interior buds allocate resources towards younger pieces of growth and And start to open it up for oxygen penetration through the canopy Troy this heat melt your brain Another article of clothing is melting right now Troy still rocking the long sleeves. Yeah, and the full man Denim hardcore overalls, but that looks good. You wiping your face there that feel good. Oh, that feels real good. Yeah Glad that you enjoyed that Joe commented that you need a little spritz spritz of water I do you know what I keep thinking about are those fans with like where it's like blowing and then you You know That would be nice Starting to happen slowly so we initially Talked about this stream as being focused on traditional design. Uh-huh. Could you? walk us through your your thought process of how you're selecting branches with traditional design Well, yeah, sure. I mean so The the the piece on the inside of the cut, right? That's a traditional thing. Well, absolutely without a doubt, right? That's I think that's one of the fundamental aspects of good pine bonsai. Okay, there's a traditional design. That's almost a rule of tradition Okay coming back in and reducing from threes to twos coming back in and selecting and Removing these stumps and how we remove that to set the trunk up to have a very beautiful trunk line No inverse swelling Continuing to preserve that movement. These are all aspects of traditional design, but what I'm doing right now We're not even diving really into design so much as we're just diving into fundamental structural decisions Okay And what you guys need to continue to clue into as you're watching me do this is I'm not actually sitting here thinking Where am I going to use this do I want it or do I not I'm removing things that just have no? Structural function to add to the tree right now because I'm going to keep probably 60% more branches than I'm going to use In the final design when this is a mature tree But right now while I'm doing this work All I'm trying to do is get rid of all of the things that are going to cause structural issues for this tree before I Ever even consider design before I ever even think what do I want this tree to look like? I'm wiping them off the board so that I don't develop an attachment to a piece of material or a branch That's going to cause problems in the tree ultimately okay, so those areas of three those areas where there's swelling those areas where I've got big stubs this is a big part of the Structural work of creating a good fundamental pine Things that nobody ever talks about right, so I'm just getting to a part right here And I'm actually I feel like I can probably go ahead and take this off because that's a pretty lowly branch Okay, so I'm just getting to a part of the design right here now look at what's happening in here I've got this conglomeration of growth we in tight here Junior Okay, I've got this big conglomeration of growth, so I've got one two three four and a few little stragglers excuse me stragglers over there. I've got four pieces Originating from one node one Junction okay now I'm looking at this and I'm saying okay when I look from the front and the front was chosen because I had the best base I had the best movement right and I didn't have really any detractable Undesirable features now as I look at this tree. I also see something kind of a little something something over here that I'm Considering a little bit, so we'll see a little something something right we'll come back to that though because This is what happens when you repop first and style second as I'm looking at this I'm thinking okay. I don't really see this small little stubby piece in here That's like a big branch base with a bunch of little pieces of growth I don't see this being as usable or quality as this branch or this branch if I've got four or five pieces of growth I've got to take that down to one or max two branches at this Junction Because the apex of this tree this leader right here is considered one in addition okay, so even if I take it down here And I leave two branches here in that one leader I still got three at that Junction Which means I'm going to have to come back in the future and take it down to two okay? So I'm thinking about that right now, and I'm saying this little spindly guy That's causing swelling in this area not a good thing to leave. I'm going to take that off And I'm going to take it off with a really nice clean cut beautiful clean cut boom boom All right that cleans that up now when I'm looking at I got here. I've got this guy's got a little bit of Deadwood down below here, okay? I come back here I've got kind of this other big knot, but it is on the back of the tree right And there's nothing on the back side of the tree. I have a lot of ramification here That feels like that might be kind of important, but also bear in mind this this expands the width The width of this Junction if I leave this here So if I look at the width here versus the width here versus the width here it almost forms some degree of Inverse Taper right here right now I'm going to show you guys how to deal with this because I actually think that's probably the best branch for the future design of The tree if that's the best branch for the future design of the tree Then that means that this is probably got to go and this is probably got to go and this is the one that I'm Going to go with but I want to make sure That I feel comfortable with that before making that decision because that's a big decision to be made in terms of where this tree moves forward Yes, I feel comfortable with that Yes, I feel comfortable with that Big moves, huh big moves big moves I Guess my question is and I might be repeating What you've maybe already explained is as a piece of raw material what makes you look at that and be this would look this Tree would be best served by a traditional design. What is it about the material that's leading? Me to make that decision is what you're saying, right? See now that's a quality question now when we look at this material and we're thinking traditional design You've got this informal upright multiple changes in direction rapid transition of taper Short and compact right already your center of mass your length of branches your features that you're focusing the tree around are all Based around this trunk right in this area right in traditional design. You're usually trying to bring visual Focus back towards that middle portion of the trunk back towards that base and you're trying to create a canopy that proportionally Maximizes that portion of the tree, right? You're trying to bring focus back to that area now if you have this branch dancing out here That's got deadwood running along it and it's it's got this interesting movement You base your design around that feature and that now moves into something else because you're moving the visual weight and the visual attention away from the base of the tree but traditional design always comes back to the Base whether it's in the visual mass whether it's in the visual focus Whether it's in the fundamental aspect of the piece of design that you're trying to create value in it's right here in this movement This girth and this portion of the tree. Does that make sense, right? Yeah and so that that is an interesting thing to be focusing on because if this is the most interesting part and we're going to Be compacting to that or we want to bring visual mass back to that that creates a lot more balance in terms of the totality of the composition and When we look at traditional design balance is the key word to creating good solid orthodox traditional design achieving Balance right and we start talking about more innovative design or looking at more natural components We push the degree of that balance. We push the degree of that asymmetry We push the far-out boundaries of where we're trying to represent that trees environment or that trees expression of a natural condition That's what creates the drama. That's what creates the energy. That's what creates the excitement that survival mechanism Traditional design is literally like going to the Hilton and having somebody feed you room service and having a super fluffy couch It's balanced. It's quiet. It's comfort. It makes us feel very very centered and calm when we look at it It's why I struggle with it so much. Do you feel centered and calm? I don't I don't feel Okay, so I've got this big thick chunk right here, but beyond that I've kind of got this big mass right here I'm gonna open up a fairly significant wound for you You guys and I want you to see how I handled it now. I've left this bud here Specifically to be able to draw sap through this area So I'm actually gonna insert my cut and I'll come back and doctor up this piece here I'm gonna insert my cut here and I'm gonna cut out Just a little bit of a V shape here so that I don't have this transition in that width that I viewed as a flaw and this is a this is a little bit of a nuance for you guys in terms of how you can handle these structural issues and mitigate some of what would appear to Be a major flaw Okay, so I've come probably Two-thirds of the way through it I'm gonna enter here now and I'm gonna try to meet that angle And I'm just angling my blade so that I see that on this backside I'm angling my blade so that I see that I'm gonna try to meet that with a little bit of a V cut Notice how I'm pulling these branches out of the way Okay Okay, I'll come back here Okay Now notice how that takes that big bulge Right out of that portion of the tree. I love this technique. I love this technique and nobody teaches this technique to remove bulk or bulge out of a Sacrificially grown piece and this is particular to pine and particular to maximizing the quality of field-grown pine So I'm gonna I'm gonna rotate this and junior if you can zoom out and give you guys a lot better idea So you see that movement come up? If this were completely flat right here, then you would have this big bulk of wood You would have a big visual mass right there and just by having that slight recess where it comes down and back up that almost beat that back up almost becomes a shoulder of That branch and creates the visual illusion that now your thickness is based on this width and not on this width Right and that's a real interesting thing to toy with people's concept of what is inverse taper versus what is natural-looking right I Was really excited to show this to you guys tonight. So there you go That was awesome. That was awesome Alex has a question about that big move you just did Okay, do you ever worry about that branch being cut off that that will cause dieback down to the roots? Well, so Good question Alex and yes Which is exactly why I made the point to preserve this bud here and this branch here so that I've got sap on both sides Of this wound because if I've got water and nutrition moving up here and I've got transpiration here and more importantly transpiration here And I've got transpiration here The most that this could die down would be to a V in the trunk right there and a little bit of shari right there Not an issue right might excuse me might even add some value to the quality of the tree over the course of time So I set myself up for success just with a little piece of knowledge Right, and then I'm gonna take these edges off so that it doesn't feel unnatural I'm gonna round it out a little bit not too much because I want to still have that contour that that callus is gonna roll on See if I can get this to bite there we go got it Okay, and now we start to create some of the more fluid Some of the more fluid lines that occur throughout the rest of the tree. We're pulling into the formation of this You know when we talk about bonsai I don't think enough people talk about the sculptural aspect of these types of decisions that occur in the structure of the tree Where you really form and kind of create that transition in those areas people say oh you've got inverse tapering It's not a good piece of material. I should cut it off here and create a bonsai No, no work with the material learn how to manipulate the way that people see the line learn how to manipulate the way that people see the Learn how to create those areas of transitions that give it aesthetic value. This is how you maximize your material, okay? Now, I'm going to show you guys a little bit of a new technique here in case you're not aware of this because this is an absolute winner in terms of being able to heal or at least stop the flow of sap. Now, we've patched every other place on this tree with putty. But say, for example, you're doing the work and it's really hot and the tree's pumping a ton of sap through the vascular tissue and you don't get that cut paste on there quick enough. You're working with another instructor, you're working with your, you know, whatever, your mentor and they don't get around in time and there's just sap oozing everywhere, right? Dry sphagnum moss is one of the biggest tools that we can use in bonsai to stop the flow of sap in a pine. Okay, so I could stop this with cut paste. I want to show you guys this technique because this is one of the best, very, very best ways to stop the flow of sap. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to pack dry sphagnum in real nice and tight over that wound, okay? And I'm going to take just some dry raffia. I'm not super concerned about how beautiful the raffia is because this isn't going to stay on. It's going to stay on long, okay? And I'm going to be very careful of the bark but I'm going to wrap this just so that I make sure that I get that sphagnum to stay on to that location in the tree. Always being careful of the bark on pines. Okay, just that dry raffia, dry sphagnum. Hold that nice and tight against that wound. Now here's what that's going to do for you. That sphagnum being dry is going to soak up all of that sap that's leaking out of that wound. And in a matter of, I'm going to say, seven to ten days, that wound will be completely cauterized and there won't be any more sap leaking out of it. That raffia is going to be literally rock hard when you remove it because it's going to be so full of sap. But then you can come back, clean up that cut edge, and paste it again and encourage the healing process to begin, okay? So this is a really nice technique for you guys to tuck into your tool belt, be able to deal with these issues if you are working pines at this time of year. Or for example, you're doing candle pruning on your multi-flush pines and you choose to remove. Some significant branches to focus the energy onto the branches you do want. This is the way that you stop that bleeding, okay? You're working ponderosa pine at the end of or middle of September, you get a heat spell and they start to bleed. This is a great way to deal with that bleeding. Because again, if it starts to bleed, that cut paste isn't going to adhere to the edges of that cut. All of a sudden, we got to come up with a different solution. Good way to make that happen. Okay. Now, and I still have just a little bit more pruning on this back branch, taking it down to threes. Let me go ahead and get that done off the bottom. And notice that I'm saving big, long, strong branches. I'm not cutting back to super weak interiors. I don't necessarily want to be getting back into interior weak growth. I want to be drawing a lot of resources through this tree because that's what generates back budding. That's what generates a lot of ramification to form. I'm saving some of the stronger pieces. Now, if they're obnoxiously strong, for example, here, we in tight here, okay, here, I've got these two beautiful pieces of ramification in this big, bulky piece. I'm going to take that off the top. I'm going to take these two cleanly off the top there. And I'm going to leave that better branch structure right there, laterally emerging. Okay. I'm going to take this little wimpy guy out of that crotch there. I've got this big, bulky piece here. I'm going to say that's going to come off. I'll use these guys to draw sap through that. This guy I'm going to leave because I do potentially see another front than the one that we've ultimately originally done. This is the one that we chose during the repotting process. And this is what I want to look at with you guys now. Okay. So let's take a look. Kendall, you talked about creating a really beautiful traditional branch or a really traditional tree. This is where we get into the design of a moyogi tree or an informal upright. Okay. Sweet. How do you spell that? How do you spell that? M-O-Y-O-G-I. M-O-Y-O-G-I. Okay. Okay. So. So at this point, just to recap, I've taken anywhere with 3s, 4s, 5s down to 2s, okay, so that I don't get inverse swelling or cause structural issues. I've removed branches that are absolutely unnecessary because they are part of a junction where there's 3, 4, 5 branches because they're on the inside of a curve and I identify them as potentially removing or decreasing the value of that movement. And I've removed branches that are either too weak, poorly formed, or structurally inferior compared to the branches around them so that I now have a structure, I can build a design around that I know will only improve the quality of this material. Big first step for raw styling of pines, setting them up for the future of that tree. I've also identified to you guys that right now at this point, I probably have 60% more branching structurally than I'll ultimately have in the final product of this tree. But I know over the course of the next five years, some branches I want to develop are not going to develop. Some branches I didn't think would develop do develop. And that design, every time we sit down with it, is going to change. But one thing that should not change moving forward is our selection of the front. And I'm already going to tell you that the front that was chosen based on the best base and line during the repotting process, which is right there, is probably not the best line and base that the tree has to offer us. So I'm just going to rotate this. Go ahead and take a real nice hard look at what we're dealing with here. And I'm going to come back and I'm going to say, actually, that our best front, best possible front, is right off of the corner here. So I'm going to erase this white chalk line to the best of my ability, which is not very good. Boom. Arthur. Sweat rag. Tight. Worked like a charm. It's water. Yeah. That's what I said. Don't worry about it. It's water, dude. OK. I'm going to say it's off the corner there. And I'm going to prop this up. And then I'm going to fire this back to you guys. Sweet. Oof. Oof. Strong. Strong. OK. I'm going to come back to you guys now, and you tell me what you think about that, OK? So let's talk about the merits of this first, just in terms of informal, upright, orthodox style tree, OK? Bringing that visual weight in the apex closer or back towards the base always reestablishes balance, always creates a more quiet, calming design. OK. So I may choose to carry the apex this way. And in the design style of Mirai, I never want to actually build the apex over the center of the base because it virtually nullifies movement. So I'm going to take the apex this way, regardless of what we decide to do in terms of angle. Right? But there's a more important reason why this angle change really maximizes the quality of this line. And here's why. OK. When I remove this, whenever we're looking at the line of a trunk, notice how vertical or close to vertical. And notice how lateral or close to lateral this section and this section are in relation to the edge of the container. This edge of the container is a hard line for design. Right? It will always exist. Unless we go with an organic shape. And even with an organic shape, the surface below the organic shape of the container will be a hard line for your eye to reference. And your eye is picking up on patterns constantly in design, OK? It's how we interpret the world without investing a ton of energy and thought in looking at things. So notice how vertical that is. Notice how horizontal that is. So just by coming in here, right? And there's another piece too. The base didn't quite make it into the container. This is going to expand the base. But just by coming in here, and by elevating that, we take that past vertical, we take that past horizontal, and we've already taken a vertical and a horizontal line out of design. We've dramatically improved the quality of the tree. Just with that singular move, we've dramatically improved the quality of the tree. OK? Now, one of the things that people continually ask me about trees, or suggest, is that they're going to suggest is, oh, OK, you've got a big, thick base. Why don't we just take this piece off and build this as the apex? Or better yet, take it off and build this as the apex. But here's the thing about bonsai. Your tree increases in value visually, monetarily, and in terms of the totality of its bonsai ability, increases in value with every single change in direction. So when you move here, right? Your base goes. Boom. Boom. There's a quick jag. Boom. Boom. So one, two, three, four, five. And if I take the apex this way, six. Six changes in direction. You cut any one of these out, I cut this out, I lose two. I cut this out, I lose three, right? So now you're taking it from six changes in direction down to four or three changes in direction. You're actually decreasing the value of material by trying to reduce the height based on a convention that we're all spoon-fed. When we first start bonsai, which is creating the shortest tree, is the best possible solution, right? And in all actuality, you guys are cutting out the quality of your tree, right? So you're going to see me use this entire length of this tree because that's what maximizes this tree's maximum potential, okay? Now this branch becomes unnecessary now. You guys probably agree. I'm not going to ask though. You agree? Arthur agrees. Oof. What do you think, Troy? I'm not going to ask. What do you think, Troy? It's a monster. It's impressive now. That's a monster. It really is at this point. That's a monster. That's a monster. That is an absolute stellar pine that we're creating, okay? Now there's questions about whether these branches here are necessary or not. At this point, 60% more than our eventual design, these are going to stay. They draw sap through this to heal some of these wounds. They continue to add to the photosynthetic mass because we've removed a lot. Now is not the time to be taking those off. So. So what we're doing now, obviously this branch coming here and this branch coming here are competing in terms of length. Let's lay this structure out. Let's make some decisions in terms of design guidance and we'll talk about how we generate direction with these longest, most asymmetrical pieces of the design. Let me get some structural wire on those real quick. Oh, yes. Kendall, we got any questions? Yeah, we do. Fire away. Brandon's wondering, how do you decide what? Size of wounds get cut paste versus the technique that you used. Yeah. If in doubt, cut paste it, but don't be obnoxious. Rob. Rob, get some water. Get some water in Rob. You don't mind cooties, I guess. Kendall's got cooties. She'll give you her water. I'm not sick. I'm not sick. I don't have a disease. Don't worry about it. It's very hot in here, everyone. So we're just all. Yeah. Flush. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. Robin. what's the difference between the green top and the white top green top and white top different colors right green top and white top so the different colors yes no seriously the white top is gray or the green top is browner gray typically conifer brown typically deciduous is going to be kind of your biggest difference because cut paste does have hormones that encourage cellular division same across the board okay so with the but that that's generally with the green top is green top is actually i take that back green top is conifer gray green top is conifer gray white white top is deciduous brown okay okay green gray conifer white brown deciduous that makes sense because i only see the green in our studio and we only we only we only roll with green conifers green yeah okay okay tons of green lots of green lots of green greens my favorite color it's staff's favorite color everybody's favorite color green okay now arthur if possible i want you to zoom in and just give me a little bit of love on the structural here okay so we're focusing right in here i want to show people kind of my considerations of structural wiring and and i will tell you guys this structural wiring in my mind is the single most mispracticed fundamental technique of styling in the in the united states or in the western world very rarely do you see people proficiently beautifully apply eight six and four gauge wire to a tree okay now when we're dealing with structural wire our most important point is the shoulder of this branch right here and what that means is my wire needs to contact the shoulder of that branch so i maintain that the most important hand in our structural wiring is this offhand because this is what holds the wire in contact with the branch i'm going to fool you guys with my little magical trick here playing with this wire out here you guys should be watching with this hand here that's the one that's going to show you how to best wire your tree okay now notice every single turn that i make i'm keeping the same angle i'm keeping the same spacing between the turns and i'm maintaining beautiful contact with the branch this is the fundamental aspect of wiring that nobody ever talks about same angle same spacing no gaps this is what gives your wire maximum function so even when i come into this shoulder here i'm maintaining that 55 or 60 degree angle kendall say that with me 55 or 60 degree angle 55 or 60 degree angle beautiful why not 45 kendall fundamental wiring says 45 degrees that's what the books told me 45 degrees why don't i want 45 degrees what's this mirai 55 60 degree angle yeah i mean i was just i was literally just going to ask that i know i saw it i saw it like on the tip of your tongue right so the books say but when we start talking about the application of wire to minimize the quantity of wire on the branch and maximize its function we increase that length of that angle to put less wire on and have more function based on the fact right that we know the longer the wire the more impact the flex of that wire has and this is to say look if i just wanted to bend this branch in a singular plane i wanted to bend this straight down the best application of wire would be laying linearly across this branch Because then any bend that I put into that branch would be held with the wire because the wire would flex as well. But we know that we want to rotate, we want to put a bend here and a bend there, so we have to have a coil to hold that movement. Now if we go too tight, so we start wrapping really, really tightly, we have to bend that branch an exorbitant amount just to get that really tight coil to bend even a little bit. This is how a spring is formed. This is why a spring holds its shape. So if we can mesh the gap between a straight line and a spring to minimize the quantity of wire and maximize its function, we're finding that 55, 60 degree angle as being that perfect point where we work hard in the copper a minimal amount, we apply it in a coil that allows us to hold the bend, we don't apply it so tightly that it minimizes the ability for the wire to flex and maximize that bend, and we find that sweet spot. That's what we're looking for, and if we duplicate that across every single turn, we now start to create a system that functions equally to give us total control of the shape of the branch. Chris is wondering what size wire that is. Six gauge. That's six gauge. Good call, Brandon. He called it out. Yeah, Brandon, got it. Got it. You on it, Brandon? You saw that. Proportional to my fingers, right? And Alex is wondering if you could point out what sacrifice branches you kept and what will be removed later. I will. I will. That's for the end. Cool. Don't you get excited. Alex. Okay, so when we do this kind of structural setting, and this is something, you know, that is very unique to Mr. Kimura, right? We'll set wire on these branches, right? I'm always going to lower from the shoulder, particularly in a traditional design, right? I want that downward angle there. At least this low on the tree, it may not totally be downward, but I'm going to lower that shoulder. I'm going to lower this shoulder. I'm going to lower this shoulder. I'm going to lower this. I'm going to lower this. This is orthodox design, okay? When we start to talk about maybe a deciduous tree, next week we're doing stewardia, it's going to be the opposite. We're going to raise. We're going to raise. We're going to raise, right? And we'll get to that. That's a different discussion altogether, okay? But when we start to create this movement in the structure, structure is different than secondary tertiary, okay? These are my secondary tertiaries, okay? These are my structural components. When we create structure, our goal is to set the backbone to build this design on, okay? So anytime that I have this major primary line in my branch, any of these other pieces of structure always move into that and then out. Into that and then out. And I'm going to set the shape of that structure before I ever wire anything else, okay? So I wire it, I set the shape of that, and then I move on, okay? And I'm going to set the structure of this entire tree before I come back and I do secondary tertiary setting. Let's go one more. You'll see why when we come back and wire that branch, okay? Structure, structure. Now, notice these two guys right here. I want to lower both of these, right? Fundamental structural knowledge says if I want to lower both of these, right? I want to lower this branch. Where does this branch want to return to? Kendall, if I want to lower this branch, where does it want to return to? Back up. Back up, back up. How do you stop a branch from returning back up? Wire. Position your wire correctly. Position your wire correctly. So if I'm lowering and it wants to return up, do I need to have the wire on the top of the branch or the bottom of the branch? I lower, it wants to go back up. Where do I need the wire? Top. Top or bottom? The top. Very, very good. Top, right? Now, people make a mistake. Arthur, zoom me in here. Are we good? Okay. People make a mistake because they say, well, if you're doing this from here, your first bend or your first turn of the wire is going to be on the bottom. I don't care about the first turn of the wire in structural wiring. I care about the point that it contacts the shoulder where that branch joins the trunk. That is my structural hold, okay? So if that's there and that's there, I now have an extremely solid structural hold, okay? Now, this is probably the most difficult combination to make well. Notice how much effort I'm putting in with this offhand to maintain that contact with that branch. And notice how that bridges, that beautiful arc that bridges. Notice the contact right here. Can you see that, Arthur? Is that sexy as hell? And can you see that there? Is that sexy? Very good. If it's sexy, it means it's working. Ugh. Sharif's curious how long you'll leave this structural wiring on. Until it starts to bite in to a point that I can't see. I can't stand it any longer. Because think about this. You are setting the structure on a tree that's been growing for X number of years. Now, this field-grown piece of material is probably 10, 12 years old, right? So that means that you've got 10 or 12 years of growth. Just outright robust field-grown, bigger, like Hulk Hogan sort of growth. You've got to be able to develop enough development. You've got to be able to develop enough development. You've got to be able to develop enough tissue to hold and override the growth that's already formed on that piece to this point, right? So what that's telling me is I've got to leave this on long enough to get a lot of tissue, which means the wire's going to bite in quite a bit. I'm okay with that. Because on a pine, we develop bark. It grows very quickly as a Scots pine, Silvestris in a young age. That's okay. Same with a black pine, right? Now, there are deciduous species where you wouldn't leave it on even long enough to see a minimal amount of biting in. Next week with the Stewardia, we will talk about that again. Hold your horses. Okay. Now, notice how I performed this. This bend, right? I want to lower this piece. I'm going to hold that because I know that's going to pull that wire off of that trunk, okay? If I lower and I hold here and it wants to return back up, watch what happens. I hold that, so I'm bending the wire. Boom. Holds that bend, okay? This is how structural wire works. And this is not something that many people talk about, and I don't know why. Because most of what we deal with in the Western world is Yamadori or field-grown stock, unless you can import. Nobody's dealing with refined Japanese trees in a high quantity that have to be detail-wired and manicured and then delivered, right? You have to make trees in the Western world. This is how you make trees. This is how you apply legitimate wire to make trees. A little bit of a faulty branch there. A little eight gauge on that. How are we doing for time? About an hour. Four-fifteen? Oh, good. Okay. Everybody having fun? Rob, you having fun? Rob's alive. Heartbeat. The sauna, we're all just cleansing. It's happening. Yes. Yes. All right, all right. Hang on just a sec, Troy. This is for you. Oh, very nice. Need that in slow motion. Uh-huh. Arthur's got to cover it. Arthur can deliver that. Oh, geez. There's music in the background. Dun, dun, dun. And just keep adding. Intimate pine time. Just keep, Arthur's like, just keep adding to the ideas. Please, please. Okay. Set these guys. Stop distracting me. You guys. This is doing bonsai. This is bonsai at its highest level. I feel like I had a pair of scissors, and I feel like I lost a pair of scissors. We have scissors right here? There they are. There they are. Sure enough. Do we have any questions, Deeds, or is everybody just kind of rocking out? Yeah, we have some questions that aren't particularly related to the Scots, but we could bring them up. Go ahead. So Gary has a single flush lodgepole doing a second flush right now and is wondering when to candle prune. Ah, lodgepole pines don't produce two flushes. What they will do, though, is they will produce a very aggressive flush of buds that were extremely weak if it achieves a large amount of vigor over the course of the season. And I'm seeing this on several shore pine that had, that had some pieces of growth that were not strong enough to be growing in the first flush of growth. And because we pinched and pinched and pinched, and then we came back and we pruned to finalize the design, it stimulated the growth of these interior buds. Weather was just right. Strength of the tree was just right. It's not a second flush, and don't mistake it for that, right? You can't be de-candling a lodgepole pine. You can't de-candle a shore pine. You can't de-candle a sylvestris, right? You can create an amount of vigor that will give you another push of the weakest buds or maybe even the strongest buds on the tree. That is just a sign of health. Be very careful about misinterpreting that. Okay, I want to show you guys a little technique here. I call this the preformed hook. So I've got this branch that's sitting here all by its lonesome, right? I need to get really beautiful movement on this because this is going to be one of the most important pieces on the tree to define this movement. Let me show you where this is at. So this is going to be boom, boom. Setting the tone for the design of this tree over here on this side, okay? I don't have another piece to pair it to, and what a lot of us would be tempted to do is to run this across this trunk, wrap it up, and tie it to here. That would absolutely create the most hideous, ugly, horrible decision that you could make across the front of the tree, screwing up bark and leaving wire all along the way, okay? As opposed to that, I'm going to use this on this backside, and I'm going to preform a hook very nice and tight. Watch how I sculpt this. To just hook around the shoulder of this branch, okay? So I'm going to just make a nice little hook, just like so, to hook around the shoulder of that branch. Now, I'm going to taste test it here. Okay, that feels like that's going to be really nice. I want that to be snug, but I don't want it to be damaging. Now, notice, if I try to bend it here, it's going to rub against that branch, and it's going to scar. So I'm just going to take this off. I'm going to use my pliers here, and I'm going to create just a nice little, just a nice, smooth little bend right there. Going in with the contour of the trunk in mind. Now, notice how that creates that beautiful little pocket that lays right into that divot right there. Watch what I'm going to do. I'm going to lower this, so I want to be coming across the top of that branch, okay? See how tight that is, how smooth that wire is? Now, watch my offhand here. I'm going to be holding in, holding in, holding in, because that wire is a living organism, and it wants to move, okay? Making sure I got that locked, and then I start to support all along this. Now, notice where I'm using my hand on this thicker gauge. Everybody says, I can't use gauges that thick. Oh, no, you absolutely can. I was able to teach one of my 70-year-old female students who said, I have arthritis in my hands. There's no way I can use 6-gauge. Teach her how to use 6-gauge just by focusing her energy on the edge or the tip of this wire and using leverage to be able to create the kind of force that you need, right? Now, getting out onto these finer pieces, I would say that's where probably it stops. But that leverage, and I always, you guys will always see in my structural wiring, I always have a fairly long piece left over. That's because if you don't have that, there's no way you can apply structural wire well, okay? I get it to where I want it to stop. I always stop across the bottom because if we go down, I want to pick that tip back up, support in the shoulder here, down from the shoulder, up, maybe another down to create some interesting movement, okay? Maybe I'll bring that towards the front a little bit because that's a big piece there. Yeah, I like that. I really, really like that, okay? That sets that tone right there, that angle, okay? Now, we talked about last week in the nursery stock series, establishing that angle and carrying that angle through the design. We have a little bit of a nuance here. Because these branches over here are so low, they're up a little bit and this one's down a little bit. We will have to reconcile that at some point. Maybe this goes and this fully drops down over the top of it. It isn't going to happen today, but maybe we set the tone for that just having seen that so that we prepare ourselves to be able to do that exact thing. And I'm pretty sure this is going to go in the future. Okay. Adrian's wondering if you could talk more about the spacing in your wiring technique. Adrian says, I'm under the impression that the spacing would impact the tensile strength. Is that correct? Spacing would impact the tensile strength. Right. So, boy, that's a big term. When you look at copper, copper is a series of diamonds that are, when it's annealed, are all aligned. Okay. So, the second that you bend copper, you start to change the alignment of all of those diamonds, right? And this is what causes it to work harden, right? The more misaligned copper gets, the more hard it gets, right? So, if you laid this across this branch and you bent it, you would be bending the branch as little as it possibly needs to be bent to bend the wire, as little as it possibly needs to be bent to work harden the wire, the maximum amount for that distance of bend, okay? When we start to apply it in a coil, the tighter the coil, the more of the wire is bent, which means the more we've got to bend the branch to bend that already bent wire, right? So, we extend that from that 45-degree angle, which is just fundamentally easier to explain, but not necessarily functional. We extend it to that 55, 60, which bends the wire less, puts less wire on the branch, and allows us to move the branch less to bend the wire to hold the bend, right? And that's the fundamental aspect of it. So, whether that keys into tensile strength or not, I could not tell you. So, I go down, I go down, I always come back up, right? When we go down, tips always come back up towards the light. This is fundamental, fundamental, particularly for the orthodox style. If you go down, you must come back up. Another one of these preformed hooks. Just a little bit. So much to teach about bonsai. You know, people say, had Mr. Kimura taught you, could you have finished your apprenticeship in less than six years? Maybe, maybe, but he did teach me. He taught me. He taught me by forcing me to do the work and learning from my mistakes. And maybe that was actually more legitimate than teaching me by telling me and giving me that knowledge, right? But when you start to look at all of the different situations that I'm encountering just in the structural wiring of this singular Scots pine, right? And then you apply this across every single tree that you guys will be handling, okay? When you look at how you clean out, how you branch select, how you design, how you manipulate, how you form, how you style, how you choose, how you know, and that's just in the design and the technique. What about the horticulture? How you identify, how you fertilize, how you water? You recognize that bonsai, and even for this live stream, I've had a lot of people say, are you going to run out of things to talk about? Are you freaking kidding me? Never are we going to run out of things to talk about because this live stream is just scratching. We haven't even scratched the skin of bonsai with what we've shown you guys yet. I could show you structural wiring for the next year and not stop coming upon situations that I could teach you guys interesting techniques to be able to address and handle. I mean, that's the beauty of this whole thing is that it's just such a minefield of, and I don't want to do that, do I? I don't want to put a really nasty, I'm going to go ahead and do what I was going to do. I don't want to put wire across that. It'll look horrible. Such a minefield of things that you guys need to know to do this well. So are you considering where the scars are going to be, or what are you considering when you just backed off just then? So I was thinking, yeah, that's a good question. I was thinking about combining this branch to this branch, right? These two guys. But then I thought, man, I have to make a full turn and a half across this very visible piece of trunk, right? And even though this is a first styling, there is no styling in bonsai where you don't ultimately consider the visual quality of the tree. There is never a time where that is not your number one concern because think about this. Yes, this is just structural. And I will come back and wire secondary tertiary, not for you guys tonight. I'll give you a sample branch and then we're going to wrap it up, okay? But as far as the aesthetic, if I achieve the cleanest possible aesthetic this evening on this tree, the first styling, and then I achieve the cleanest possible aesthetic the second time I work it, and then I achieve the cleanest possible aesthetic the third time I work it, by the time I get to that third working, I've worked so hard on the aesthetic of the tree and made it look so good over those stylings that I have a showable tree. And this is how Mr. Kimura completely expedited the process of bonsai creation because every single time was maximizing it. Even if it is in its raw form, we're just establishing structure. We're still going to wire everything else to give it the most function in terms of photosynthetic efficiency. So that means that always, always, always am I thinking about how do I make this look as good as possible? It's going to sit in my garden at Moriah. I have to look at this for two years with this wire on. I have to be able to use this wire to recheck the growth next year. I don't want anything about this working to disrespect the quality of the material that we have our hands on here. And so I'm always thinking about aesthetics as well as function. And by clean, do you mean just clean wiring, good wiring technique? That's right. That's right. Good technique is clean work. Good technique is clean work. And again, you know, the idea that there is some excuse that removes the necessity for the work to look as good as it possibly can at any one time is exactly why people's bonsai don't look as good as a professional's bonsai over the course of that lifespan. Because what you hear a lot of people say is, ah, it doesn't matter. It's just structural wire. It doesn't matter. It's first styling. It doesn't matter. Excuses, excuses, excuses. It matters to the tree. It matters, right? It matters in the energy that you're investing in the work. That matters. It makes sense to invest the time to be able to have a beautifully wired, well-structured tree. And what would messy look like? Not like this. I don't know. Different angles, lots of gaps, tons of wire around the trunk. You wouldn't be able to hold those angles of drop. So when you guys watch me place the structure of this tree, I hope that you notice that everywhere that I move this, that that position is locked in. It's held. I'm not coming back and I'm not bending things two and three times, right? I may add another jog. I may add another little piece of movement. But I'm not sitting here fiddling around with the position of these branches, right? If I'm moving it, it's because I'm adding some value to the already created shape on that branch. That is good design. That is good technique. That is good, proficient bonsai practice. Does moving it around a bunch compromise the wire? Absolutely. It compromises the health of the tree. Because the more that you take, you know, if you guys just think about this, the more that you take this tissue and you bend it around, it turns into rubber. But what's happening below that is that tissue is just basically disconnected from that central stem. And we know from the creation of deadwood and the reduction of live vein in junipers, that generates shari. That generates deadwood, right? So if you apply the appropriate gauge to move this anywhere, you go down and out, and you lock that in, that's the best possible thing that you could do for that branch. And most people hold back on thick wire in the structural setting, because they say, ah, it feels a little bit, a little bit aggressive. I don't know if the tree will like that. No, that's actually the kindest you can be to that tree, okay? All right, let me show you guys where we're at here. I'll come out there and talk to you for a minute. Oof. See all those angles? The back one. Now you start to see this. Notice how this sticks out. Boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. And then this sticks out. Now if I drop that down, all of a sudden it fits in. It's crazy, right? It's crazy. So now we're up to the top. Now when I look at this, I look at this piece and I'm saying, okay, I got one, two, three. I've got three branches in the same location. Ah, maybe there's a fudge factor here because we've got a great space, and these two are at a higher elevation and this is at a lower elevation. Would this swell without this swelling or this junction swelling? Possibly, possibly, okay? I'm going to say for now, I'm going to go ahead and keep it to keep more photosynthetic mass. It gives me a back branch. It gives me a side branch. But ultimately, and Arthur, if you can zoom in on this, okay? This is not a high-quality branch here. There's no interior budding, no interior ramification. If I had to choose between the two, just in terms of branch selection, notice the interior pieces here that I have. Notice the shape that I've got here. This is a far superior branch. I'll keep them both tonight, 60% in addition, right? By the time this tree is done, one of these two will be gone, and I'm guessing it's a structurally inferior one in the next five years. Okay, so I'm going to finish setting this structure. I'm going to wire out one of these bottom branches and show you guys what a fundamental branch on an informal upright single-flush short-needle pine would look like where we finish it out. And then we're going to talk about those designs, those branches that will go in the future, those branches that will go in the future, those branches that will stay, that direction of that apex and those decisions, and then we're going to wrap it up for the night. Does that sound good? Sounds good. Yeah, tight. Brian is wondering if you would treat aluminum wire with the same degree of coiling. I definitely would. I definitely would because you don't gain any more strength by coiling it tighter. You still have to bend the branch more the tighter that you coil it. I would still treat it the same, right? When we do on our deciduous tree, it looks better, it functions better. All right, let's get rid of some of this mojo here and come back and prune this one. It's a tough gig to try and remove that top piece because I would imagine this is my eventual apex. I like to do this when I'm going to do a little more work. So I'm going to go ahead and get rid of some of the stuff that's going to go in there. I'm going to go ahead and get rid of this branch that's going to go in there. I'm going to get rid of this branch that's going to go in there. And I'm going to put this up right here. This is the right length of the branch. So I'm going to do this here. eventual apex. So we'll save three there. I'm going to save three at this. I think this will be an apex. One of these two will be the eventual branch. Tom has a question about the structural wiring. Tom's wondering if you would hook a branch and go around the trunk and then wire that same branch that you hooked. There is a way to do what Tom is talking about, and that is something that we'll encounter in a future stream. I know exactly what you're saying. No, I wouldn't hook it, go around the trunk, and wire the same branch, but I would carry the same wire out to the same branch using both ends of it. That's the quickest way, and I don't want to burn a lot of time on that because there's not an instance on this where I get to show that, but there will be in the future, and I will. Definitely bring attention to that. It's kind of fun to be creating an orthodox style tree. Mr. Kimura always said this is the most challenging style. Why is that? Because it has to be the most perfectly proportioned. There's no exceptions. Junior's in the stream. You in it, Junior? Deep? Deep. Arthur? I'm just trying to get your attention. It's harder to achieve a perfect proportion as opposed to something with asymmetry? Yeah. Think about that. Just stop for a moment and think about that. You have orthodox that's based on a proportion of design, right? You can either maximize that or totally botch that. To be able to maximize that every time that you sit down with an orthodox piece of material... Yeah. ...there's a difference in the way you apply it. I think that's the difference. ...you can really use that to build a style. Does that make sense? Yeah. Because you're actually recreating something that already exists with a different piece of material each time. How do you conform that material to that style? Hmm. Now, I'm not saying that I necessarily believe it, but I am saying that he felt that way after having styled several what? Names. Names. Names. Names. Names. Names. Names. Names. Names. Names. you know, tens of thousands of trees, dude probably knew. Probably had a good idea. I'm guessing Mr. Kimura, if I were going to ask one person, he would be the one. Is there such a focus on balance and symmetry and perfect proportions in the traditional trees because the Japanese culture wants to invoke that feeling of calm that you speak to? I think it's calm. I think it's quiet. I think it's centered. I think balance is a big part of that. I think bone size goal. You know, when you talk about the traditional art forms of Japan, you're talking about art forms that originated back in the days of the samurai where you had a lot of warring clans. You had a lot of violence. And the people that promoted those traditional art forms were the ones that were striving to support, to seek a balance and try and find some, you know, reprieve from that, from that aggression and that violence, right? And so to find that stillness, to find that quiet, to find that ability to just relax and calm down, still a very, very, very, very big part of Japanese culture. I mean, you're talking about Tokyo is one of the most densely populated, you know, in the world. Japan as a landmass, one of the most densely populated places in the world. And it's hard for us to comprehend that being in the Western world because, you know, we got space. Like, that's one of the things that we have the most of. We got space. Well, in Japan, you know, the size of California, landmass the size of California has 125 million people. Or, yeah, 125 million? 125? How many people we have? 350 million? United States, 350, 330, 340? Last census? We're in there. Somewhere in there. Literally half the population of the United States in the landmass of California. That's Japan. Sums it up. Give me that quiet. Give me that reprieve. Thank you. Alex is wondering if you could point out any flaws you currently see with this tree. Oh, yeah. I'm going to point them all out. I'm going to point them all out. I'm going to point them all out. Don't worry, Alex. We're about ready to tear it apart. I'm going to take this off because this is now not necessary. I don't need it. I have fallen in love with this tree, though. This always happens, you know? I'm like, I got to do this. It's kind of informal upright. It's going to kind of be lame, you know? And then you get into it and you start really digging in. You're like, oh, this is going to be badass. This is going to be an amazing tree. Okay, here we go. I'm going to come back to you guys here. It looks like that back branch here. Okay, so notice the proportion that's forming here. Notice how long this is here. Notice that we don't have anything here. So this is a perfect opportunity to just go ahead and shift this. Shift that position. Bring some of this over to here. That also is going to guide some of my selection at the tip here. Arthur, come in close for me. Okay, so now I can come back in. Junior, are we in tight? Okay, so I can come back in here. I can take that strong shoot out. Now I've got this real weak one and these two medium ones. I'll take out that weak one and I'll just look to lay those out laterally right there. Coming back into here, I probably need a little bit of length since I switched this, but I'm still going to take out the strongest to start transitioning the strength. Okay, and I'm going to take out that bottom piece and now I lay those out laterally there and there. That's a beautiful structure right there. See, that decreased that proportion. Now, I also have all of this length right here. Okay, and I've got these really nice, small, fine guys here. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take this out. Take that center out and then I'll flare these guys right here. That'll be a beautiful, nice little pad here. The reason I need to shorten here is because I'm short here. So in the future, I'll need to shorten here and I'll also need to shorten here. Okay, now when I look at this whole thing and I start digging into this design, areas that are a problem. Ouch, there we go. Got a needle. Areas that are a problem. This does not feel good. This branch does not feel good. Feels like a rabbit's tail almost. Like, you know, the rabbit's here. It's a little tail. I don't like this because it does extend this outer bend here and almost, you see that, Troy? Yeah. It's like protruding out. It's like elongating that bend. I see the potential for this swelling on this shoulder to create inverse taper right here. This will be one of the first branches to go, probably as soon as next year, right? Now, I also am not a huge fan of this because it's coming right from the inside. Now, this isn't structurally a flaw. If I just rotate this for you guys, you see that it actually comes out of the backside of that bend. So it's not even connected with that. It's not going to create a structural flaw, but when you guys look visually at the front of that, it actually, it emerges. Do you see that? See that right there? That's a weird little piece of design, right? Still nice, though. The foliar mass is nice right here. We need to find a better way to represent that. The better way to represent that is actually this branch right here swung into that position from a lower point that doesn't create that space on that interior bend. It'll be a far superior branch, okay? So I know this branch is eventually going to end up here. I know this one's going to go. And I know this one's going to go. I'm guessing this one goes next year. I'm guessing this one takes two to three years to go. I'm guessing this one will have developed enough to swing in there as a nice small pad as this is built up top. And that's probably where we're going to be, right? Now, as you guys are looking there, I'm looking at this branch and I see this being very awkward. This is a branch that we're holding for foliar mass just to keep photosynthesis moving forward. This will absolutely go next year. And as a result, this branch back here, which actually has tighter ramifications, far better movement, far better structure, will just swing over, be kept nice and short so that you pick up. When you guys are looking from there, you need to pick up a little bit of visual mass right here so that your eye doesn't move past the trunk. This makes the trunk look bigger, right? This branch right here and this branch right here, boom, boom, number one and number two for priority, okay? Now, do we, and this is the big discussion, do we push this branch on the bottom in and run this branch here in? Do we push this branch out so that we create a little bit of interest even inside the orthodox design? Because there's nothing saying that orthodox has to be this is the longest and then this second longest and then back. That's not orthodox design, right? Orthodox design is to say we're here, we have a counter here, we have depth in the back, we have here, we have a counter, we have the rear, here counter rear, here counter rear to whichever direction we're moving. Now, we said, listen, the way we nullify design is by taking this apex back over the center even though we picked this up and brought the visual weight back towards center, we move this apex away off of center, still maintain that little bit of Mirai quality to the design. I feel like another way to maintain Mirai quality to the design is to get my elongation out of this branch and push this branch in. This is very much a Kimura technique. Run people's eye out, force them to move back in and generate that inconsistency in the silhouette that gives you length as the play for visual interest. Even inside the orthodox length out, in, out, in, create that depth, create that length, create that space, that gives the tree a lot of value. I see that being a key to this being one step above your common informal upright style. Is that why it leans so far to the, or it's coming so forward? Or will that change when you repop? Well, so let's look at this. So if we're looking from the side, you guys are now looking directly from the side, and you notice this big bow forward. Now, the apex hopefully will stop right here and not be any farther forward than this. This is very standard for an inclination of a Japanese informal upright style tree, right? And it's interesting. Whenever I work across the Western world, people say, oh, the tree's too far forward. I want it standing back up. But do you want somebody when you meet them to be like, hey, give me a hug, or do you want them to be like, nice to meet you, right? Which feels right? It feels more engaging, right? And I think one of the things that Mr. Kimura's trees do to viewers, I think one of the things that a lot of Japanese trees do to viewers, I think one of the things that Murai trees do for viewers is they engage you. They force you to come into them, right? They're inviting to be looked at. That is a big part of design, and that's accomplished with that forward lean, right? So I feel like that's actually a merit of the tree. Okay. So, so far, we've identified four branches that are going to be removed over the next three years. This one's going to be immediate, right? Again, I'm going to come back to this. This one's going to be immediate. This one's going to be pretty immediate. This one will be two to three years down the road and swing this one over, right? We'll push this one in. We'll pull this one out. We'll build up these back branches. We do potentially have an option to be made up top. We'll hopefully pull the apex in, and we are going to have an absolutely stunning dialed, informal upright tree in an orthodox style that still has a little bit of design flavor because we manipulated a few of those elements, just a little spice on that tomato sauce to make it something a little bit better than rice-aroni or what is that? What's the pasta ravioli, pasta? Chef Boyardee. Oh. There it is. We got to go past Chef Boyardee. Okay. Last piece. I'm going to wire out one of these branches for you guys to show you how I finished this design, and then we're going to field the last questions for the evening and let you guys rock out while we all go and hopefully stick our head in an ice bath. Greg has a classic John Naka question. Are you styling this tree to look like a bonsai or like a tree? This is a bonsai, man. This is a bonsai. Because it's so traditional? I mean, so again, you know, like one of the biggest, one of the misunderstandings in the Western world that's been taught from the beginning of bonsai is left, right, back, left, right, back. Okay. That's not, that's, hmm. That's not what's happening here. Right? Orthodox is length, balance, back, length, balance, back. That's not left, right, back. That's length, balance, length, balance, length, balance with depth. Okay? So we've got a lot mixed into that beyond left, right, back. That's an oversimplified version of what's happening. Okay? But when we start to talk about that, people say cookie cutter. They say, oh, that's so uninteresting. Cool. Can you do it? Can you do cookie cutter? Can you make something that looks that odd? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Awesome. While still being very consistent with a style that's been developed over the past 700 years of bonsai. Hmm. I mean, I see the merit in orthodox. I personally don't find it to be the most enjoyable style. And yet here we are creating a very orthodox, informal, upright, pinus sylvestris. And I'm in it as deep as I was the juniper styling last week. As deep. For sure. Yeah. Adrian's wondering, when in doubt, should we gauge up or gauge down wire? Depends on if you're in secondary tertiary or if you're in structure. If you're in structural, which is the branches coming from the trunk, that point of origin, if in doubt, gauge up. Because you want to be able to set that structure. Anywhere you want that branch to move, you need to have the power to move it there. Okay? If you're in secondary tertiary, right, and you're saying, I'm creating this nice branch pad, you probably don't want to be gauging up when in doubt because you're probably going to be over-gauging and potentially doing a lot of damage to the branch. Okay? So there's a difference. Structural, gauge up. Secondary tertiary, when in doubt, probably go with the lighter of the two that you're conceptualizing. Now, that's a change because I used to tell everybody, gauge up, gauge up, gauge up, and then they would gauge up and crush the crap out of their secondary and tertiary branches. Half the tree would be dead, and I was just like, man, that was bad. That was a bad call. That was a bad call on the teacher's part. So moving through all of these needles, I do like to clear a little bit of a path. Now, I want to leave these needles intact when I'm wiring this because this is where the epicenter of all of those buds are going to come. When this does start to bud back. So I don't want to just pluck this and denude this, and we've already removed so many branches. When you guys do the structural setting, you do remove a lot of branches. Now, I hope what you guys are recognizing is I'm leaving branches that I don't actually want and don't actually find a lot of merit in the design for to use them as photosynthetic resources to build the branches that I do want. And this is a big part of Mr. Kimura being able to expedite the process of development. Because he would keep things, knowing he didn't want them, knowing he didn't need them. He would keep them just to use them, and I always called them donkeys. He would use them as donkeys to pull the photosynthetic resources through the tree, and that would actually encourage and increase the resources feeding the roots, and the roots are feeding the other branches that you're trying to develop. Use those donkey branches as much as you possibly can, and when they're no longer necessary or they start to create a structural flaw or the branches around them develop to the point that you want them, get rid of them. Get rid of them. I've given you multiple ways to heal wounds, remove branches from the trunk. I've given you ways to stop sap flow. I've given you ways to delineate which branches you remove before you even conceptualize design. We've talked about selection of front. We've talked about handling of structural wire. We've talked about laying out of traditional design. You guys literally, between last stream and this stream, are walking away with a data bank of knowledge about bonsai that I don't know you'll ever get anywhere else. I don't think anybody's going to give this to you. Hardcore. Hardcore. Hardcore. Hardcore. Alex is actually wondering if you could walk us through your technique for weeding through the wire between the needles and the candle. Sure. Arthur, you got me in close here? Tight. Okay, so I'm just cleaning off some of those initial ones, right? Okay, watch closely here. Right, and you'll cross the wire. Don't tell. Okay, so I've cleaned off to this point. Now, if I know where this path is coming, I've already got this node or this space here where that junction exists, and I'm just kind of guiding that wire up through that. I'm going to hit that node. Now, as I come around the bottom, I'm going to create a little bit of a space off of the bottom. I'm going to come up through here. Once I get to here, I'm going to create another space in here. So I'm not afraid necessarily to be removing needles. I'm just not stripping the whole branch of needles. So it's not that I'm weaving, right? I'm just systematically and strategically cleaning off the branch where I need those spaces to be able to proficiently and very aesthetically apply that wire so it functions, okay? And this is a big deal because the worst possible work that you can do on a pine is crushing a bunch of needles and having a bunch of needles trapped below. Now, notice how my hand is always moving up from the back. Do you see this as I support? So I'm never grabbing here because that crushes needles. As long as I'm moving up from the back, I'm pushing those needles forward, which doesn't break them. It just lays them against the branch. That's exactly how you're able to support this as you're wiring. Either come from the bottom or come from the inside. Working out is what's going to protect those. Once I get up in here, I don't want to remove any further needles. I just kind of weave it through that last little piece, okay? All right, and then I'm just doing a little bit of soft movement. People put too much movement into your secondary tertiary branches. The actual movement needs to be done in the structure of the tree. Okay? So notice how fundamental, and I'm just going to pull this back. Notice how fundamental and simple that is laid out. Into the main, into the main, out to the space. Into the main, out to the space. Into the main, out to the space. And now we've got that perfect fan shape. Bottom should be flat. That sets up the tone for the creation of your pad, right? From this point forward, we are maximizing photosynthetic efficiency with that fan shape laid out, flat bottom delineation between pads. This is how we're going to style the rest of this tree, and we're going to let this tree rock out. Feed it aggressively to get maximum amount of development, maximum amount of resources being produced, and this tree will start to shine very, very quickly. Okay, let me point this towards the front for one last look. Begin feeding aggressively. Kurt's wondering what the fertilizer scheme, like a more detailed explanation of that. Fertilizer scheme. So right now, fertilizer scheme for us is, we were having extremely mild temperatures, so we're like, hey, why don't we fertilize the garden real quick? And then all of a sudden, we're going to be hitting record temperatures this week, and we're like, ah, dang it. But we applied one more light feed of organic fertilizer to our trees about a week ago, and that's what's on this tree currently, is just one application of light application, right? So we're saying half tablespoon per pile, six to eight pellets. Light application of BioGold for all of our trees. I wouldn't recommend you guys going out and doing it if you're experiencing that heat wave, that most of the western portion of the country is. But if you're having milder temperatures this summer, your trees are growing well, or you had a late start to the spring, that was the motivation that encouraged us to do it. We're just going to have to manage our watering a little bit differently now that we have the fertilizer on there in this heat. Okay? So you notice the flatness here. We've got that established angle. Boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. Got that apex pulled off center slightly. We've got that trunk past vertical, past horizontal. Any more questions? I think we're good. Boom. All right, guys. You know, Mirai Live, I feel like I always summarize the stream with something probably unnecessary, but something that I kind of feel to be important. I speak a lot about American bonsai and bonsai design outside of the Japanese aesthetic. I still very much believe that you have to understand tradition to be able to deviate from tradition. And as people say, you have to know the rules to break them. I don't think it's rules, right? I think that there is a fundamental concept to design in proportion that creates a beautiful aesthetic in the Japanese model. And it's what has attracted most of us to bonsai. And I think that there are elements of that aesthetic that still play into more modernized or more natural designs in terms of their execution. I think you have to understand structural setting angles. I think you have to understand the design concepts that an informal, upright, orthodox style pulls in in order to be able to create something that deviates 180 degrees from it. And I hope that tonight you guys were able to see how these design elements were implemented, manipulated, tweaked, and get a lot more insight into how to handle not just a pine, but fundamental design in general so that you can take it home and apply it to your trees. That's what this stream is about, is expanding your ability to do bonsai well. And that means we've got to touch on every piece of this and how we handle it. But this stream tonight is a very fundamental piece of design for you guys to continue to refer to moving forward because there's a lot of knowledge that was put into this tree tonight. We thank you for the support. We love you guys very much. What was that, Arthur? Ah, ah, Thursday. Thursday, live stream. What time? Our Q&A? Noon. Live stream Q&A? Noon. Live Q&A. 90 minutes. We'll hammer down on your guys' questions. We'll see you guys there. Archive will be up Thursday. Thank you guys so much. Have a very good week. And if we don't see you Thursday, we'll catch you next week. 
