As you guys watch the live stream, you see this repetitive technique that I'm applying to wiring the structure of a tree, where I'm creating this hook and I'm connecting it to a point on the tree and I'm wiring a single branch with this preformed hook structural wire. I wanted to come back and I wanted to touch on this technique with you guys just to give you some sort of structure, some knowledge and concepts behind how we appropriately utilize the preformed hook in the structural setting of the tree's major primary branches. Now today I'm dealing with a dug fir. There's multiple ways and multiple reasons that we would use a preformed hook. We're going to explore all of them over sort of a series of feature content videos and today the one that I wanted to focus on is we've got this heavily barked branch, we've got one single structural branch that needs wire, we've got a whole lot of barked up older branches around that that aren't going to be able to be moved by the pairing of a structural wire and so that's a perfect opportunity to create a preformed hook that both functionally works and aesthetically looks good and it preserves the bark of that tree. Let's sort of step in here and take a look at what I'm talking about. Now I've got this major primary piece coming out here. Notice its thickness. Notice the really old flaky bark that's existing on that. Notice that it forks right here. Towards the end of the branch and this is a perfect opportunity to pair these two structural pieces that exist here and use a guy wire. You can see this guy wire hanging on from sort of a previous structural piece and we'll replace that. But we can pair this so that we can utilize this to actually set the structure. Now when we do that what ends up happening is we've got this singular branch here that we're saying, man, I don't want to wire this branch all the way down here to one of these trees. Notice this portion of our primary structure isn't going to give us any sort of function and if anything it's going to remove that bark and it's going to do damage to the age that gives this tree quality and character. As a result I'm looking at wiring this piece as a singular wire and I've got to figure out how do I anchor that to appropriately accomplish that work. This is where the preformed hook as a technique comes in. I look around this area. When I look around. Notice I've got a really nice solid gin here. I've got a fairly weak gin here and I've got a really weak gin very close to where this structural branch is emerging from the primary piece. As a result when we start looking at this sort of preformed hook technique we've always got to have a very solid point to anchor that wire so that it's capable of holding the stress and sort of the application of force that this branch is going to need to be effectively wired and controlled in terms of its shape. And in this situation I see this gin being extremely strong and probably our best option. So this preformed hook has to function number one and it has to look good number two. This is sort of that major point when we start to talk about how do we execute a preformed hook that we've got to really take a good look at and develop the craft and the technique around to actualize that function and aesthetics to be able to control and create an aesthetically pleasing hook. So this is the first step. So this is our next step. We've got to think about the initial structure of this branch. We've got to think about what is the starting point and then we've got to focus on the next step. So we're going to start off with a little bit of a combination of events for this singular branch on this heavily barked tree. I'm going to get a piece of wire. I'm going to show you guys some of the strategy behind that and then we'll look at that application to really hone in on how we apply and approach this situation. So as with any structural wire application we've got to be thinking about what are we trying to accomplish. Obviously we want to be lowering this branch from where it's located into this negative space that exists around it. But beyond that we've got to be thinking about what rotation. Do we need this wire to be applied at so that we're able to control this, work with the wire to push it into a specific direction? And what I see when I'm looking at this, if I want to rotate this branch into this space, and it's sort of presented with these pieces splayed this way, is I would like a counterclockwise rotation to be rolling into this space. And that gives me a big sort of initial step in terms of how am I going to be forming my preformed hook to give me the ability to lower and the ability to rotate in a counterclockwise direction. So I can be looking at this and thinking, okay, if I hook from this side, and I'm going to be wrapping around sort of clockwise in this direction, I would have to come underneath and reverse the roll of my wire in order to be able to accomplish that counterclockwise roll. In structural wiring, this is totally acceptable because the function is derived from the contact with the shoulder. You guys know that from the structural wiring stream. I could. I could also, however, give myself a counterclockwise roll from the very beginning by forming a preformed hook that hooks onto this piece from this side. Now, there's an advantage to the initial concept of being on this side of the branch, and that is I would get a full rotation around this structural piece that would potentially give me more holding capacity. But there's another consideration that I have as well. Aesthetically, if I form this hook, I'm going to have far more contact and a far cleaner line as I approach that in terms of the hook and the rotation that follows the hook. So I gain more structure, I gain more function, and I have a more beautiful aesthetic, right? I'm going to show you both options so you can see exactly what I'm looking at, and then we'll come back and we'll do it the appropriate way with this piece of wire. When we're forming a preformed hook, function is achieved by this hook being as tight and as snug of a fit on that anchor point, whether it's a gin, whether it's a piece of deadwood, whether it's a living branch, as tight of a fit on the anchor point as possible. As a result, a good preformed hook isn't this sort of half-hearted, kind of roundabout, this'll hook on and then I'll crush it onto it later. That's not how we do a preformed hook. This is a very crafted technique in order to gain the function and the anchor point of that hook on that specific piece of deadwood or branch that we're trying to achieve that function from. So, when we do this, we're looking at this diameter, we're forming a very nice, beautiful arc in a hook, and we're trying to match up that diameter so that it gets as snug of a fit as possible, okay? Now, we talked about the first option potentially coming on this side. As I apply this to that gin, notice how that hook is really loose and really sort of sloppy in terms of its anchor on that point. That is not a good preformed hook, so I'll remove this, I'll bring this back, and I'm going to tighten this up just to get a little bit more function. Now, when I tighten it up, notice that sort of the tip of my crook has elongated. Now, when I apply this to this piece of deadwood, you're going to see that the wire starts to kind of hang over and starts to form a little bit of an unsightly aesthetic. Now, we're sort of violating that aesthetical concept of this needing to look good as well as function, so I'm going to bring this back. I've got that nice, snug fit. I've got a little bit of aesthetic flaw in it. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to bring it back and just trim that off to really create a beautiful functional and aesthetically pleasing preformed hook, okay? Now, by doing that, I know I've got a nice snug fit. I know I've got the aesthetic fixed up. Let's take a look at the strategy of approaching it from this side. Now, we said we would be following this clockwise motion, but we also said that we wanted that counterclockwise movement that was going to take place in the branch. So, we would be coming up and around and actually entering the branch from this side to achieve that change in rotation and get that counterclockwise movement to establish that function of the wire that we'd be applying. Okay, when we look at this, we notice that we've got a very beautiful aesthetic, that we've got a very functional application of wire. This feels like a very solid strategy, okay? Let's take a look at the other direction and see if that gives us maybe something even better. Again, I'm going to form that really beautiful functional preformed hook that's going to give me that nice snug fit on that gin. I'm going to come in and I'm going to make sure I've got a nice tight fit, okay? And then I'm going to be working out the nuances of where inside of this, where inside of this application do I find the space to achieve that counterclockwise motion? Where do I find sort of the secure snug fit on that gin? Where does the wire start to look aesthetically beautiful and functional? And when we start to look at it from this direction, we notice, wow, that actually doesn't really work that well. We're going to be having a sort of a quarter rotation on this structural primary piece, of the branch before we get to this. That doesn't really give us a great holding capacity. We've got a much larger gap between the gin and the branch that we're going to see in the application of wire. So currently in this structure, this is a far lesser option for how we approach the preformed hook than our original sort of concept of what might be better. Now, I've got another option inside of this. What if I take the hook and I rotate the hook to hook onto the other end? Or the other side of the gin? Does this change the function of the wire? Let's take a look. So I'm going to straighten this out. I'm going to undo the hook here. I'm just going to straighten out my wire. This is a test piece just to sort of find the function, find the aesthetic in this. Now notice I'm going to be applying the hook in a different direction. Originally we applied it where it hooked from the bottom. Now we're going to apply it where it hooks from the top. So now I've hooked from the top. And I come back in and I find that. And notice now how much cleaner the aesthetic is. Now it's inside of that crotch so the space is much smaller. It's got a nice, tight, secure, snug fit at the very base of the gin. But we still only have that quarter turn. Now when I look at both options that are giving me good potential solutions, both of them involve the hook being over the top of the gin, not coming on the underside of the gin. This is information I need to process. So I'm going to come back in the pre-form hook application and say, OK, my hook is going to hook from this side, not this side. And now I've just got to decide, do I come around the branch from the underside or do I go up and over the top to achieve that function and that aesthetic? When we look from coming from the underside, we see we only have a quarter turn and that we're probably not going to have the function that we would ideally like to have for that to be exactly what we want. So I'm going to come back to our original option and I'm going to come around the structural branch. I'm going to come onto this side and I'm going to change the rotation of my structural wire. This feels like it gives me a beautiful aesthetic, a great attachment to the gin with the pre-formed hook and it allows me to change the rotation to accomplish that counterclockwise movement that's going to allow me to position that branch where I want it to go. This kind of decision making, this kind of interpretation of all of the opportunities is a paramount component of utilizing the pre-formed hook effectively. And if we're not going through strategizing about it and I'm not showing you that process, then I'm not giving you the backbone that you need to be able to utilize this technique effectively. It is not a haphazard technique. It is not an about technique. It is a concise strategy based technique that gives us the function and ability to achieve structural integrity with beauty while only wiring one branch to an anchor point. So I'm going to come back to the bigger, thicker piece of wire and we're going to apply it with a 6 gauge. Significantly greater, significantly more challenging and see how this goes. Alright, so we've got our 6 gauge here, the gauge wire that's going to give us the ability to move this branch wherever we want it to go. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to set my pre-formed hook really nice, clean, tight. Now this is a much thicker gauge of wire than sort of our test experiment wire was so I'm going to have to make sure that this seats well. We determined that the function and the aesthetic that looked best was going to be to hook from this side, the bottom side of the gin, and to come over the top of the branch. Now I've got a little bit of slop. Notice I've got the slop in there and I want this hook to be right up against the base of that gin but it needs to be snug. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to pull it back out and I'm going to work this hook until it gives me that snug, nice, tight connection that's going to give me function in terms of the pre-formed hook. Again, I start to see this giving me that length that's going to be extending beyond the gin. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to trim this down just so that we head that off in case this gives me that beautiful, nice, snug fit that we're looking for. A really nice, clean, beautiful pre-formed hook. Let's come back. I'm going to reattach this to the base and now I've got a really nice, I've lost that slop. So when I try to rotate laterally I'm not able to get that. Strong hook on that. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to lay this down really nice and clean and notice where my hands are that are supporting it now. Making sure that hook stays towards the base just the same as we would if we were pairing this to another branch structurally. I'm treating that hook and that support of that wire the exact same. If the hook is not tight, my hand is not strong enough to be able to anchor that hook without the leverage of the rest of the wire that we would have if we were tandem with a branch. My hand does not have the strength so that's why it's so important to have that hook be snug. I'm going to carry this around. I've got a little bit of branching that I'm going to have to work through. Very gently. We said we wanted that counterclockwise rotation so I'm going to be coming up on this side of the branch here nice and snug and then I'm going to change that rotation. Now a lot of people are going to say man, what about that space? I thought that it had to be right up against the branch. Again, I want to come back to the idea that every time that we apply structural wire there are all kinds of nuances that we can utilize. What we're going to be doing is teaching you guys those techniques and those situations and those nuances just like this preformed hook with a heavily barked tree and all of the considerations that are going into it so that we give you guys the tools to build your belt. I promise you this is going to be highly functional when we're finished and it's going to be the best solution to have protected the bark, to maintain the function and apply a single structural wire that helps us set this Doug fir in the right direction. So now the rest of the wire since that hook is nice and solid notice that it's not moving. Everything is anchored, everything is tight and as important, everything looks beautiful. This is a big part of being able to adapt to all of these conditions that we get inside of all of these varying varieties of trees to be able to accomplish this bonsai technique, form and beauty that we're all aspiring to be able to build our skills and expand on. I'm going to carry my structural wire just the same as if I had wired it in tandem down to a point where I'm capable of now transitioning to my next junction of branches and now I'm going to execute the bend to set this structure. Now notice again, I'm going to be supporting the hook at the base just the same as if this were a tandem branch. We always support at the shoulder that allows me to execute a nice downward force. I can then rotate with the counter clockwise to move it into the structure where I wanted it to be leveling off that sort of point of origin and we've got the sort of totality, finality and realization of what we were trying to accomplish. This is just one example of the many opportunities that we have the ability to use the preformed hook in structural wire setting to be able to achieve an aesthetically beautiful and a very functional application of structural wire. Tuck this into your tool bag, come back when you've got a situation of this scenario where you're dealing with a bark you don't want to damage and branches that wouldn't benefit from the application of wire yet you need to set that singular piece. This will be there for you guys to utilize throughout your sort of bonsai application of techniques to give you a higher quality product that both functions and looks beautiful. Thanks guys. 
