Welcome back, Mirai family. Today, what we're going to focus on is taking cuttings for propagation purposes. We're going to do this from the standpoint of something that is more or less a pre-bonsai that is at that stage of further development, and we want to try to save pieces of it that are useful to us versus a standard tree that we're taking cuttings from for production, as in we want multiples of this. It's not a design consideration or anything like that. We just, we're producing. Both of these trees were taken from cuttings. This here would be closer to a three to five-year cutting. This would be five-year range as well. To give you a little background of where we are, what we're doing, this is D&O Nursery. We're in Ocklawaha, Florida, about an hour and a half north of Orlando. So for me, the parameter that I'm going to set is going to be a three to five-year range. So for me, the parameter that I'm going to set is the same for you. You just tweak it based on your seasonal, as in maybe the months of the year where the temperature is appropriate. For me, May, right now, my nighttime temperatures are consistently staying above 60. So if you look at the extended forecast for your weather, your nighttime temperatures are the things that you want to use as your sustained temperature for propagation. So anything above 60 degrees, especially when we get in the 70-degree range, the roots love that. They want to grow. The tree is prime. The other part of that is we've already gone through that initial spring flush, where in my case, I've taken the trees back from that spring flush. They're beginning to harden off and they're beginning to send out new juvenile foliage. Here in Florida, this can happen three, four times a year. Other places, maybe once. Our growing season is more or less eight months a year. I would feel pretty comfortable with saying eight months versus nine to 10. We get temperatures here that are as warm as Key West in Florida. We also get temperatures that can be consistent with lower Alabama or Georgia. Just an interesting place in Florida. How that relates to you is you guys are anywhere in the world, as far as I know. So that parameter, as far as nighttime temperatures and the actions that follow, you can do that where you are. Maybe that's May for me. Maybe that's March for you. Maybe it's June, July for you. Take the information and fit it within your zone. The first thing is to make sure we have the correct materials to begin this process. Have a plan. Know which trees you're going to use and get the materials that are appropriate for it. The most common type of hormone that is used in cuttings is a powder. They come in different strengths of a one, two, and three. The difference of one, two, and three, one is more common in the sense that I can use it for roses. I can use it for garden trees. I can use it for garden trees. I can use it for shrubbery. Number two, you're going further into semi-hardwood cuttings. Then when you get into number three, then we're talking about deciduous material that is going to be done after fall and then leaves drop. So three is not something that we can do under these conditions. This is something we need for winter. It's eliminated. Number two, there are some specifics there on the depth of hardwood. Us being in Florida and being able to really get away with a lot by having a longer growing season, one is very much applicable to virtually everything for the purpose of what we're going to show you today just so you can get the general concept and idea of how to do this going forward for wherever you are we're going to concentrate on number one I'm going to give you the chance to see a boxwood something that is common around the world a juniper also common and then we're going to use a water jasmine right here religiosa as a tropical version of that typically with things like ficus I don't need hormones for stuff like this these things are almost like epiphytes in nature cut it drop it it's usually going to root in terms of mass production and I don't want to waste my time I'm going to be a little bit more specific of where I make those cuts but if you're just trying to quickly matter mass produce with volume and a potential style or guidance in the tree that is something that you can do once they get larger but the basis of a cutting is very small it's a small amount of roots we're talking this particular container right here this is a 10 inch bulb pan I feel pretty comfortable in putting two dozen cuttings three dozen cuttings right there it's fine the amount that I would typically add to this pot would be anywhere from two to three dozen the material inside the pot is perlite you can find this at most common garden centers really you should be able to find it anywhere it is volcanic glass when it gets wet it is incredibly good for retaining that moisture providing a super humid environment you notice I said retaining moisture but not being sopping wet this will float if it has too much water so it maintains the right amount of humidity the right amount of moisture in the pot that makes the roots have the oxygen that they need and the moisture that they need to grow the hormone is that little assist that we need to kick off that tree to just start growing where you take a cutting matters it matters on the type of tree the type of tissue some things we can take from the basis of a leaf this is a loose example where you know completely green cutting these oftentimes were ignoring the species here we're just talking about the concept this being green at times will often produce roots more predominantly than something that's a little more hardened off however these have the lower chances of survival if we're talking about you know a general cutting for a ficus and we're being specific so on a ficus I can take a cutting virtually anywhere I can take something that is this big around and it will make no difference it will likely root exactly how you want it to if you're giving it the right conditions so just to give you a visual perspective of what we're looking for on different species this happens to have the right amount of growth where you can really see the transition of this color so here this is what we consider to be green tissue so if you're taking green wood cuttings this is what we're looking at this right here is what we would call semi ripe tissue you're starting to see this transition move through the tree like the colorization down here would be closer to what we would call a hardwood cutting. Even though this is a ficus that color example is absolutely relatable to a different type of tissue it's just not necessary on a ficus I can just to make this incredibly simple as far as the amount of growth on the top of a cutting you do want to slightly control the amount of auxins there you don't want there to be so many leaves that the rate of transpiration is faster than the root development can be where I would necessarily need a rooting hormone for this boom tropical I hate to break everybody's heart but if you have a ficus it more than likely came from a cutting the reason I say that ficus is a fig so the figs that they produce are not the kind that it's like oh great I can make some jam and jelly out of it they're more of the type that is simply reproduction they are an inverted flower and they take each variety of ficus some may share but most varieties of ficus require a particular variety of wasp to pollinate that fig for it to actually sprout as a seed and produce a plant so most of the ficus that you're going to see in almost every setting are going to be simply an operation taking cuttings popping a couple leaves off and boom right in a pot something that's small that can be done something that large that can be done and that is literally once we allow that fig to grow we're going to be able to make a lot of feed out of it and then we're going to have a little bit of a fertilizer that we can use to help it grow and the first thing we do is we eliminate some of those leaves kind of balance it out there you'll find some applications where some folks will do this I'm not as crazy about cutting leaves whether it be on an established tree or cutting simply because of the pathogens they can't invite other issues into the tree I just assume reduce the amount of leaves and not actually cut the leaves this is a preference that I have found to be successful 60%, 70%, 80% success, well then it's broken somewhere and I need to readjust my application, my materials, or something of that nature. But mostly, especially if we're talking about ficus, you can produce these by accident. So, as far as cuttings go, this is pretty general for something, say, like a ficus, but what happens when it's not a ficus and it doesn't just fall down and begin rooting? We're gonna jump to a different tree. I did explain what the different hormones were as far as a one, two, and three and what they're used for. Don't freak out, you don't have to memorize that. There's a little something that we use in the world that most people ignore and it's called instructions. Turn the bottle around and the directions clearly will tell you what this purpose is for, what type of tissue it's for. Simply read the directions, you don't have to freak out and be like, I don't know chemistry, I don't know what in the world should I pick a one, two, or three. It's on the bottle. So, as far as how I transport around when I'm doing it, a lot of times when I'm taking cuttings, in me, in nursery production, in bonsai, typically, not to sound crude or funny, but you're a grower or you're a shower. And what I mean by that is a lot of times people are either growing material for bonsai or they're styling material for the purpose of show. There's very few places that do both. A lot of times, it's one way or the other, because it is a massive time consumption to be able to style, move trees forward from a design perspective, but then also propagate them at the same time. The reason is, is when spring growth hits and you need the time to work out those design aspects, Florida based, that is also the time when it's like propagation season. So, you really have to manage your time and do this successfully, otherwise you're failing in two ways. So, I would encourage you to make sure you have the right materials before you jump into this. It's not difficult to take cuttings. It's difficult to manage all the things you're doing at the same time, if you're doing cuttings, air layers, as well as bonsai at large. So, how I travel around with this for ease, because I'm doing so many, these little baby food jars or garlic jars or any of that kind of stuff, you can recycle them this way. I put a small amount of powder in here. If I'm using a lot of speed, if I'm using a lot of species, if I have stuff that is moist, dripping, I don't need to be taking every cutting and putting it into my main jar and potentially putting other things in there with it. So, I carry this around. It's easy to dip the cuttings. I try to keep my perlite containers for the actual root production part of cuttings, separated by species. Sometimes I may have two or three of these for something that is a hot demand for bonsai. I need a lot of them. Or if I'm preparing for something long down the road, then I'm going to put as many of these as possible. Your best time, I did mention, is kind of after the spring growth occurs. At that time, things are kind of hardening off and you can really see the color variations in the trees and know where to make that cut. Some trees, it doesn't matter. The first one that we're going to do, aside from a ficus where it doesn't need a rooting hormone, is a Harlandii. It's a Harlandii boxwood. These have become wildly popular in the last few years. They're a small leaf, fast growing boxwood. A cutting from this I can take up to near pencil size without considering internodes, without considering really where the growth is. A lot of times if you're thinking of a hardwood cutting, which is not something that we can do here now because this Japanese maple would need to be deciduous, but the point, the concept is there as far as where to make that cut. So a lot of trees when you're taking like a hardwood cutting that's something that is not deciduous, that you can do at other times of the year besides when the leaves have dropped, is right here. This is a Japanese maple. Propagation of these, this is very easy to see because you're looking for internodes. You're looking for that place where there's the accumulation of nutrients and that vascular system. So in order to make a proper cutting here, if this were leafless, during the wintertime, I would make my cut just below that internode. That is where I'm going to get the most chance of success for roots. Right there. How I would proceed, I don't need that branch. I could eliminate part of the rest of the branch. This is just a cutting. It's an example. You don't need a whole ton of leaves. This is very adequate for a hardwood cutting during the wintertime. Again, for that type of tree, I would use a number three hormone. For the sake of exercise, because we're tossing this and I want you to be able to see it because it's not wintertime, it is this simple. Bam. Powder on the tip. This is not compact. I do not push this down. I scoop it in there, level it off. I do not water it ahead of time. It is just moist. I place it right in there like so. I don't try to push it all the way to the bottom of the pot. I just try to get it stable. If I have to put a lot in here and I'm putting them close together, I might stabilize this one while I push that one down just because I have OCD and I feel better when I do it. From here, if I fill this pot, at that point, I would give it a very light watering and that is the only time that I would hand water it throughout its entire course. The best place for these to go going forward is under a mister. Here in Florida, where I have an abundance of humidity, it is still not enough. Not only do I keep this in, we'll just say about a 30% amount of light, which means I have 70% shade cover. I don't want these to rapidly transpire. I don't. I want it to be enough to develop roots and still have leaves to continue growing and producing its own sugars. I'm not feeding this. I'm not supplementing this. I'm not giving it any multivitamins. I am dependent on what I leave with the tree to create those roots and still photosynthesize in a reduced light setting. That could be in the pot for anywhere from 30 days to 90 days. How do I know when this is ready, when this is rooted? For me, it's very simple. I keep these on the ground when they're under the mister. That way there's not an extreme amount of loss going out of the pot. It keeps it very humid because it's insulated on three sides, only allowing evaporation to occur here. When I set these on the ground and I want to know that they're ready, experience will tell you how many days is appropriate. If you're new to this and you're not sure and you don't want to disturb this because if we start disturbing this when the roots are very underdeveloped and they're not hardened off to any extent, they're going to break and they're going to shatter. So how I'm going to determine whether it's ready or not is very simple. I'm going to lift the pot and I'm going to look in these holes. I prefer bulb pans. Bulb pan meaning this right here, very little feet, holes are on the bottom as opposed to a grow pot that is tall, the holes are on the side. So when I lift this up, I should see tiny root fibers sticking out of the bottom. If they have penetrated this soil enough to grow out and seek out refuge in an even warmer environment such as the ground, then I know that I have enough roots to pull these cuttings out and put them into individual pots. That is the kickoff point. Some people in mass production, they may have a tray with a series of individual little cups, ranging from anywhere from five inches by three inches deep to something very small using rock wool. I have to produce a lot of these a year. We do maybe a hundred different species of cuttings every year and I may do multiple dozens of each. Doing that multiple times, it doesn't work for me. This is a surefire way to get it done. So that is a cold hardy cutting as an example because it's the wrong time of the year but you get the idea as far as where to cut the internodes. So jumping into something that internodes are irrelevant to taking the cutting, would be like a Harlandii boxwood. They're really the big thing that is the turn off. We can get a close up of this. So you can see here that the Harlandii has had very fissured bark. I think the proper name for that is it's rad. It's awesome. That is what makes them ridiculously unique compared to other boxwoods that I may or may not see it grow very much in a matter of years. This growth here, we're talking this is a month or two and these are fast growing trees. So in regards to taking cutting from it, this bark is another visual indicator as it is on many species on when is a good time to take a cutting. As I look at this branch, starting at the trunk, this bark is very thick. It's very fissured. It's very fluted. As I move up the tree, that becomes less and less. So where am I going to take the cutting? Where am I confidently going to take the cutting? I'm going to take it just above where that bark starts to get deep. So in that regard for me, right here, where it leaves the trunk, this is perfectly acceptable for a size cutting. Right there. That in terms of other plants, that could be literally like a two year growth as in I took a cutting two years ago and now it's at this size. Something like a Harlandii, I can produce that now and right away. And I'm going to eliminate some of this. I don't need all of this growth. My main thing is for this to be able to grow out. So a lot of this, those auxins that are at the tip, I can control those by just eliminating a little bit. And that will redirect that energy back into root development. That right there, that is an adequate cutting for a Harlandii boxwood. You know, this is almost pencil size. Perfectly acceptable for a boxwood of this variety. And it will grow almost unchallenged, unhinged, whatever you want to say it. It's nearly 100% success all the time. So I have eliminated a lot of the tips to control the auxin, put that energy back into the tree. Now I just need the rooting hormone. As described before, simple dip. Does not need to go very far up the tree. You could even knock some of that excess off there. It doesn't need all that. From here, as described before, this perlite is not saturated. It is only moist. It is not packed down. It's just leveled off. And I'm going to very easily push right down into the perlite. Done. All right. So now we have shown you the color transition on a ficus. We have taken a cutting from a boxwood, hardwood cutting, void of internode. We're really just looking on the bark, how fissured it is, how deep it is. And we know to take a cut just above that or closest to the actual stem, tip of the stem. Going forward, we also showed you a cold weather cutting example because those need to be done when they lose their leaves of deciduous nature, like elm, I'm sorry, tridents. We've taken those just below the internode. So now we're jumping into something that the Mirai audience is more familiar with, which is a juniper. This particular juniper is a Femina juniper. I guarantee that all of you out there have seen Goshen, John Naka's famous 11-tree forest. That's what we're talking about right here. These are underutilized outside of the 1970s and 80s and on the East Coast especially. I happen to love them. I fell in love with them before they were, I realized that was what Goshen was. I don't know, something about the needles. I like a challenge. So as far as the cutting on a juniper, this is very straightforward because the color is, the color be popping and you can really see it. We'd have to do a close-up on this cutting because there's so many on here that you'd probably get lost in focus. All right. So when we're talking about things like a conifer, we're going to focus on a juniper right now. This is going to be very similar to that of Shinpaku as far as like that color variation that we're looking at. So on here, we see the green elongation from this year and right here, we're stepping into hardened and off territory. As far as the cutting for a juniper, Shinpaku or something like that, my cut is going to consist right into that brown, just barely. Those little needles right there or if you want to call them coming down to like a node per se, that's going to be our sweet spot right there. Good there. Close up. Just in time for that thing to get in my armpit. So in order to dip this thing, I'm simply going to just clean this off. I'm doing this for my own peace of mind. My rooting hormone, also number one. It's the most common that we're going to use. It's a simple dip. And don't double dip. Yeah. No need to double dip even though you're not sharing. So these have spikes on them, very intense needles. So we're going to just push that down. It really needs to be, I guess you could generally say on most of these, get a good inch down, two inches down is safe territory. This is enough. So in terms of conifers, it's very obvious to see that hardening off going from a very reddish brown color into obvious green tissue. Taking that cutting just into the hardened off caramel reddish brown color tissue, depending on the species. Cutting that right there, stuffing that down, that is the best place to get that root growth from. Same thing, standard number one hormone. It works very well for these. As far as space, something with leaves, leaves come and go. Sometimes they will continue to grow as a cutting and elongate. For junipers, because of the tight nature of the foliage, I tend to give them a little bit more space because unless you have some kind of netting overhead, leaf litter and things like that, when you get into here where it's a very compact foliage, it's very difficult to get those out and then you're moving the perlite around, you're disturbing the roots, you're interrupting that stability. So it's better to, depending on the species, give them a little space. Junipers, I like them to have that space. To kind of reinforce what we just saw on the needle juniper, the Femina, you can really see that color transition there. You can see that obviously coming further down, we have a lot harder wood here. This is basically last year's growth and this is basically this year's growth. That's one way that you can kind of look at it. So as we saw with the Femina, we're looking for that caramel color to help us find the best place to take a cut. It's a little more obvious on this, on a Shinpaku, but this color transition here where we go from green tissue down into this caramel color, right here is that kind of first branch extension. My cut would take place right there. So I've got a little bit of that brown tissue there. This is the place that I'm going to start off and that roots are going to occur. Same thing as you saw before with the Femina, I'm going to take this number one hormone dip and just push it very softly down into the non-compact perlite. And that is far enough. All right. Now we're working on a Rydia religiosa, which is a water jasmine. It's a common tropical seen in bonsai. As far as taking a cutting on this, I do have a little bit of leeway, not quite the same as a ficus where I can simply cut it and stick it. There still is a better place on the tree to make a cutting. Cuttings are always best in an internodal part where on this case, I have opposite leaves. So taking one there, similar to that of a maple is very successful. Where I would judge this is based on the lint of cells on the tree. Here, not as visible. There you start seeing the lint of cells open a little bit. Here they start getting more constrained and closed off as we move into greener and greener tissue. This is not enough. This is still not completely hardened off tissue even though the color is there. Right here where the lint of cells are more exposed, you see these, uh, dark lines. This is also expressed in a lot of other variety of trees. So it's not just, boom, I'm going to cut this off and that looks like a good place. It's probably going to work. You need to learn how to read the bark. Either you're reading the color variation, you're reading the lint of cell variation, but one way or another, there's something about it that it's telling you is the appropriate thing. On this tree, these are very closed, or not closed is the right word, but they're a lot more compact. So cutting on a rightia, here is a previous set of nodes. This is my best place, just below the node. Same thing, I don't need all of these leaves. I'm going to reduce them a little bit. I don't need all this moisture loss. Uh, I'm going to take, right now these things are still at the tail end of flowering, so I'm going to take the tips off right there where the new growth is. These leaves are enough to get it done. As we've used so far, standard, number one rooting hormone. It's very applicable to most species. None of these are deciduous, so I've got my cutting in the correct place. I'm going to dip. That simple. I'm going to place. Here, same as before, I'm just going to push straight down. I'm going to go one to two inches down, and I'm going to let it ride. To follow up on cuttings, we just covered how to take a cutting, place it in perlite, and I discussed in the very beginning the conditions to meet in order for that cutting to be successful. To just recap that before we jump into the next step, I had an environment ready to mist the cuttings for the duration of what's necessary to develop roots. I discussed that I would typically set them directly on the ground, that way they were insulated on three sides, and I would decide that it was ready when roots were starting to protrude from the bottom. As far as daylight, I did say that we're looking in kind of that 30% light, maybe 70% shade. That way, it's not transpiring at a rate that can't pull in new moisture because it ain't got roots. Now, what happens when it comes out of the perlite? Does that mean it goes directly in a pot? For some people, yeah, I'm sure that is their methodology. For here, where every cutting counts, we take an additional 30% and that's the final step. What I mean by that is they go directly into perlite when the cutting takes place. From there, I know I have some very soft tissue roots that are available. I'll jump it into soil at that point. The difference between this and, say, an air layer is I need time on the tree to develop roots, then I need time in the perlite to harden those roots, and then I can safely transition it to soil so it actually can begin growing as an isolated tree. So, what we're going to do to illustrate the next step in a cutting from going from perlite to soil, I have just a couple cuttings here of different variety. One, something that everybody knows, a dwarf jade. These are very common. It's virtually like a succulent, but I still prefer to take a cutting, develop roots, and then putting it in a pot rather than just rushing it to a pot. The problem that nursery owners don't have is a lack of patience because we simply have too many things to concentrate on every second of every day. So, these things have a chance to develop. If you're only doing a couple at a time, it's very hard to be patient and not want to dig around in that soil to see if it's working because I need that gratification. I need to know that I did it correctly. Patience is an ultimate weapon in almost every aspect of bonsai. So, these have had time to develop. I mentioned that this was a dwarf jade, common name. This here, and yes, you were about to hear this correctly, this is a Taiwanese juniper. There are very few of these in the United States. I was very fortunate to get a bunch of cuttings from. So, I hope in the next 20 years, well, I'll just leave it at that if you know what a Taiwan juniper is. So, what I like to do before I just start yanking these out because I don't want to tear roots off, I like to take the sides of the pot and compress it. Just kind of squeeze on it, loosen up that perlite a little bit, kind of knock it around. When I'm doing this, I'm not causing an intense amount of damage to the roots. I'm probably not causing any damage at all. Realistically, as long as you're kind of massaging it, you're loosening up. The perlite isn't like a lot of other substances that it immediately begins to bond to itself. If you have an issue with your perlite holding too much water, not being dried down enough to produce a humid environment, you probably have too much perlite. You probably have too much perlite. You probably have too much leaf litter or trash or soil mixed in with it. Perlite is savable. Wash it, rinse it, reuse it. We reuse it for, I kid you not, I bet I have some perlite here that we've been using for 15 years. It's just been washed and reused. I only have to wash it maybe every two to three years as long as I keep leaf litter and things out of it. So, kind of massage this out a little bit. Am I going to just start yanking them out of there? No. What I'm going to do is I'm going to kind of tilt the pot. What I prefer to do is more or less kind of start shimmying that a little bit so that perlite kind of starts coming out around it and then I'm not really disturbing the roots quite as much. At this point, the soil has dislodged from the pot and I can pull these out. So, here, here's your perfect example of root development in a perlite type environment. These roots are nice caramel type. In color, we know they've hardened off. A lot of times when you see white roots in a pot, they're more often than not weeds. So, you can be careful, but at this point, these have established long enough where it should be able to safely separate them and move them to soil. Here, there's multiples to a pot. Once I bump it over, I am only going to put one tree per pot and it is an adequate size. When we get into... You'll see another... Another segment, maybe you've already watched it, called Introduction to Tropicals. In this, I will make a broader explanation of pot styles and what their purposes are based on their design. In short, the reason I'm choosing the black tall grow pots with the holes along the side is one simple reason, gravity. What I mean by that is this being tall, the taller it is, the higher or the increased gravitational push getting the water to come out. The fact that the holes are on the side means I can put it on the ground, I can put it on a table, it's going to adequately drain. The difference between a bulb pan like we have here, you notice you don't see no holes. They're small, they're half the size of this, and they're on the bottom. If this is not elevated on some type of surface, whether it be two small chopsticks or a grate similar to what you would use in closets, shelving and stuff like that, something that allows the pot to drain. That's what I'm talking about. It allows the pot to drain and not accumulate sand and water that keeps it basically so saturated it's rotting on the bottom and dry on the top from the sun. These pots are excellent for shedding that water, creating a very humid environment. One thing that is not touched on enough is how big of a pot do I need? What most people would conceive is if I give it more space, I'm going to get more roots. I hate to say it, but that is just, I wish that was the case. A lot of times when you over pot a tree, it tells you. The way that it tells you is A, it dies, or B, when you take it out of the pot, all the roots are running to the side and down or circling the pot, and it is void of roots in the interior, directly under the trunk where you want them the most. That is telling you that you put it in the coldest, wettest part of that pot, and you have literally slowed down the ability to produce what you're going for. It isn't adequate. It is an adequate-sized pot. For these cuttings, this is an adequate-sized pot. Here's the thing. I can always bump it up, but once I get this established in here and I create a situation for rot to occur, I can't correct from there. I might be able to save it and go back down, but it's better to start here and move up. Going into this root ball, I'm going to just massage this out, kind of like I did from the sides. I'm not going to get in there. I'm not going to start ripping, tearing, or anything like that. I want to just slowly massage these apart. In my particular case, these are Taiwan junipers. They are virtually non-existent in the United States. If I don't get 100% success on this, I'm probably going to slap myself, so I want to take my time and do it right. All right, there you go and come here. There is number one. You see, this was an even cutting taken with a root hormone. This is not a radial root situation that you're going to get with some species. This is something that can be developed over time. The point is, is we were able to propagate and create a new tree out of literally a part of a branch that is no longer necessary. Nothing was wasted in that regard. Continue separating these out. That is the hardest thing to get out. This is like trying to dislodge a forest to remove a dead tree and put a new one back in. Here is one solid giant cutting. If you look, these are completely fused. I am not disappointed by that because I ended up with a larger tree to start off with. These are actually all fused right there. That's a great one. Where this would be a candidate for this pot, this would be a candidate for this pot, adequately sized. This was taken basically right at the tail end of fall. This is that situation where this was not a planned event. Uh-oh, we need to cut this tree back. Damn, that's a Taiwanese juniper. I hate to waste it. Let me see if I can root it. That's where these came from. Taiwan junipers are so rare here that waste not want not. Damn, that one is growing right in there. Well, this one, hopefully that other little root may be enough because this one's probably gonna get a little bit of damage. This happens sometimes when you have aggressive growing cuttings in a pot. Sometimes they fuse, sometimes the roots become entangled. This is a good example of where I was saying earlier is giving them a little bit more space than you feel you might need just to have that little bit of insurance policy. In this instance, I have one mediocre cutting and I have one pretty awesome cutting. So, I'm going to save as many roots from this amazing one. And this one, if I have to sacrifice one, this is just how it has to happen because that one is not really coming out of there. And I am damn sure I'm not gonna mess with the larger one. This may still be okay, but I'm gonna put my chips in the bigger one. Yeah, broke off a little bit, but overall it's still separated. That's not the end of the world. I got a little root there. It's a little damaged, but hey, keep this guy. Yeah, let's hope so. Last couple. All right, just to kind of lay them out and see what we got. It's another one of those things is be prepared, have the materials you need to make this happen. If I were going and trying to run and get pots and everything, get my soil, I could potentially cause these to dry out if I, you know, I'm not relatively close to them. I'm relatively quick about it. All right. So we ended up with one, two, three, four, five, six, seven cuttings off of that. And that's just one of the pots. So this was trash falling on the ground. It had to be cut off the tree for design purposes. That trash just yielded another half a dozen trees. A lot of you guys out there, guys and gals, that are students of Mirai are doing this. You know, with a professional interest in mind. You can go and invest a whole lot of money in buying stock readily available to somebody already produced. Or you can take this and invest it into your business and invest it into your education and produce more. Going back to something I said earlier, I'm not sure if it was this video or another, but doing this gives you the opportunity when you encounter that customer, you encounter maybe, the client, maybe the enthusiast who just enjoys and appreciates your work. You can produce more of what they like, what you're into. And you can speak for that material from point A to point B. So that's confidence for you. It's confidence for the buyer. And yeah, you can fully describe what is happening in that tree, how you got from here to there. A lot of times that little bit of extra knowledge about it is the difference of someone's getting into bonsai and not getting into bonsai so moving forward we're going to pop these up the soil that I'm using this is soil that we make this is a mixture of peat crushed pine bark it is a very well draining soil for those of you out there who are not buying this by the dump truck load and mixing it which is most everyone your most similar type of soil that you can buy and say Home Depot Lowe's or something this is closely related to trees and shrub soil what I mean by that is I'm not going to knock Miracle-Gro I'm not going to hate on master gardeners or anything like that but typically things like Miracle-Gro are made for the lazy gardener because they expect you to let's face it half-ass accomplish what you're trying to do the trees and shrub bags these are soils that you use to put a tree in the ground and soil to go around it to help integrate what's in the container to the soil that's in the ground where you are it well drains it mixes well so if you're looking for something similar to this that you can confidently grow and it's not going to be oversaturated and drain trees and shrubs tight soil with a high crushed pine bark peat that is a well draining soil you can find that virtually anywhere in the world and you can find that anywhere in the world they sell gardening supplies I have never found any type of Miracle-Gro that doesn't retain too much moisture for what I need as far as production is concerned so potting I do this a particular way I don't have my scoop handy but I'm going to put the soil in there I usually will go at least halfway into the pot so I'm not going to pack that down I'm not going to push on it where I would take the cutting from here let's see we'll use where's that small one actually yeah this one so I have soil ready in a scooper hand I place the cutting right there I don't push it down and then I start allowing the soil to softly fill that space I'm doing this so I'm not applying pressure to the roots I spent a lot of time making these roots I don't want to ruin it now once I get that soil level virtually up to the top everything is virtually stabilized so what I do from here I hold the cutting and I just take my finger and I go all the way around the side because if I'm pushing the sides down I'm stabilizing the outside and it's pushing toward the inside without me actually taking my finger or an instrument and touching and pushing directly on the root I'm allowing the sides to do that for me by indirectly stiffening up the soil layer in the pot I never ever push down close to where the actual trunk of the cutting is or where the actual roots are once that is down I fill in the remainder of the space that I push down with my hand that's all I'm going to do to it what by doing that and not overly compacting it I've I've continued that environment of high humidity well draining it's not sitting at the bottom it's sitting virtually dead center of the pot so best situation to get more root growth more elongation on the actual branches themselves on the foliage so here this pot I don't have to worry about it being over potted if you're in a situation where maybe you can't have soil in a high peak content that is not as super well draining how can you improve that take some of that perlite that you used for your cutting initially and mix that in a certain degree this works also well with collected trees if I have something that needs that space and I don't have a absolutely perfect situation of soil I may add fifty percent perlite I may add forty percent I may add twenty percent perlite it's dependent on the tree the point is well draining humid nights above 60 degrees at least and from there yeah reduce light and a mister when we get to the soil level like this where we're using a mister on the pot perlite from here I can actually set it aside I'm still not going to give it direct light for two weeks because here we are fresh set of pot again I'm gonna put it in reduced light and gradually over the next month or two I'm gonna start pushing those out to full sun where they can actually do their juniper thing and grow at that point when I'm reaching full sun it is comfortable to go ahead and feed feed is a loose term the trees feed them themselves you really supplementing them but at that point I'd add some kind of organic solution whether it be granules or liquid junipers respond well to foliar feeding so at that point yeah if it's safe enough to go in the sun it's safe enough to start supplementing slash feeding and you're rolling with that point so just to reinforce it will do one more same thing I'm gonna get my soil level halfway up the pot my nose is trying to run away soil levels about halfway up the pot let's grab this big guy here so same thing I'm gonna hold the top pull some of them little weed roots out of there I'm gonna set the cutting down then I'm gonna start adding soil once I get virtually up to the top I'm gonna apply that pressure on the direct sides it forces that stability around the outside which closes in the inside without me having to put direct pressure on the roots in and chance breaking off what I spent so much time making or in this case a rare species so at that point just from doing that this thing is pretty stable so I'm just going to take the soil and I'm gonna fill in those gaps I push down with my hands literally being that careful with the roots is the difference of your cutting surviving or not surviving from there it's a it's a balance of water and light boom done same thing yeah give it some a period of rest indirect Sun when these things start expressing they're happy and they're not dying and they're growing you pretty confidently sticker out there and start supplementing with some sort of food multivitamin I just want to make sure everybody understands that trees feed themselves and we're giving it the assist because it's containerized so food is so commonly said but we're really supplementing for the things that it's not getting by not being in a natural environment or ground okay real quick just to what kind of recap I'll do a little Jade real quick just to show you same thing this is a tropical closer related to a cactus type succulent than it is just a woody tissue same thing as I was in the other pot I'm gonna ring the sides loosen up that soil a little bit all right I prefer to tilt them on their side kind of shake shake those roots free and then from there since this is a much more forgiving variety I can separate these a lot easier boom just like that got a jork baby Jade ready to go so same process is this even though this is a succulent I mean when you get this developed you could put it into a different medium that is more cactus related but as far as growing out if I want to get the most growing production I'm gonna put it in the similar soil that's fast draining it creates a humid environment because especially with this I do not want something that's so wet and waterlogged because this is going to absolutely root or I'm sorry rot incredibly fast compared to other things a ficus is going to be similar it's not going to rot as easily as this but too much water on this a good rule of thumb when we're talking about succulent type plants or jades like this if they're not growing then they likely don't need water so winter storage for stuff like this if it's not growing it likely does not need any water so through the winter when I'm wintering these as bonsai or these cuttings I almost water them maybe once a month and that's only because my greenhouse is set up to basically continue producing through the winter so these they're easy but you can still screw it up so make sure you have all the the tools that you need to be able to get them out of the water so that you can get them out of the water so that you can get them out of the water so that you can get them out of the water so that you can need make sure you take a good cutting I like to take things that have branch opportunities right away rather than just take a stick and work on deal with that later I try to trim things in a manner to get there quicker so you pot these up the only time that you're going to water this is basically the same as the others you're going to water them in and this you're going to set aside until it starts growing again the others the junipers and the other cuttings the ones that are more established that are going to soil I'm going to water that in at the beginning these in soil are going to go on a regular watering routine like any normal growing plant and things in perlite are going to grow in a mister that way they stay moist and humid but not wet so it depends on what stage you're in but I've given you the tools to basically figure out what is my best weather based on I need 60 plus degrees in the evenings consistently I need to be concerned on how much shade how much light I'm giving these based on how much shade I'm giving these based on how much light I'm giving these based on how much shade I'm giving these based on I've cut the leaves they have no roots the amount that they're going to transpire you don't want to overdo it these are very easy things to do if you just decide that you're going to do it correctly and you're going to eat your mistake that's the only way that you're going to learn it so at least with cuttings versus an air layer you do have a lot less to lose however if you only have one tree to take cuttings off of you have a certain number so if you're doing this on multiple trees and if you're doing this on multiple trees you're going to have a lot less to lose so if you're a Mariah student who's using this to become a career professional and you're you're like me and you want to grow all your material because you want to be able to speak about it from the very beginning to the very end of your ownership of it then this is a good way for you to create your business create your stock I know a lot of you out there have a dream of what bonsai professionals do I was there for me personally I understood ecology incredibly well from my time in the Forest Service but when I got into ornamental horticulture propagation and things like that there is a learning curve no matter how experienced you are and other aspects of trees this is a new skill if you're looking to do this because it is your dream it is your aspiration this right here is creating free material for your business so if you say okay I'm starting off right now if you want to do this this is a good point of advice from me put all of your interest in your education and get these things growing that way when your education education grows say to a 10-year point then you have 10 years of developed material ready to go that you can a right away begin speaking of your knowledge of these trees and then you use the assist of that technical ability that you learned elsewhere hopefully at Mariah or maybe a D N L uh to take those trees to a market to sell or to show your talent, your skill. So if you want to do this long term, these are the things that will help you get there because it is very costly. Unless you start off with a trust fund or you start off with a very enthusiastic family member, spouse, whatever, or maybe you're just lucky and win the lottery and you can buy all the material ready to go. You'll still only speak about it from the time that you bought it. You don't know what happened. You only know what someone told you before that. This is a way for you to confidently go about your business and to speak from the heart directly with, I've done this, I have failed at it. This is opportunity to fail. If you want to get better, I hope you can fail sometimes. The reason I say that is you can know everything that you want to know about bonsai. Most important ingredient to me, from my opinion, is you can learn and adapt to all this, but the thing that makes you the most successful is being humble and being able to say, this is where I went wrong. I tried this. I tried it in different ways. Don't try it once. Don't do cuttings and be like, oh man, that didn't really work out. Figure out where you went wrong. Grow from it. That is the purpose of Mirai Live is to give you these resources, but it is up to you to stick to your guns and follow it. So if you're looking to make a dream out of this, or maybe you already have that dream, you're trying to improve it, that's what these videos are for. That's what me showing you these step-by-step things are for. So take that information, utilize it, be patient with it. If you're trying to be a bonsai superstar overnight, I wish you luck. You won't be able to do it alone, but this is one way that you can take every ounce of that pride in that later sale and know that you did it, you made it. So success in bonsai for me is not the amount of money that you make. It's the amount of results that you get from the crap that you speak. And I don't mean crap is like, oh, this is lame stuff. I just mean, if you're gonna talk, back it up. This is the best way to start backing it up. Make more. I hope everybody enjoyed it and I'll see you next time on Rye Live. 
