Guys, super excited to have you in the studio tonight to tackle one of the biggest pillars of bonsai that is never, ever quantified, broken down, or explored in depth. And that is the art, the discipline, the horticulture, the practice of pruning. Now, when I was an apprentice in Japan studying with Mr. Kimura, and I was sitting there watching him practice bonsai on a daily basis, one of the things that I came to realize is it wasn't his ability to bend, it wasn't his ability to carve, it wasn't his radical design approach that set the stage for him to create groundbreaking work. It was actually Mr. Kimura's ability to prune that made him this genius of bonsai. And this brilliant renovator of this art form. And that quiet subtlety to this technique is why it takes a backseat to wiring and to repotting and to carving. But in all actuality, the biggest technique that I can give you guys in terms of technical approach to the tree itself is breaking down the process of pruning and helping you understand the fundamentals behind why we're doing what we're doing. Now. As always, when we start to talk about the pruning process or any operation in a bonsai, the first question that we start to ask ourselves is, what are we trying to accomplish? This idea right here, what we're trying to accomplish is what guides every single action that we take on the tree. And the difficulty in pruning is that there is no sort of lump sum of this is how we prune. So in order for you guys to be able to grasp this, and in order for you guys to be able to apply this. You have to separate yourself from trying to memorize what I'm saying tonight, and you guys need to really dig in to understanding the concepts of what are we trying to accomplish and why are we doing what we're doing, okay? And if you can do that, when you sit down at a tree, you may have some branches that are developing. You may have some branches that are refining. You may have some that are growing. You may have some that are pruning. If you're looking at each branch and you're saying, what are we trying to accomplish on each of those branches in that tree's design at that moment, that is effective pruning at its very highest level, okay? Now inside of what are we trying to accomplish, we've got to consider the function and aesthetics of the pruning process. Now in terms of functional considerations of pruning, we're eliminating structural flaws. Functionally, it improves our vascular flow and connectivity. We're going to be preserving and directing energy. Preserving and directing energy from the exterior. From the interior of the branch to the interior of the branch. From the apex of the tree to the lower branches of the tree. Pruning is what allows us to control the tree's distribution of growth. And we're going to be creating photosynthetic efficiency. Photosynthetic efficiency by making sure that the branches that we leave on that tree have access to sunlight and airflow to be able to photosynthesize at the highest possible rate to create a system that is building a bigger, better bonsai, okay? Inside of the aesthetics. We're going to be pruning back to pairs of twos to create that organic, ramified pad. One branch to two branch to four branches to eight branches to 16 branches to 32 branches. This is the building process of a refined bonsai pad at its highest level. We're going to even out the foyer distribution. Inside of our positive spaces of foyer mass, whether it be deciduous, conifer, or broad-leafed evergreen. Inside of each pad. Inside of each pad. Inside of each pad. Inside of each pad. Inside of each pad. Inside of each pad. Inside of this pad is equivalent. And the foliage distribution in this pad is equivalent. And the foliage distribution in this pad is equivalent. Now, each of those pads, with that same density, is what represents the positive space in your design. You're able to illustrate the negative space. You're able to illustrate the positive space with an even distribution inside the pad and throughout the tree. Aesthetically, you create a design where people are going to focus on the high points of that tree's characteristics and quality. Creation of negative space. to balance those positive spaces and even distribution of foyer mass in the pad and across each pad. And then we're going to be improving the line, the line of the branches. If it's a deciduous, we see that for half the year. If it's a conifer, we see the base, we see it in the back of the design. Line is so important in our branch creation. This is the aesthetic consideration we start to work with most, and improving of taper so that we see that transition base to tip, we move from that developmental process to that refinable process, thick to thin, 1 to 2 to 4 to 8 to 16 to 32. This is that development of taper that we achieve via the pruning process. Now in order to be able to sort of understand all of this, we first got to talk about sort of this idea of development as a practice and as an action that we're taking in the sort of quest to get to this refinement and deciding when we prune and why we prune and how we prune. Okay. So let's talk about development in terms of branch building. Now development is the process of building length, thickening, expanding foliar mass, rebuilding roots, and I say re but also could just be building roots, rebuilding roots, and generating interior budding for that ramification. And we say that when we talk about development, development is the step that we take to get the basic formation that we start pruning to allocate energy, transitioning, refining, increasing ramification, improving line, improving taper, we have to have that framework, that structure. We have to have that foundation first and this is development as it occurs prior to all of our pruning beginning to take place. Okay. So if we understand that, we know that that's in place and then the pruning process is what leads us into and transitions us from that development of length, thickening, healing, healing, healing, healing. Let's go one more. Let's go healing. I can't believe I forgot healing. Healing wounds. Okay. Healing, root regeneration, back bud formation, expansion of the vascular tissue. These are the things that we're trying to accomplish so that we can crack into that process of pruning. All right. So before we go any further though, we need to understand that once we've achieved whatever it is we were trying to accomplish in development, whether it was length, thickening, expanding foyer mass, building roots, generating interior budding or healing, any big cuts on that tree. Once we've achieved what we were trying to accomplish, we need to know how we determine, when the best time to prune is. One of the biggest questions that I get on the Q and A's from Mirai Live users and emails from people asking for sort of the yearly routine process is, when should I prune to get whatever it is they're trying to accomplish? So let's just understand this. At this point in time, when we're in the early spring, sort of this late winter, early spring. Winter or early spring period of time, right here. We've accumulated all of the resources that were being photosynthesized last year from the foyer mass, creating the vascular tissue over the course of the fall, storing up sugars and starches that are giving us winter protection, and all that stored energy is dedicated towards generating new solar panels right now at this late winter, early spring flush of foyer growth. Now over the course of spring, we're going to be running out all of those sugars and starches to create those solar panels, and we have these different timings where that tree is in an energy deficit or an energy positive. But at this point in time, before the buds push, we have a copious quantity of energy stored in the tree. This is our number one time to do pruning, to redirect energy. And guide the distribution of those sugars and starches into the different pieces and portions of the tree that we're hoping to get growth or development in this year. Now as that foyer mass, as the leaves emerge, so we'll say this is leafing out, and leafing out whether it's deciduous or conifer, same concept applies. That energy storage, so this is energy here, a copious quantity of energy, as more and more leaves come out, and as they're very soft and fleshy and the plant is having to support them. We're losing energy in the production of that photosynthetic mass. We're using those stored sugars and starches to produce this growth that's going to hopefully pay off if some bonsai practitioner doesn't come and cut off all the growth as it's elongating before we get that payoff back. And it's exhausting all of its resources to sustain and expand and expand and sustain and sustain and expand and build and create and build and create until that piece hardens off. And once that piece hardens off. And we see that with the formation of the cuticle. Once that piece hardens off, now we've taken all the stored sugars and starches from last fall through the winter, we've pumped those into an expanded foyer mass, hopefully expanded from last year because we're developing ramification, we're developing branching, we're developing all of this quantity. We start to see this energy reaccumulation, and we're going to see more energy over the course of this season. More energy stored than last season, this is how a tree gets bigger. When we're pruning, we're pruning here when we're in an energy positive. The last piece that we would, or the last time we would want to be pruning is here when we're in an energy negative. Energy negative. And then as that tree hardens off and we reaccumulate and we photosynthesize, now we start to be able to prune again. As we get bigger. As we get back into energy positive. Understanding these concepts is what allows us to start to begin to break into the pruning process. We're going to walk you into the studio. We're going to show some pieces in development. We're going to show some pieces in refinement. We're going to start to talk about this pruning process and give you guys a visual taste of where this energy positive, energy negative, taper, twos, threes, fours, etc. and then we're going to come back and we're going to start to open up this concept of why do we prune. Diving into this whole concept, the totality of pruning, we've got this idea of what are we trying to accomplish. We've got this idea of considering function and aesthetics in every single action that we take. Function being whether it's the management of structure and improvement, whether it's the cleaning, whether it's the growth driving that energy to the tip or back, apex, lower branches. And. We're talking about doing this at the prime time in an energy positive state. This totality of concepts is really what we're trying to master. And we're going to go through a series of trees in the stream where we show each of those illustrations independently. But I wanted to start out with a juniper that has, and again, what are we trying to accomplish? Knowing the species nuances, knowing the structural nuances, and knowing the ramification nuances of each species allows us to gear our approach to that species, that operation, and what we're trying to accomplish in this tree. So this California juniper is a juniper. This is a juniper. This California juniper is a tree that has a lot of branches in refinement where they don't have these big, elongating shoots. And it also has a lot of these elongating shoots that were branches in the developmental process where we were trying to, and on our native North American junipers, we say some junipers run before they clump. Some junipers like Japanese junipers, Kishu Itoyagawa, clump before they run. We had to allow this California to run in order to build mass on the interior of the sparser branches. Build strength, build thickening, build structure. Meanwhile, we're managing a lot of the branches that are in the position that we want them to be. So we're going to be doing a duality of prunings on this. We're going to be transitioning strength now. We're going to be cleaning out to be able to provide additional wire to the branches that are here. We're going to be managing some structural issues, and so let's just dive in and see where we're going to go. So when we start to look into the interior of these branches that we allowed to elongate for development, we recognize that we're starting to get... All right. lot of production of some of these denser pieces of growth on the interior. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to, in my pruning process, transition the strength from the tip of this to these interior branches that are starting to develop some mass in terms of the foliar content. One of the reasons that we allow development is to expand foliage, to elongate and to thicken. All of those things were accomplished here. Now I want to be considering function and aesthetics. Obviously, I can prune anywhere along this branch back to any of these secondaries to transition the strength and the auxin allocation of this tip back into these smaller pieces, which will then stimulate their movement and expansion as foliar mass. I also need to be considering aesthetics in terms of how long do I actually need this branch to be to fit into the design of this tree. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to rotate. I'm going to take a look at where I want this length to be from the proposed front. I'm going to make my decision. In terms of where I prune, based on not only where I want that growth to be, but the direction of the growth and the position of the line of the branch to satisfy all of those aesthetics and reasons that we prune. I'm going to start out relatively conservatively at a point where I have a lateral piece growing upwards. Even inside of these secondaries, when I transition like that, because I've got mass back here at the base, I know that these tips are going to take over auxinal suppression. Okay. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to further transition that energy along all of these smaller secondary branches from the tip back into strong growing interior pieces of foliar mass to really drive that. If you notice now, you see that this line angling up from this branch, not as attractive as this lateral piece here after trimming that tip. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take that off knowing that this is right in that length that I need for the design of the tree to be able to prune accurately to drive that design forward. And accomplish that functional activity of transitioning the strength of the tip into the interior pieces of foliar mass. Here you can see that pruned branch with that tip removed, that line shortened. We've accomplished that structure. We've accomplished some growing density. It fits into the design and now we're going to anticipate more refined growth as a product of that pruning decision. Okay. Now I'm going to continue sort of working through this tree making pruning decisions and I'm going to walk you guys through it as I'm doing it just so that you can sort of see the process and be aware of sort of all of the things, the totality of pruning. So if we notice now this branch being elongated, let me just kind of adjust this piece of wire to give me control of this new position. I've got a little extra loop there. That's rather convenient. I'm going to drop that down to the perimeter here. I'm going to come along. Okay. I'm going to come along this exterior silhouette and I'm going to dictate the length and I'm going to continue to look at what kind of distance I want in this area to be able to create that design in the silhouette here. And I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to keep this relatively short. Let me just orient you guys on the front first. It's a little bit a cant from the, I want to take advantage of this base and this movement this direction and I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to prune here where you guys are at so that we can see this. Taking these back to strong. Okay. Secondary branches. If even those secondaries are a little bit strong, I can take those back to some of the tertiary pieces. And I'm just making these length decisions based on aesthetics to transition that strength to the interior pieces that are going to be giving me the ramification in that transition of energy and strength. Okay. Now, as I've established this sort of silhouette and the exterior length, I can now start to kind of move into some of these upward growing pieces or what I call body branches on the interior portion. Now we want these to be strong. We want that ramification to be maintained but we don't want to allow these to grow vertically because when they grow vertically, they start to obtain a lot more strength and suck energy from the tips. We do, however, need their content to create the interior. Okay. The interior contour of this branch. So I'm going to come in here and I'm going to prune these pieces back to the length that I desire for the height of the silhouette of this branch. Always pruning back. And again, even in here where I've got strong secondary or tertiary growing pieces, pruning that tip back, that strength that was in that one tip is now going to be transitioned to those three. This is how we get that incremental refinement of growth back into the interior and transition that strength. And I'm actually going to take that tall guy out yet again. A process and a nuance of just working through that pruning process, taking those pieces back to start to form contour transition energy, solve any structural issues that are happening. This is the totality of pruning when you start to go branch by branch on a tree. Now in the interior here, I'm going to lift this up. Notice this big elongated piece that we have sticking right off the top. That big shoot right there, we want to take these pieces off unless we want to replace this piece of ramification. Okay. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take this off so that I drive strength into the tip. And these crotch growing pieces and those vertically growing pieces really start to sap energy from the tip of the branch because they're occurring at the crotch where that junction transitions energy. I'm going to continue to refine. And notice how I'm also cleaning off bottom growing pieces. We're not covering cleaning in this stream, but cleaning and pruning in tandem as an operation to start to transition strength. I'm going to go ahead and reallocate and make all of these changes we're trying to make a big part of the process of pruning and making decisions for the aesthetic and horticultural benefit of the tree. Okay. All right. Let's go ahead and take a look at some of the things that we're going to be doing. I'm going to go ahead and take a look at some of the things that we're going to be doing. Okay. So this pad is really starting to take on some really beautiful definition and I'm just going to kind of isolate this again with my hands so that you can see it in its totality. Now you see that we've transitioned that energy. We've taken away that length. We got the development. We've reallocated the auxin towards the interior. We've opened it up for more oxygen and air. We've pretty much done every single scope of the pruning process. This is what pruning on a refinement level, transitioning from development and sort of a totality looks like on the finer ramification of a bonsai branch. This is something that we've explored with the two of them together. This one up here is out of the tree because we're going to have a lot of time talking about it. It's really hard to get it off the tree after four years. You've got to keep it apart for a long time. It's really hard. You've got to keep it apart for a long time. You've got to keep it apart for a long time. It's really hard to take the fun out of it. okay so just kind of went through that process of pruning and decision making and foyer distribution and allocating resources back to the interior and taking away weak stuff taking away structural flaws the whole gamut of pruning all in this entire tree and some pieces need a little bit more development so I left them longer and some pieces need to be pushed back so I prune them farther this is the process of pruning and I think when we think about pruning we say I'm going to sit down and prune my bonsai and that to a lot of degrees is true with a deciduous tree or broad-leafed evergreen tree and sometimes it's in tandem with other actions that we take each time we're thinking about the function of the pruning and the aesthetics of the pruning and each branch that we put our scissor to we're thinking about what are we trying to accomplish now one of the things that we didn't and let me go ahead and give you guys the front one of the things that we didn't touch on was removal to open up negative space and I've got two areas inside of this tree that I see some opportunities to remove so from the front we've got this beautiful pad formed right here we've got this beautiful pad here we've got this beautiful pad formed right here we've got this wonderful defining branch that's giving us length right here and we've got this piece that's sitting over them that's preventing sunlight in that's preventing oxygen in and also a piece that doesn't contribute to the rest of the tree so I'm actually going to come back in here and I'm going to be fully removing these pieces of the structure to be able to open the door for light penetration for sunlight but also to remove some negative space and allow visibility through this area of the tree okay so notice how just that removal does create that space does give us that aspect of visibility and starts to generate a little bit more quality in terms of the bonsai that we have here each tree reaches sort of a point where you've got to come back and re-address that quantity of negative space as it advances, as its foyer pads mature, and as that design evolves. Okay, now I've got another space back here, and we'll come back in close, where we see this kind of weaker branch that has extremely poor interior ramification. Notice how long the lines are before we get to the tip, very little ramification, they're not as weak, and we've got these branches around it that are now developing an entirely different quality of branch. I'm going to come in and I'm going to take these two away, open up that negative space, and also prune to be improving the structure by removing poorly ramified branches and replacing them with that negative space and allowing these highly ramified branches to have a lot more light and air circulation around them. So, when we come back and we look at the process of pruning, we recognize that this is a tremendous scope and breadth. This is a tremendous scope and breadth of activity that we're going to take place. Let's go back to the whiteboard, let's take a really close look at each reason why we do what we do, why we prune, the three reasons that we prune, and then we're going to come back in with each of those reasons and we're going to lay that out for you in visual form, so you can see what that looks like and the considerations that are involved. So, now that we're back here at the whiteboard and we have the ability to lay this out, I want to create some very clear, concise, compartmentalized reasons why we prune. Look at the pruning process in terms of function and aesthetics. We can back all of the function and aesthetics, both of those up, with each of these reasons that we prune. Now, number one, we prune to clean, and we're going to come back in and we're going to talk about what that cleaning does functionally and aesthetically, but we're cleaning the tree in terms of maintaining the tree. We're managing the growth of the tree, distribution, and we talked about in the previous discussion of tips to interior, apex to the lower branches. So, we're managing that growth in a variety of forms, and then we're structurally controlling, dictating, designing, and always improving the tree. These three reasons, when we get to the heart, we break down all of the garbage, we trim off all of the fat, we recognize, ah, if we just look at why do we prune? Clean, manage, improve structural. These are our three reasons. All right? Now, let's dive a little bit deeper into these three reasons. These three different components, and go take a look in the studio at how they look and how that pruning process happens. In terms of cleaning, we're improving sunlight, penetration, we're opening up for air exchange to occur, and we're opening space for wire to give us the capacity to design the tree. This is our, these are kind of our three big peaks or pinnacles of the cleaning process. And we say, listen, to maintain health throughout the entirety, tips to interior, apex to lower branches, we've got to have sunlight penetration causing any place where there's foliar mass in the tree to photosynthesize. If a piece is not capable of capturing the sun's energy and generating sugars and starches, then the tree will let go of that piece of foliage as just a non-contributor or an exhaustion of energy. So, we've got to get sunlight. Now, just like sunlight, we've got to get air. And most people think air-producing. Air penetration into the interior branches is an oxygen source. But what the tree needs to be able to photosynthesize is not the oxygen so much as the carbon dioxide, since that piece of carbon is the component, the carbon component that creates glucose with the combination of hydrogen and oxygen from water. When we have a really dense, heavily built up foliar mass that's photosynthesizing, it's off-gassing oxygen. It's transpiring water. And that really dense air mass of oxygen-rich, moist, humid air stays inside of that canopy. When we clean and we open it up, we get rid of the moist, oxygen-rich air and pull in carbon dioxide, which allows those interior branches to once again photosynthesize. So we're cleaning to allow sunlight penetration. In order for sunlight to be able to cause photosynthesis, we have to have carbon dioxide around that. And we've got to be moving air to get that carbon in. And we need to create the space and the structure to be able to get that carbon in. And we need to create the space and the structure to be able to get that carbon in. So we need to have a really dense air mass to be able to cause that nitrogen to get out of the tree. be able to wire our tree without crushing needles, without damaging photosynthetic solar panels, having the correct spacing to be able to aesthetically and functionally wire well and design a bonsai to maximize its aesthetic quality. Three reasons that we're cleaning. I want to take you guys into the studio. I want to show you sort of the cleaning process and the breakdown process, both on a tree and on just a branch. So you see how this occurs over multiple sort of areas and regions, and you can apply this practice to your own bonsai pruning process as you're designing trees. So now we're talking about pruning as a practice of cleaning. Cleaning for sunlight, cleaning for air circulation, and cleaning to prepare for the wiring process or just to be opening up the spaces around a tree that is wired. And it's necessary to understand that the cleaning process and the pruning to be cleaning is a yearly, routinely maintenance thing that we're doing to a tree to give it all the things that it needs to continue to sustain that interior ramification and all of the things that are happening to set us up to be able to create bonsai. The other thing that you guys need to understand about cleaning as a pruning practice is that we oftentimes apply this to the structure of the tree as well as to the secondary tertiary, meaning there's a lot of branches that exist in the structure, smaller, weaker branches, bar branches. There's just an abundance of branches in areas that aren't going to contribute to the eventual structure of the tree that we're removing to define our primary branching that the backbone of the tree is going to be built on. And then we're going to move out to the secondary tertiaries and clean out all of those, you know, via pruning, clean out all of those areas that are clogged for light, clogged for air, and need that path for wire to be applied or for the wire to continue to function. Okay, so we're going to dive into this juniper and I'm going to blast you guys in close here. This tree is ready to be wired and we're going to come into these areas in here and just kind of take a look on the interior at some of those structural decisions first and then we're going to move out to these secondary tertiary pieces second. Now, when we talk about pruning to clean for structure, particularly when we're first sort of digging into a tree, we're looking at these areas where we have these beautiful structural pieces in place that we know they're going to build. These are going to build the backbone of our tree, but we have these leggier pieces, that exist from the same junctions, forming structural flaws, but also, you know, just in terms of they're taking up the space that when I drop this branch back, when I move that branch forward, they're not going to be contributing to the design. So this is that practice of pruning on a structural level to be cleaning out some of those areas and I'm sure we're going to encounter more as we get in there. Now, when we get into these secondary tertiary areas, you start to see a lot of these really weak interior pieces where we have nice ramifications. We have a lot of ramifications around here to build pads and we even have some more solid ramification prior to these weaker pieces. I'm going to come in here and I'm going to be removing these. Some of those happen with your fingers. A lot of them happen with your scissors because they might be more established pieces. And what this is doing is it's opening up room for air and light, air circulation and light penetration. And I'm also cleaning up these junctions so that when I come to wire and approach these places, I'm not wiring over pieces of foliar mass. I'm going to come up into here. I'm going to clean out this first eighth say to quarter inch so that my wire has the ability to function on the shoulder of these branches and give me a good solid hold. And you guys have seen that structural wiring video so you know that contact with the shoulder is one of the most paramount concepts for the wiring practice. Any of these weak interiors that don't have branching aren't ramified when we compare those. And notice this. Notice how weak these are. They're not ramified. They're not really strong. These lignified branches. These lignified branches are going to be the pieces that are going to create our actual branch structure. Now, a lot of people are going to say, well, what about back budding? What if you don't want to prune out that growth? That's fine. Back budding will form where these are. These weak branches are not going to form good quality branches to use as bonsai. We're better off taking these off, opening that up to sunlight, setting that structure, and then letting the buds that develop that are strong, that are responsive to the vascular expansion of that photosynthetic efficiency, we're better off using those to be able to create our final pads and generate that growth that is going to be a refinable part of our eventual tree. Now, in this same angle, I'm just going to rotate so that you can see sort of this lateral layout of the branch that we have here. Now, one of the other issues and one of the other concerns when we start to prepare for wire is we oftentimes want to make sure we have this staggered approach. Now, notice that this branch being extremely strong and extremely photosynthetically efficient at the apical portion of the tree, notice how it has this right, left, right, left, right, left, right sort of orientation. That orientation is absolutely the best possible scenario. There's nothing that we're going to prune out of here. We don't have any groups of threes. We don't have an over congestion. I'm just opening up this first quarter to eighth inch of that shoulder so that we have a nice clean space for our wire to be able to get onto the tree. We've got great sunlight penetration, great air circulation. This is exactly what we're looking to accomplish. Not saying that cleaning is this big massive ordeal, but it is a priority as we start looking to raise the level of our tree. We're trying to get rid of the things that are detracting and preventing that really strong healthy growth. And we're leaving behind the things that we can utilize to make the best bonsai possible. Okay? So I'm just going to kind of continue to dialogue as I clean here, making sure that we're giving good solid area to be wiring, making sure that we're eliminating anything that's going to be overly congested and potentially blocking that sun. And as we get into the interior, we're going to see a lot more of that kind of density that we're going to have to be making decisions on. Really, this tree has beautiful, beautiful, beautiful setup for structure. Okay? Now I'm going to blast you guys in here. Here's one of those areas as we get into the interior. Now notice that we've got this very beautiful structure and we've got all of these sort of laggier pieces of growth. Now if we didn't have this real primary line, and then if I part these ways just a little bit more, notice this really beautiful strong branch right there. If we didn't have those pieces, obviously we're going to have to leave these. But because we've got structurally significant pieces, we're going to come in and we're going to take these smaller guys out that are clogging the way, that aren't allowing sunlight to get to the base of these branches, and we're going to be opening that up for that penetration, for that wiring path, for all of those things that we talk about in that pruning as a cleaning process. And I'm just going to continue to sort of refine what I've been doing here as I gain a little bit of a better feel for the layout of the tree and whatnot. This tree is going to be easy to wire after this. Okay, now notice how the density has changed. Notice the openness, the availability to sunlight and oxygen flow. I'm looking for this exact aesthetic, this exact pattern and layout across the entirety of the tree before I ever start to wire. And when we come back and we maintain this tree, we'll lay this structure out, we'll wire all of these pieces out. Some of these tips will be pruned back to start the reallocation process. Some of them will be left long for the developmental process. We will come back as that interior gets sunlight, gets air flow and that carbon dioxide contributing to photosynthesis. And we're going to have to do this again as this tree adds density and sunlight and air can't penetrate. And we don't have that space between our branching. We'll have to do it again to maintain it. We'll have to do it again probably when we unwire and rewire. And this becomes that routine maintenance. Pruning as a cleaning practice is a part of keeping a healthy bonsai with those interior branches that allow us to keep the tree small. It's one of those things where the trees are not even a stump. So only your roots have to be little. And you need to know that. And that's when you'll have to do it right. It's not me saying it necessarily, but it's me saying it. So the tree is the only thing that keeps the other branches alive. It's the only thing that is healthy, and it's the only thing that keeps the other branches alive. It's the only thing that keeps the other branches alive. I want to remember a couple of things. If you think of a tree as a kind of a tool for your garden, just remember that. Okay. Okay, so thorough cleaning, thorough opening up, removal of those structural pieces that are clogging up that air light, as well as in the secondary tertiary realm, this tree is now, one, if we didn't style it right now, would be far healthier to continue growth. We would maintain interior ramification, we would be able to continue to develop interior pieces of the foliar mass. But beyond that, it's now ready to be wired. They're designed and styled as a bonsai. There will be further removal, selection, length, strength, reallocation, et cetera, in the styling process. But this is that first step, and this is also that routine maintenance in a bonsai that's laid out, obtains a lot of foliage mass over the course of the season. We come back in and we do that cleaning to keep health inside the tree. So let's go back to the whiteboard. Let's take a look at our number two sort of reason why we prune. Okay, so now that you guys have a fairly... Let's just say a much better idea of how we clean, why we clean, and that portion of the pruning process. Let's come back and look at our second big reason why we're pruning, management of growth. Now, we know as a bonsai practitioner that we're trying to keep this tree small. If we let it get big, it's just going to be a normal tree, right? So we're trying to keep the proportions, we're trying to keep this thing small. And in doing so, management of growth also requires that we're directing the strength and we're controlling that length. So when we talk about this, management of growth from controlling that strength, not letting the strong get stronger and the weak get weaker. And we know, in terms of a tree, the tips are going to get longer and stronger, the apex is going to get longer and stronger, the lower branches are going to get shorter and weaker or not grow as much, and the interior is going to get shorter and weaker. This is the natural growth process of a tree that thinks it's going to be big. And we're saying, hang on, wait. Wait, I don't want the tips to be strong once I start getting to a point, where my developmental process is finished and I'm entering the pruning and refinement as a bonsai. I want to direct that strength from the tip to the interior. I want to direct the strength from the apex down to the lower branches to build this beautiful sort of representation of nature in miniature. We come back and we prune for direction. So we know that straight lines in bonsai, for the most part, and right, gray, not black and white, straight lines in bonsai, for the most part, are not desirable. And we're able to prune, to dictate, the direction. We're able to prune to create the decisions in the structure of where our positive space and negative space occurs. We're able to change our ramification and create those zigs and zags that give us beautiful branch shapes. This is a big part of pruning, to change and direct the direction of our branching. And then in terms of length, beyond that strength capacity, beyond that elongation in terms of tips getting stronger, we need to control that length that that design occurs. Now we can control that in ramification, and we can control that by removing entire branches to reduce larger portions of the silhouette and improve the structure or control the structure via these length changing decisions. So when we start to talk about management of growth, we have management of growth occurring on a structural level as well as on a refinable level in our secondary tertiary and our primary branching from the correlation of strength, direction, and length. And just to sort of touch on the mechanism that allows us to redirect, when we talk about the tip of the branch here and these buds that are going to be strongest and elongating first, in the tip of the bud we have a hormone called auxin. Auxin is a wonderfully beautiful hormone necessary for growth produced in the root tip of the plant that hitches a ride on the water molecule. Water molecules moving up through the foliar mass carried to the points of the tree where transpiration is taking place, depositing the auxin at the tip. Now if auxin is being moved from the root tip to the foliar mass and it's hitching a ride on each water molecule that enters that tree, the place in the foliar mass that's losing the most water is having the most auxin deposited. And if you're a tree and you're saying, I want to be big, how do I control and how do I decide which piece of growth is going to become the next apical leaf? The leader, it's the one that's transpiring the most, probably has the biggest exposure to sunlight and wind. That probably is your most efficient capacity to be a big tree. So it makes sense that auxin is deposited there and auxin actually suppresses the growth of the branches around it so that it creates a singular leader. This is how we get these big elongating tips. Now when we remove auxin, what ends up happening is that suppression is removed and all of a sudden it stimulates growth across all of the growth tips that we have behind it. And this is where we start to say we control strength by removing auxin. We control direction and transition by removing auxin. We control length or the reduction of length by removing auxin and using these pruning decisions. In reality, if we want to talk about management as a pruning practice, we're managing auxin as much as anything else that the tree is producing. To be able to give us control of this miniaturized bonsai form. Let's go into the studio and let's take a look at this pruning practice to manage growth in terms of strength, direction, and length and the reduction of auxin. Okay, so that management of growth now. Big, big reason in bonsai why we're pruning. We're talking about reallocation of strength from the tip to the interior pieces. Now when we think about this whole concept of development to allow elongation, thickening, foyer expansion, development of interior growth, and back budding from that increase of resources moving through the tree. Now to transition that energy to the interior means we've got to take the auxin out of the tip. And as a tree evolves and develops, even a bonsai is going to accumulate strength on the tip and we're going to have to continue to manage the stronger areas to push that growth and limit that suppression of that auxin, that hormonal concentration in the tip, so that those interior pieces gain the strength being allocated towards the tip and start to produce that ramification that gets us a denser and denser and more refined branch. As far as directional pruning, in terms of controlling the direction, whenever we're pruning to get a lateral, say for example, and most of the time this is true in bonsai, we want a lateral presentation of our growth. That means that when we're pruning, we're pruning to shift the direction from either a singular line to a multitude of two, or we're pruning where we may have a vertical growth, making that decision to prune, and some of our decisions to prune, based on what direction that bud is going to be facing and we need that growth in consideration for that entirety of the branch. And then the third reason that we're really looking at, that length reason now, is because we've got this idea that the apex is going to be pulled back, we're going to have this play on length. Out, in, out, in. In terms of the silhouette, that's what gives us visual interest in our bonsai. As branches get longer and longer, we've got to manage that length to be able to maintain that out, in, out, in movement, as well as that asymmetry, as opposed to that symmetrical canopy that the tree is going to be moving towards because it is growing with such vigor, the lower branches are going to get weaker, the upper portions are going to get stronger, and we're going to start to get that symmetry of growth that gives that tree photosynthetic efficiency when it's left to its own devices. Okay? So I'm going to dive into this spruce. This spruce was pruned, I believe this was pruned in, it was either a spruce stream or a spring growth stream last season, just at this very time, right before it was pushing, and I believe it even had some little green buds pushing, it was like the last week that we could prune it. And we reduced a significant amount of growth. And that stream was really that pillar of hitting that pruning at that energy positive state, all the stored sugars and starches just moving. We pruned it then, and I was even a little bit hesitant to come back in and pinch and manage the growth after that pruning because we removed so many branches. Now, because I didn't manage it, we're almost back to the same position we were in when I pruned it, and I'm not going to make the same mistake twice. We're going to be pruning to transition energy from the strong to the weak, exterior to interior, apex to lower branches, we're going to be pruning to control direction of this next piece of growth that comes out, and we're going to be pruning to control the length to be able to now manage the shape of the silhouette and give this tree the best possible visual quality we can. So when I dive into pruning and starting to transition strength and energy, I've always got to be looking at what length do I need in addition to that pruning decision. So I'm going to be rotating back and forth, and when I see the design of this tree, I recognize that I like this length here, but I'm not as much of a fan of this length here. So when we come into the detail cam, we can see that we've got this central pillar here that has these big massive, this big massive trio of buds. If you can see those three buds on the tip. Now that is a lot of auxin accumulating there that's suppressing these smaller buds behind it, and I want to reduce this. So by pruning back to these two smaller pieces, I'm going to transition the energy that was going into that central stalk into these two pieces, activating both of these pieces of ramification as a result of that transition from one to two. I'm going to get more controllable growth in these finer pieces of ramification, but in addition to that, I've now reduced the length aesthetically. Now we're starting to merge that gap of function and aesthetics in the pruning process. Now I'm going to shift to this next one here, and as we look along this range, we see again two strong buds at the tip of that elongated growth. Notice that I have this very beautiful bud at the very base of that growth. I don't want this to be that long, and I also want to transition that energy. I'm going to come in here, not going right up to the bud, leaving myself just a little bit, and prune that off to transition the energy of that shoot into that bud to rebuild and start to reallocate that energy and resource. When I look to this shoot now, I notice that I have a singular bud, and I don't have any ramification on the interior. I don't have a place to be pruning this back to on a spruce, and there are trees that we can prune back to, without buds, like a bald cypress or a deciduous tree, and there are trees that we can't prune back without a bud, like a spruce, like a pine. Now I've got to make a decision. At the junction of this branch, right here, I see that I do have a bud right back here at the very base of this. It'll take this ramification down to one piece for this flush of growth, but I will get a new flush here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to stimulate that flush of growth, taking this down to a single, short, reduced leader, so that I stimulate that, reduce that length, and transition that energy. This is all part of the pruning decision and process. If I keep moving through this, notice again I've got this big, long central leader. I've got these two finer pieces of ramification, and I don't want length. I don't want development here. I'm moving more towards refinement. I'm going to reduce that central pillar. Notice that this interior piece that isn't necessarily contributing to this silhouette is extremely long, but I've got these beautiful luscious, and let me go ahead and show you this. I've got these beautiful luscious buds, two of them set up right at the base. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to prune that right back to those buds. Notice how that shortens that. Now with just a little piece of wire to lay this out and this out, I've got that interior body starting to form that gives us contour to our branch. That's really setting me up and holding those upper pieces of ramification back in terms of growth management and building that sort of ramification. And the structure that's going to give us the best possible final product as this tree is refined. So I'm going to go through this tree and I'm going to continue to make these decisions about length, about reallocation, about strength management and direction towards those interior pieces, and I'm going to be making the pruning decisions based on where my buds are and what direction I want those buds to be moving. We'll come back at the end if we come across any specific situations and take a look at how that pruning to manage growth is going to be occurring in those random situations. Thank you. Okay, so this is a really awesome time to stop so that you can see the duality of the finished section versus the unfinished section. I'm going to step up close to you guys here. Now, on this left side, all of this has been pruned. It's been reduced. The length has been controlled. The strength has been reallocated. There's a little bit of debris sitting in there because I'm not quite finished. So we've been controlling that length, redirecting that strength. Get that one out of the way as well. And making those growth management decisions that are giving us the ability to continue to evolve and develop and push this design forward, allow this tree to function from the aesthetics as well as the horticulture. This right side here, and particularly in the back, we still haven't touched a lot of this. And you can see the difference when you compare the left to the right. This is unpruned, so there's a lot of strength at the tips. There's a lot of overly elongated pieces. And that process has to apply and be applied to the entirety of the tree in order for this to really work. And reallocate that energy and manage that growth in all the ways that the pruning process allows us to manage. So we're going to finish out the rest of this. But instead of focusing on finishing that out, we feel like you guys have that concept in mind of why we prune, when we prune, and what we prune. We're going to go ahead and we're going to move on to that third concept, take you back to the whiteboard, and discuss that last remaining piece and pillar of the pruning process and why we do it. Okay, so now that you guys have dug into this, we're going to move on to the next step. We're going to move on to the cleaning process and pruning as a cleaning, pruning as a management of growth. Let's get into that third really big sort of majorly encompassing in regards to bigger aspects of design and refinement. The structural improvement. Okay, and now when we talk about each of these pruning styles, you guys have to be looking at this in terms of how it not only applies to the branch tips, but also to the structure of the tree and the primary branches as they emerge from the trunk. It's the same as we have to clean off weak branches, unwanted branches from the trunk to be able to design and see our bonsai and wire, and we've got to clean off and improve the growth management of our big branches and our tips to get that final bonsai practice. In the structural improvement, we're always improving structure in terms of our primary branching as well as our secondary tertiary branching. And the pruning process applies across the board in terms of three major considerations to primary and structural as well as secondary tertiary refinable pieces of growth. Okay, so just keep that in mind as we continue moving forward. So in terms of structural improvement, refinement of branching. Whether it be refinement of branching from the trunk, and if you guys watched the Cedrus stream, you saw a tree that was 56 years in bonsai cultivation that still had a bar branch that only after 56 years was that bar branch causing a structural issue. So when we say refinement, even after 56 years there was still a big bar branch that only 56 years later was causing inverse swelling. Refinement of branching, structural or secondary tertiary, improvement of the inner node length at the tips of the branches, coarse inner nodes, or pieces of elongation between buds, removed for tighter, finer inner nodes. Coarseness, or that thickness at the tip, or maybe overly thick primary structural branches on the trunk proportional to the tree, we're going to be taking those out as that time evolves in the pruning process. Any areas where we have three branches that are at the same junction of growth, whether it's on the trunk or on a secondary or a tertiary piece of ramification, contributing too many sugars and starches to one junction causing a swelling, we take those down to twos. Improving taper. Coarse, thick to thin, as we refine our branches and we work towards refining our trunk, can apply to the trunk line as well to improve that transition as well as increasing that quality of line, direction of movement, different angles, different spaces, different planes that that movement occurs on to generate more and more interesting line in our design. Removal of flaws. Now this comes back again to almost the same as refinement because again, removal of flaws, taking away those threes down to twos, being able to undo or remove those swellings from bar branching or potential areas where the pruning process didn't go deep enough, this is a big part of structural improvement as a pruning practice. And then the creation of negative space. And this is a big one because every bonsai as this tree evolves and develops is going to move back towards this pyramidal growth that is the highest level of photosynthetic efficiency for a tree becoming big. And when we start to see all of this happening, the way that we continue to generate interest in the silhouette and create that balance and give that impression of age is to open up pieces of negative space, allow sunlight and oxygen penetration, which was a big part of our cleaning and our management, but also design-wise to create that same movement flow, age design. These are all of the pieces that encourage us to prune. So now, kind of summing all of this up, pruning as a practice sets the backbone for your design. It's completely and totally misunderstood in the entirety of the bonsai approach and very rarely dove into in terms of the depth and the reasons and the why and the how. But if you guys can master the process of pruning beyond any other technique that you apply to the canopy of this tree and you understand when a tree is in its energy positive state so that your pruning process has a directly positive impact on the tree, then you're going to be setting the foundation and establishing a design that regardless of whether you wire or not, regardless of anything else that you do aesthetically, you're going to be achieving a higher result. Why we prune? To clean, to manage the growth, and to improve the structure of the tree. Why are we doing what we're doing is based on what are we trying to accomplish, what is the function, what are the aesthetics. This is a really valuable pruning exercise for you. I hope this has cleared up some things for you guys, made the knowledge a little bit more concise. Let's go into the studio, let's take a look at structural improvement as a pruning practice and then we'll sign off and see you guys next time. Okay, so now that we've sort of established that third pillar of pruning to correct structural issues, I wanted to come to a more open tree where we can see a lot of these very visually sort of representative species. We have a Zelkova here. That came out of Randy Knight's growing field. Wonderful structure. It's a tree that we did a lot of initial structural work on. And when we come back and we talk about that structural work, we're working to eliminate big significant structural flaws, improve the taper line, coarseness, reduce threes down to twos, and doing that not only in the structure, but also in the finer branches of the tree. And then that last piece of opening up negative space. And that's not necessarily going to be something we're going to see as much here as in another example. But let's take a look at just what we've accomplished so far to see what those first moves really gave us in terms of that pruning process. So if we zoom in here in tight, you can see sort of the remnants of what was a very big branch moving out here overly long. We adjusted the length. We reallocated that strength towards the interior, transitioned to much finer branches. But what you can see is that we still have a lot of coarseness in these branches. So the pruning process is this consistent return to what we're trying to accomplish to continue the refinement, to continue the improvement of the line, to continue the improvement of the taper until we get that really beautiful transition from the base of the tree, through the trunk, through the primary branches, to the secondaries, to the tertiaries, giving us this outstanding sort of point of evolution across the entirety of the tree. So I'm going to take you in and you can see some of the older scars where we fully removed structural issues where we had multiple branches in a single point. We can see these leftover nodes where we respected the collar of the cut. We cut at the collar. It compartmentalized right at the collar. We'll come back in and take off those junctions. But also notice here where we are starting to have areas of threes that's causing swelling. We took these down. Maybe this grew in the interim. We need to be doing some more selection. Stay up on that pruning process. And so let's dive into each one of these issues and sort of look to how we handle these and attack solving those structural improvements. So in regards to the removal of flaws, first and foremost, I always want to come back and clean up areas that are starting to look unsightly or where we've had that recession and compartmentalization. And when we clean these up, it's perfectly acceptable to open up some of those old wounds to be able to get in and just give that a really beautiful, nice sort of incision. And a lot of people ask when do we actually make a concave cut if we're always respecting the shoulder with deciduous trees? Well now, after it's compartmentalized that and we've got some callus formation, we can come back in and we can dig in a little bit deeper to create that more concave sort of inset cut into the tissue of the plant. And then we can come back and instead of going back to that really thick cut paste, the putty, we can come back and we can just liquid paste it because the only thing that we're actually stopping now that that original wound was compartmentalized is desiccation of the tissue that we've just re-exposed. And that's a very easy way to preserve it with the liquid cut paste. Now in terms of improving those structural flaws, we've got to be looking at the totality of the shape of this tree. Here we see one, two, three branches emerging from this singular junction. And we notice that we're getting this shoulder swelling here that's causing an inverse taper issue in this branch. I'm going to come in and I'm going to have to make a decision. Now when I look through this, I notice that this branch hangs down almost into this branch below it. Whereas this branch really forms sort of a pinnacle of the canopy here. And this branch also gives us some really interesting ramification that exists almost in a better proportional space than this lower piece. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take off this lower piece seeing that I have good ramification, I have good ramification good structure, good transition. This is very coarse out to here. Very poor ramification. Every single thing that I could use to make that assessment says that this is the least or lesser of all three branches that are sort of existing in this space. So I'm going to come back and again I'm going to treat this at the shoulder first. And I'm going to let this go ahead and compartmentalize right here at the shoulder just the same as we did with this. After it compartmentalizes I can come back in and I can go ahead and reduce that and pace that. I don't want to cut in too far because I don't want to cause that dieback right here. Same considerations apply each time we make these structural changes and improve structural flaws in the tree. And again this is truly a process over the course of time and I'm just going to take it back so I don't leave a big grotesque stump. But this is a consistent thing that we have to address the slow transition to getting that concave cut over the course of time. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to pace that up. Small wound meaning limited amount of cut pace necessary. So that's one major structural flaw. Now we're going to come up into the upper portion of the tree here and we've got another area where we have very significant bar branching that is going to start creating a structural flaw but it hasn't started yet. So I'm on the fence about whether or not I need to make this decision now where it's not causing an immediate structural flaw or whether I want to wait and make this decision later. Now I'm going to show you these two branches from the front of the tree just so that you're aware of what we're looking at and what we're talking about here is this branch right here that forms this significant movement to the right but does sit in front of this albeit it engages the viewer because we don't have a lot of ramification and then this big branch on the upper left here that fills the entire rear left portion of the canopy. So when I step up in front and I start to look at the value of either of those pieces I do tend to feel like it might be better to transition out of using this branch to occupy that big line and starting to develop some branches that are starting out as small buds along that more primary branch so that we don't lean on this for that development and we remove the structural flaw proactively. So let's go ahead and make that pruning decision just to continue moving this tree down the path of evolution with the pruning process. So again I'm going to respect the shoulder if we come in close here and I'm going to take out this fine twig. If we come in close here and I'll move these guys as well my shoulder on a Zelkova is much tighter to the trunk than the shoulders say are on a beach or on a stewardia. So I've got this shoulder right against the trunk here and I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take this one to be able to get my knuckle cutter or my knob cutter in there just to remove that so that I can come in and get a beautifully clean cut on that spherical shoulder that exists in that 360 degree circumference of the branch. I bring these in here and this is going to respect that shoulder, stay within the confines of that shoulder, but take a nice clean being really aware of the branches nice clean cut out of that. Notice that I left that shoulder intact once we start to get that healing that first callus roll compartmentalization I can go back in and take that into the trunk and that one being more significant I'm going to want to go ahead and paste that up with some of the putty cut paste which I will do after we finish this round of work okay. So as I continue to look at this I notice a few more areas where we've got some structural issues that need to be addressed in order to use pruning to continue improving the quality of the tree and some of these structural issues start to focus more on the finer portions of ramification where elms and zelkovas and other species as well will form these sort of clumps. So notice where we have one branch here and one branch immediately above it. Now both of these occur at a beautiful junction in terms of their location origin and also their function in the design of the tree. However we can't have these two and we usually tend to talk about groups of three as being a bar branch but in this instance our group of three, one, two and the main stem being the third piece of growth originating from this singular location, we've got to go in and we've got to remove these to further continue avoiding swellings and deformation of the branch. I'm going to take the one off the top and I'm going to take the one off the top for a very specific reason. When we look at this we see that the big elongated shoot actually died back right at that junction and I've got these multiple clusters of branches that exist in threes, fours, etc. Whereas the branch that I left has a very beautiful line, has very beautiful distribution and refinement and we'll be able to make that a far better, higher quality branch easier than we would have the stronger, more robust shoot with the dieback that already existed on it. So structural flaws exist even after the first working. We didn't eliminate all of them and they continue to sort of rear their ugly head throughout the evolution of bonsai because growth is always originating when you have a strong tree from places where there are collars, joints, junctions, etc. That's just a natural part of bonsai and a continued process of that maintenance on a yearly basis to continue improving line, taper, form, structure, etc. Now I want to come back and look more at the finer ramification and talk about that improvement of the tips as one of the major structural improving techniques that we utilize pruning to achieve. When we talk about the tips we're looking at getting a very beautiful transition of taper from the very base of the trunk or base of the tree through the trunk up through the apical region out to our secondary branches and as we follow these secondary branches all the way out here into tertiary ramification. You can see some of the taper that's starting to be worked into these branches. I'm going to continue to rotate and I'm just going to show you a few of these branches and point out these transitions where big cuts have been made to get to finer branching, etc. Now we're into some of the beginnings of ramification. We're always looking to try and improve this. When we come back to refine the tips and do that work to take this tree to the next step, where we see big, thick, long, unsightly lines, we've got to understand that these big, long arcing unsightly lines can be improved by the pruning process. Maybe we choose to take this big, long line back to this piece and have a change of angle and start to pull in a more jagged movement. Four elms, four zelkovas, that's very appropriate. Species specific indeed. Maybe we leave the smoother, softer curve but we shorten that point of thickness on our secondary to be replacing that with a finer branch that's going to be elongating from that point, improving that taper. I'm going to start by first reducing this to the next piece of ramification just so that we start to see how taking that out reduces the length of that thicker piece and starts that transition to a finer piece of growth and a tertiary ramification sooner. We can start to make some decisions. Even this feels still a little bit long, the arc of the bend not necessarily attractive. I'm going to come back one more junction to this piece and this is going to take over really as that next, I think, wonderful sort of ramification taper and improvement of movement. Now we come here, here, here, and we'll go here to finish that off, ramification building in this area. In addition to that though, I wanted to open up this junction from where we pruned off that structural piece earlier. We're thinking about multiple things as we refine the tips that are playing into some of the structural decisions and the totality of this shape in the pruning process. When we come back to some of these pieces that we've allowed to elongate for development, we also need to be thinking about starting that transition of taper. When we look at overly long internodes, notice the internode from this branch, and I'll put my hand behind it to isolate it. We've got this branch here, we've got this tiny piece of ramification here. That length of that internode when we start talking about the tip of the branch, just the same as we want the line to go from thick to thin to thinner to thinnest as that transition of taper, we want the internode to go from long to shorter to shortest and really refine that distance. So as we move out this, I want to shorten that internode length as much as I possibly can. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to first start by removing this to here considering the length of the totality of this piece in the process. I'll never prune all the way back to where I think I want. For example, if I pruned all the way back to here to this fine piece, I would be pruning so short that this branch no longer engages in the shape of the canopy, but I can be thinking that over the course of the next two to three years, I'll be building my pad from here, and when that pad becomes more evolved, maybe I further improve the taper back to there in the next pruning of this tree as we continue to perpetuate and develop it as a bonsai. Pruning, as much as it is a technique and a discipline, is also a strategy for how do we build a tree and continue moving it forward creating the highest possible aesthetic quality each time we touch the tree. Now on the finest levels, when we start getting to the real refined tips of the tree, notice how the growth of this really fine branch is all the way out here at the tip, but we have an internode here, we have an internode here, we have an internode here, we have an internode here. Now we talk about pruning in terms of growth management to transition the strength, you can see that this tip apical bud has that auxin that's suppressing these other buds from developing, and also we don't want this tip to be this long and not have this ramification developing, so in refinement of the tips prior to bud push, it's always wise to come back and transition the energy that's in this one tip to at least two internodes, and ideally, two internodes from one to two, two to four, four to eight, eight to sixteen, sixteen to thirty-two. Now we can plan on this internode and this internode pushing as a result of that prune. From one, we get two. This is refinement of the tips. Improvement of the line, improvement of the taper, improvement of the quantity of branches and their internode length to reduce it to the finest possible degree. Refinement of the tips, wonderful aspect of pruning to develop the highest quality bonsai. Now, I'm going to go through this tree. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to change a lot of the structural flaws. I'm going to go in and I'm going to prune and refine the tips. We'll take a look at what it looks like when it's done. It's going to be notably different than what it is now. I'm going to get to work. I'm going to go in and I'm going to fix the pruning. I'm going to go in, and I'm going to fix the pruning. It looks like you're going to put the prune the right way. So, here I am, in the central branch of the plant, and we're going to move through the pruning. So, from this tree, I'm going to go in and I'm going to fix the pruning. We're looking at an income on the bottom of the pruning. It's not going to be enough. It's going to be enough for the now we see the end of that structural improvement pruning that we've done where we've taken away any structural flaws in terms of trios causing inverse swelling we've improved the lines we've improved the taper and we've refined the tips of the branches we've also taken a few more steps in terms of coming back to old cuts where they've compartmentalized that taking that back into the trunk to start to eliminate those swellings and repasted them and this year this tree is going to just flourish from having all of that energy redirected having those lines improved having that taper improved we're just going to see this tree exponentially climb in terms of quality a little bit of wire work will be necessary to just kind of guide some of these big structurals and secondaries but you can see a dramatic shift in the aesthetic as a result of that pruning process that really helps this tree evolve and builds the structure and the foundation for us to create a really wonderful bonsai so in the totality of all of this um all of this pruning concept uh you guys are seeing sort of the you guys are seeing sort of the you guys are seeing sort of the multi-faceted aspect of how pruning is applied as a technique and a fundamental foundation to set the course whether we're cleaning sunlight air room for wire or routine maintenance over the course of the year whether we're managing growth we're allowing development to take place we're pruning to transition from the tip to the interior we're managing all of those lines all of that taper and structural issues in terms of structural improvement these are the reasons that we prune and the way that we set the foundation for trees you saw in the original juniper that we pruned how we opened up some negative space we've got one more sort of scope that i wanted to come back to while we were working that juniper we saw the opportunity to really add one more structural improvement to that tree so we're going to bring that tree back onto the turntable and we're going to talk about that big removal for negative space in a grander way than we saw it originally applied to cap off this pruning concept and show how that tree takes that next step as a fairly mature design to open up that negative space visibility enhance create more asymmetry in the canopy and then we'll have wrapped up all of those pruning concepts so let's get that in here we'll take a look at it and we'll send you guys on your way with a new scope of knowledge to be able to better your bonsai practice sort of this idea of taking a mature tree and continuing to advance its design this tree has been in development at mirai for almost four years now and we've built a lot of parts of the tree and you saw what this looked like with all the elongating shoots the development you're going to be able to see the transition you saw us remove some unnecessary branches as the tree continues to fulfill that design concept and also inform us in terms of how we're designing and as we were pruning this tree or as i was pruning and cleaning and sort of doing this original scope of work to show you guys the power of pruning and that control of growth and just sort of the broad scope of pruning i noticed a tremendous opportunity based on the development of the tree so i'm going to step around here now over the course of this tree's evolution and i'm going to stand out of the way here i've been waiting for this branch to give me enough of a little counter here to the tremendous movement that's existing now this movement to the right isn't necessarily anchored by a living piece of tissue on this deadwood which means for the most part i've counterbalanced that lack of foliage mass here with this branch up in this area now but it's always hidden a very valuable piece of deadwood up here and so in in this evolution and in that development and in that process where we've gotten elongation out of this branch in the back and we're now starting to see it be visible here to counter that lack of live vein and that grounding with that movement to the right i see now the opportunity to fully remove this branch which includes this piece here and this branch that's disguising this really wonderful piece of deadwood and i'm going to roll this to the detail cam so that we can take a look at this okay so we're looking right in here to this branch and and i'm going to lift it just one second you can kind of see what that's going to open up and what you're going to be able to notice and appreciate about this once we remove it but beyond just that removal of this branch and this branch seeing more deadwood we're also going to notice that we're going to pick up more asymmetry in the design so we won't have this significant silhouette here this really rounded silhouette we're going to get this big shift here and it's going to push the movement off to the right here we go so so so so so so so so oh Okay, and now inside of that movement we've opened up more space, we've created a bit more asymmetry, we'll continue to work on refining these, pruning these back to dictate that length, allocate strength towards the interior, and we'll really control the elongation of this so that we get that deadwood and we have that visibility. But now you can see that total commitment to the right that's happening. Let me go a little bit further. And we've got just this little piece in the back that's actually to a point where we get that green mass and that's all that we need to counter that and really hold stability in the design of this tree. This is pruning as a structural improvement to be aging the design of the tree and evolving that tree's growth, removing full branches, full pieces, opening up visibility, creating negative space, regaining proportion in the silhouette, and improving furthering the design beyond what we had originally conceptualized. We're getting it to a point where we can make those big moves. This is pruning at a very advanced sort of pinnacle of the pruning process, making those big decisions. So you guys are now armed with the ability and knowledge of how pruning works, how to clean, how to refine and direct growth, how to be able to structurally improve your trees and advance their state of existence as a bonsai. This is a massive foundation for you guys to be able to utilize. I encourage you to work at it. Think about it. Think about each branch. Prune at the appropriate time when the tree's in an energy positive to elicit a positive response. Think about whether you're refining or you're developing so that you can guide the decisions that you're making on the branches. And always be approaching each individual branch, one branch, one shoot at a time to be able to take that bonsai to the next level. Good luck. I hope this helps you guys a lot in understanding this very major pillar concept of bonsai design. And we will look forward to seeing your bonsai improve as a result of the project. Thank you. This is the Fundamentals series. Thanks, guys. 
