oh wow what's going on everybody Wednesday mini stream got my elongating elongating one pack of ninjas in the house today this this piece of material there's like and and I feel like there's always at some point you're gonna say every tree is unique you know Ryan like you make a big deal out of every tree it's true I like the trees we have at Mirai and each one is special and has its own story and has its own context but this piece does stand out from a lot of other pieces that we have at Mirai and the reason for it is is number one it's one of these ancient fin spruces right Jerry Morris collection originally owned by another individual in in Denver Colorado and has been styled and cared for by a multitude of people so this tree also has kind of an accumulation of provenance and history I have the wood boards for stability if I took them out it would sit like this we put this in the Yonkoulic crescent and ultimately even these pieces here have root mass attached to them which is where the raft when we talk about a raft a connected root there is a fundamental root base that exists but you see the connection of these pieces and the roots coming off of these individual trunks and every single trunk has a root mass and that is what gives rise to the fundamental concept of a raft a connected root style a raft style bonsai this does not abide by your traditional notion or understanding of a raft style bonsai because it's on an angle in a crescent slab and all of a sudden we're like wait I thought these occurred in shallow containers I thought every late everything laid down it then produced its own roots all those pieces are connected to each other and that's why it's so important to understand what a raft is it's the fundamental understanding that each of these components has its own unique root system could exist on its own but still contributes to the greater good of the entire composition and I felt like when I looked at this and when we tilted this up initially this did lay down and you had this homogeneous height to all of the living pieces of the tree and inside of that we lost that hierarchy or that sense of unity and that sense of a forest but when we tilted it up and we started to pull this piece in the back into a higher elevation and we started to lower this and raise this into the intermediate now we started to tap into that fundamental sort of capacity for this connected root style to represent an entire ecosystem unto itself right and that was the real magic when this composition started that process and we broke through kind of we're able to shed some of the formalities or limitations of the raft style and really kind of play with this notion of creatively what can become of this and so today now our job this is recovered from the repotting process our job is to start to try and reconcile and let me show you what we're trying to reconcile reconcile the fact that the biggest tree that exists here the tallest apical region of this is all the way towards the back right very very uncommon to have the apex so far in the back do we abide by our that convention do we let that convention guide us that this needs to come towards the front do we try to pull this towards the front do we accept that the depth of this piece gives it a tremendous amount of of visual quality and interest and accept that that piece in the back has a real value back there do we change the size of the apex to create a greater sense of proportion and scale of distance to really magnify the foreground background and shift that aesthetic these are all of the things that we're trying to do right now we're trying to do right now we're trying to do that we start rolling around as we start to talk about the creation not just of a raft but I think for this specific piece the pieces of formality that kind of bog us down now anytime and again I always come back to this anytime we start breaking into a new piece right it makes sense to start the cleaning process this has some old wire on it I didn't want to spend the time unwiring it because we're going to be cutting off a lot of branches that are going to save ourselves the the issue of unwiring and save ourselves the issue of unwiring and save ourselves the issue of unwiring that's the first thing is we have a lot of old needles that are just starting to shed and you can see all of those old third-year needles on the inside there right you see those at the base this is not an unhealthy branch this is a very common time that spruce start to let go much like ponderosa pine they have the capacity to create sort of or continue to generate or stay inside of that full year growth phase whether or or not they're going to actually be producing foliar mass or producing bud mass, spruce do tend to hold their needles all the way until the fall when we start to really see those third year needles drop. And it's a great idea as we're working them at this time of year to be taking off these weak and insignificant pieces, pieces without buds when we have a tree that really has an established degree of health and these older needles getting rid of them, not going too far, right? When we say take away older needles, a lot of people mistake that and start plucking off all the old needles and just leave this year's growth. That will, in a single season, completely debilitate a spruce. So how far do we go? We go through those third year needles and I use the pull test just as a simple way to kind of measure. If I grab a needle and I give it just a little bit of a pinch, I can always pull a needle off by exerting force, but if it's not ready to come off, my fingers will slide right off of that needle. Okay? Slide right off of that needle. But the ones that are ready to come off, and let's use this vertical one, okay? The ones that are ready to come off, they just shed very, very effortlessly. I'm not even grabbing them very hard. And then I get up to this point where the same amount of pressure and these are holding on, that's where I stop because those are still photosynthesizing and by eliminating the ones that are no longer contributing or are getting ready to be dropped off, we open the capacity to be able to, number one, open up that woody interior ramifiable tissue. That's really what we're trying to get to. It's what we're trying to tap into with wiring. It's what we're trying to open up, evolve, and advance, right? But then beyond that, we also make our job of wiring so much easier by that cleaning process, okay? So if we're just kind of trying to get a lay of the land, an understanding of structure, and start to try and figure out this wonderful, wacky world of a tree that we haven't had exposure to quite yet, then going through and performing the cleaning process allows us to meet the tree, if you will. And on spruce at this time of year, this is really important. Okay? Okay. This is really the action that we take. One of the other reasons that it's so brilliant to get to work spruce in the fall is because we are hitting them at that natural transition. Out of foliar and into vascular, we can clean these pieces off instead of wiring over the top of them, and all of a sudden, we really do have kind of a beautiful marriage of timing and application of technique, scope of work, to be able to maximize their response, to be able to maximize the quality of our wire, to be able to maximize the aesthetic, not having all those crushed needles underneath that, okay? I'm going to go ahead, and I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to get rid of just a few pieces of wire here, because there's an immediate that's jumping out to me. And I think when we talk about the connected root style, we sit down to work on a tree, this is a connected root tree, and we recognize, I don't know what I'm exactly going to talk about when we sit down with a connected root tree, because this tree is a connected root, definitely a little bit different and a deviation from the traditional understanding of a connected root, but also, you don't know what the tree has in store for you until you meet the tree, right? I haven't touched this tree yet. We've repotted it, the group that's actually in studio with me is the same group that repotted this tree, we've been through the aesthetics of it, we've kind of conceptualized the initial concept of the connected root, almost on a hillside, if you will, or having taking advantage of that display of verticality. But it's tough to know where to begin on a complex piece of material like this until you put your hands in the tree with the intention to alter its vegetative shape. And so as I'm putting my hands in this tree. the immediate thing that I'm recognizing is in this middle ground, I need to define the line of the apex, base to tip for each of these pieces. And again, I didn't know, I know that in fundamental design I need to do that. I know that in the creation of bonsai I need to do that. As I sat down today, my curriculum for this mini stream wasn't, I'm going to sit down, I'm going to talk about the cleaning process, then I'm going to walk them through defining the line base to tip. I didn't know that's where we were going to be. But that's where we are. And the reason that I know is as I'm cleaning, all of these pieces are kind of meshed together right in this middle ground. You see how dense? That's just a dense, dark mass right there. And this piece that really needs to carry sort of the engagement towards the viewer is hiding. It's running away from us towards the back of the tree. We've chosen this new front. We've chosen to accentuate the ancient deadwood. We've chosen to accentuate the group kind of dynamic of all of these pieces. And that means we... we have to isolate or at least be able to identify each one of those pieces as a singular stand-alone unit. So by taking off this wire, the only thing that I'm trying to do is open up the structural capacity to be able to alter the position of these pieces with the singular goal of defining the line base to tip. Now, when we get into this, defining the line base to tip, I might choose to drop this down because I do have my highest structural element is right here. Okay? So the highest structural element, we want to play. I want to play on this kind of vibe that we have here. There's a significant amount of influence happening in terms of these pieces. We don't see in the deadwood of this piece a lot of branching coming back to the left here. And that in itself is a very powerful display of design opportunity. So in that, do I take this piece and do I create engagement across the front here? I like this notion. I like this notion too of taking some of these pieces and continuing to push them away. I think this is starting to build a really interesting dialogue. And you might be saying, oh, okay, wind again. Wind influences every tree everywhere all the time. All the time. Right? There is no exhaustion of wind influence. Wind influences everything, everywhere, all the time. To what degree does wind influence the tree is completely determined by the characteristics of the material. Movement of the trunks, the formation of the deadwood. Could we say that this was stripped of snow on one side? But not the other? That's a challenging suggestion. That's a challenging suggestion to say, you know what? Snow only acted on half of this tree. So how else does a tree become one-sided in its growth habit? Well, there's really only kind of a few different ways that that happened. Now, it does have this interesting sort of movement up through this piece. As we see this curvature and we see this direction of wind, it's almost like the wind is coming against this tree up over some sort of environmental insinuation. And we talk about the crescent, right? The use of a crescent container, ceramic slab, et cetera, as kind of the ultimate suggestion of definitive environmental location. And so we already, when we vertically oriented this in the crescent container and we created that flow, that visual flow and that physical flow, that distribution of weight and that tied into, tapped into the characteristics of the tree already, then we already, to a large degree, set our design intentions, maybe even without, without actually thinking about that. Did we talk about wind when we did this? I don't, I don't think we did either. I don't think that was ever a discussion, like, oh, it looks like wind. And I've never thought wind. But then as I'm sitting here looking at this, I'm thinking, wow, wind. Yeah, no, this makes a lot, a lot of sense, okay? So let me go ahead and get this last piece off. This will help us. And then this is also going to guide the elimination of branching because if I leave all of this in the interior and I try to start making decisions, about the other pieces that play a role in the design of this, it's going to be very difficult, okay? My initial piece, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to connect this to the apical region of the tree. Let's go ahead and define that piece and really set the tone for the shapes and the existence of that multiple apicy form that we kind of have the opportunity to tap in here. And obviously, if you've tuned into enough Mirai Live, you know multiple apicy forms like me scratching a very, very fond itch. Because I think it does in the elongating species, in the spruce form, in the hemlock form, in the fir, in the redwood, in the bald cypress, right? The multiple apicy form in all of its different iterations is such a true piece of these apically dominant vascular strength and the vascular tissue species. They tend to, when they shed their upper apical region, they tend to respond. Very, very strongly with a big push of multiple pieces, trying to reestablish that apical region. And over the course of time, when you start to get old multiple times over, that old multiple times over means that you're getting multiple dieback, multiple destruction of apical regions. And you have more and more apices forming. With the loss of each apical region, that stimulates four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, different apical regions to form to try and reestablish the verticality of that structure. So if that happens again and again and again and again, what you get is you get this exponentially accumulating number of apical regions the older that an elongating species gets. And this tree, maybe more than any other, there's a few other Colorado spruce that I have that I would say have a similar kind of vibe of age. But this piece right here really does carry a very special nuance of age with it that I think is quite stunning and quite spectacular. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm even going to be thinking, in this creation, as I'm just sort of working through the definition of these lines, some of this kind of vibe. Notice these lines right here. Notice these lines. These are really educational lines. Those are informative to our process. Those are informative to the design. If I take all these branches and I lay them all down like they were a spruce that experienced no wind and I just handled it like a spruce, you would look at those and you would say, okay, I see a spruce, but I see all that. How does that relate to that? How do those two work together in the same composition? And the answer is they don't. They don't work together. How do we create that design consistency? How do we continue to build upon an idea that is informed by the characteristics of the tree? So this isn't a windswept tree. This is a raft-style tree, but it's a raft-style tree of significant age for a spruce, which means the apex has died back multiple times. And consequently, this is what has happened. We've gotten this continuation of this multi-trunk connected by the root mass to get this radical formation of all of these different individual ecosystems existing together. And this is where we start to tap into the fundamental concepts of the raft still needing to be respected. What are the fundamental concepts of a raft? Well, first and foremost, right, when we talk about a good raft, we talk about a good raft having the same characteristics as a good forest, as a good clump, as a good multi-trunk composition, okay? So we say, listen, the trunks need to have differing girths, differing girths. Now, one of the interesting things about the formal execution of differing girths or differing thicknesses of the trunk would be that the tallest trunk typically is the thickest trunk. But when you start to defy that concept of age and the apex gets knocked down, here, the most dominant trunk doesn't have a single living piece on it. That's amazing. This is amazing. This is ancient, right? The second most dominant piece is actually far lower and has very little living tissue on it. We're going to have to consider that in design, and that's a part of the story. I love this. I love this. It could not work out any better, in fact, to have this kind of immediate dialogue from the tree breaking all of the rules and conventions still doesn't mean that we deviate necessarily, from the concept of what makes a good raft a good raft because different heights, in terms of the definition of the line base to tip, this is one of the things that we have to put into the design, okay? So I'm already thinking, as I'm defining the line base to tip of this piece, I'm thinking, where in the hierarchy does this piece sit compared to the other pieces that I have? And am I super concerned about the thickness of this piece and how it represents the height compared to others? I'm going to say, for this composition, with its deviation already and informality, I'm not necessarily going to use the fundamental criteria of raft or multi-trunk creation that the thickest piece necessarily needs to be the tallest. I'm not going to elongate this up because that suddenly needs to be my tallest tree. In fact, this is catching the brunt of the wind that's blowing over this composition, and in that experience of force and in that gesture of force, it makes sense that that's the most dead, short, kind of stunted tree, and it makes sense that these pieces, protected by the knoll a little bit, have a little bit more lift and have a little bit more verticality. The story is authentically true, okay? But this piece right here, what I know is that I need it to be higher than the lowest piece that I see, which is the smallest piece in the composition, and inside of that, we are going to maintain some of that trueness to the raft style, okay? So already, we've kind of formulated a little bit of a concept for our composition, and that is, typically inside of a raft, we want different thicknesses of trunks, most of the time in the traditional execution, that thickest trunk is going to be your tallest piece. We recognize in this execution of this composition, we are going to deviate from that, okay? We are going to deviate, and we're going to pull on the ancient form and the natural characteristics that have already started to form themselves, okay? But I am going to be building. I'm going to be building on this wind-influenced form here. So I'm creating lines that are kind of moving, and we talked about those pieces from the proposed front, starting to engage with this, this deadwood, all right? So we've created openness here. We get a little bit of space in there. Now we're moving in that direction, and now we've kicked off the design. Okay, let's come back to this, because this piece feels like we need to understand what in the world is going on here. Seems as though the wire is quite heavy and quite dug in. I don't want, I don't want to cover up the really big portions of this, but I do need to be aware of the foyer mass that exists here, okay? So I have one branch coming to the front. One living junction on this entire piece, and it happens to be where three branches emerge together, okay? This piece in the back forms an apical region, or at least the taller of all the pieces, okay? And then I've got these two pieces dropping down, right? And I've got this piece dropping down and coming back over the front of this piece, really covering up what I would consider to be a very, very pivotal component of the tree. I'm already thinking, man, if I'm looking at this, this return piece here is hiding that visually. And I could create such a greater story. I have another piece of verticality here. I can create a greater story. I'm going to go ahead and I'm just going to say, let's get rid of this. Let's turn this into one of those remnants of what was, right? A fantastic piece of deadwood. We see that loss of those pieces. We don't have many returning pieces in this upper component. We see the same angularity and movement in this direction. Let's carry that thematic through. Let's stay true to the concept. Let's stay true to the material, okay? And in that, we start to create a little bit more space and a little bit more transparency. Really, really interesting there because now we see that rugged line, okay? I can carry this up and over to there. I love that, right? Coming back into here, do I want this point of verticality? I have to ask myself that because this is a dominant piece. This is a very, very dominant piece of the composition. Feels to me like having a little bit of an elevated canopy here above this piece but below the rear portion. I could see where that could really work and we lost a piece that was alive right here, which is unfortunate. We'll take it though because it gives us more remnants of what was. I'm not going to sit and sort of cry over spilled milk but we do have to understand that if we're going to keep one of, or excuse me, if we're going to keep a structurally sound tree, one of one, two, or three has to go. And when I start to look at this whole thing, I'm going to say this is giving us length and strength. This is giving us opportunity for verticality. Should we want it? Of these three pieces, this is kind of the least common denominator in terms of the quality that it adds. Excellent. Excellent. Let's go ahead. Let's make that move. Now you might be saying, well, you're deviating from traditional already, right? And this is just fundamental structure that we're talking about now. You're deviating from traditional. Why couldn't you keep three? I can't keep three because three is a structurally flawed system, right? Three branches is where this continues to swell up, become more and more unsightly, and starts to lose its value. And the deadwood that's going to play in this piece, that's showing a lot of rugged age and antiquity, that's where the thematic of value is built, okay? So by knocking one of those out to improve the structural integrity of the composition, I'm also enhancing the expression of age that this piece is kind of generating. And that's part of the whole process as well, okay? So that lightens that to a significant degree. Lightens that to a significant degree. I have another apice here that I can utilize, and I'm going to be pulling this piece over into that region. Let's go ahead and see if we can position that apex, because I think positioning that apex is going to have a major, major impact. Okay, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to get rid of just the limited piece of wire that I have here. It's very, very small. Bear with me as I kind of take this off of the primary line here. Okay, and I'm going to get rid of all of these small little dead pieces on the interior. I want to be really working with big, healthy, sound, pronounced, developed, buds, right? When we're dealing with spruce that are established, when we're dealing with spruce that are established, there is no reason to be working with weak buds, right? This tree, unless it does not have strong buds and the tree has historically been weak and we're allowing it to recover, then we would need to leave these. But if it is a strong tree and we see the tips here, we see the tips have very strong buds on them, that's all we need to see to understand that these weaker pieces that have existed in the shade, that have lost their hierarchy, or their prominence in the design, that are maybe growing out of interior crotches, facing downwards, etc. Okay, we can go ahead and select these and take these off because they're not going to do much positive for the design of the tree. And in fact, they're going to continue to consume resources that the stronger portions of the tree could allocate towards. And think about this. When we talk about trying to get a tree to really back bud, if the tree is spending all its resources keeping really poor, weak interior buds, alive, which a spruce is a very compassionate species. It's very slow, very understanding. It's willing to give each branch and bud the benefit of the doubt. Okay, so when we start to see that happening, what ends up costing us is that sacrifice of energy that could be put towards much stronger buds. Should we make that selection, the tree will continue to allocate towards those weaker buds. Now, I want to draw a boundary here for spruce. I want to draw a boundary for spruce, and the fact that if a tree is not strong, if it doesn't have these big established tips, then the last thing we want to do is start eliminating weak shoots because we simply need the needle mass on the tree that photosynthesizes, generates sugars and starches, allocates hormones to be able to navigate and guide the growth of the tree. That becomes our priority, is making sure that that system is built, that that system is maintained, okay? So it's only once we get these big strong branches forming that we would go through and feel comfortable, eliminating or eradicating those weaker pieces. But once we get that to go through and select, right? Once we get a tree reestablished or once we get a tree established from the collection process, making sure that we get those pieces set up, that's a big part of success in spruce because now they can allocate energy towards back budding. And that back budding is going to be shorter, tighter, more compact growth. That gives us higher quality branching and a lot more to work with aesthetically over the course of time, okay? So getting this out of the way, a lot of the density in this tree because it's been allowed to grow so dense has created very strong pieces and very weak pieces. And now we're going ahead and we're selecting and making sure that we're leaving in the capacity for us to work the strongest pieces because of the fact that they exist, okay? Now I want to come back to the fundamental aspects of a raft because we talked about different heights, we talked about different thicknesses. Another aspect of rafts, much like any other multi-tree form, forest, clump or multi-trunked design creation, we want the spacing, okay? And I'm just getting this wire out of the way as well because I'm going to link the two living pieces now. Okay, we want the spacing between the trunks to have diversification. We want there to be acute, we want there to be obtuse, we want there to be an unpredictable authenticity to the spacing between the trunks. And we have that here, right? We have a differentiation of movement, we have a differentiation of spaces, we've got a differentiation of heights, we've got a differentiation of thicknesses. Literally this piece, if you talk about fundamental values, although the thickest trunk is not the tallest and we don't have that younger representation, we have an ancient representation, which in my mind usurps that younger representation exponentially in the visual value of the composition. And so inside of that, that spacing and making sure that when we create a raft or when we decide upon the design of a raft, that we're really selecting with that trunk shape, that trunk spacing in mind, as well as thickness, height, et cetera. And all of a sudden, we get to that last component and I think this is the birthplace of this composition and I think it's also one of the challenges that a purist would see in this composition and that is, and I'm just kind of debating here, do I need a six or do I need an eight? I think I'm going to go ahead with an eight because that upper piece is pretty soft and has some pretty deep wire scars from before we got. Okay, when we get to this last piece, we talk about different planes, right, different planes, and that's where this rear portion starts to play in. We're going to come back to that. I'm going to come back to planes here in just a second. Let's go ahead and properly execute this combination and let's see if we can get this apex headed in a direction that gives value to the aesthetic. Now, I would say over the course of time, one of the things that I have become very, very aware of, is when you fall in love with a piece of material, you have to identify what is it about the material that you like, okay? And for this, it was the fact that it's a connected root that looks like an ancient forest. I mean, it really already has all the vibe, okay? So if this looks like an ancient forest, one of the big dangers of putting our hands on something that already has that vibe is that we take that vibe out of the tree. And I don't think a lot of bonsai practitioners recognize the fact that through the process of design, we very much can strip a tree of the character that we value in the design. We can completely eradicate that sense of age. So as I'm doing these decision-making, you know, sort of commitments, as I'm performing these branch elimination decisions, as we're working through design, the thing that I need to constantly be asking myself is, am I moving this forward? Am I continuing to expand on the age? Or am I moving this backwards? Am I creating youth in the decisions that I'm making? And I don't know that a lot of people talk about the fact that you can reduce the age of a tree by the decisions that you make, especially in its representation in a miniaturized form. Like, there was a moment in my apprenticeship where Mr. Kimura gave me a really mature black pine, okay? And I was young in my apprenticeship. I was maybe in my tail end of my first year starting my second year. It was a really established, old, impressive black pine. And the tree itself was done. It didn't need Ryan Neal to change its shape. It really didn't need Ryan Neal to wire much of it. But I wired every branch on that tree. I mean, I wired it to the nines. Just every single piece, boom, boom, boom, boom. And Mr. Kimura had left after he had given me the work. He had given me no context to the work. And then he came back after I was finished with the work, and he said, yeah, you just took 50 years out of this tree's maturation. You just stripped it. You stripped it of its age. And I just thought, boom, gut shot, right? Because I poured my heart into that tree. I was like, I'm doing it. I'm doing bonsai. I'm doing bonsai well. Like, look at how good this looks. And he was like, anybody could have made it look like this. This tree was 50 years past what you just did. You were so far behind the tree in your skill level and understanding of bonsai that you just basically destroyed that many years of work. It was like, you could have told me that beforehand. I guess it was what I felt. Maybe you could have given me just a little hint, some sort of suggestion. Didn't work that way. But I'll never forget that. And I think it was one of the strongest lessons. Although Mr. Kimura wasn't like, Mr. Kimura wasn't teaching me, because he's like, when you go back to the United States, you're going to be working with material that represents ancient. That's not what he was thinking. There was no gimme to the information that Mr. Kimura was teaching me as an apprentice. But what it did do is create just an absolutely sort of big sledgehammer kind of moment that said like, wow, OK, wire can be as destructive as it is constructive. And from that perspective, we've got to be very careful with that. OK? So as I'm working a tree. Like this already having some of the nuances of age that I really value. I don't want to be recreating or taking this tree backwards. And I say that because it is to a large degree very possible to start moving this tree backwards. Right? So we've got to be careful in that. Now, decreasing that density, carrying that further degree of asymmetry. These are gestures of age. Opening up negative space, leaving behind remnants. These are gestures of age. Inside of that, we do have kind of measurable aesthetic actions that we can take that we know we can lean on. We can depend on those pieces to be confidently moving us in the right direction. OK? I feel good with that piece now. And I do think that I prefer the height over there to be a little bit taller than this piece here. But none of it matters until we dig into this interior. So let's see what we can get out of this interior piece. Now, I'm going to disappear into a little bit of a chasm here as I work through this. And I want to be thinking. Now, of this interior area as a little bit more of a protected environment. This is a little bit safer. It's more sheltered. This guy obviously took the brunt of every tree in this composition sort of force. You know, it's like, take one for the team. And he's like, I took one for like centuries of teams. And that's awesome. That creates a part of the story. OK? So already as I get in here, I kind of see these pieces coming into growing up against and really challenging the space. This is now where I'm going to execute age as I start to open this up. Because asymmetry, this is actually going to be the most symmetrical piece. This is going to be the piece that doesn't necessarily need such a dramatic, big, huge push in the asymmetrical direction. It's sheltered. It can grow with a little bit more. It's like the younger brother, right? It's got all these big brothers taking care of it. Whatever story you want to create that gives you an idea of how this tree interacts with its environment, OK? I like the big brother, little brother thing because these are all connected. It's one big happy family. Right? That feels good to me. OK, I'm going to start to open that up. And I want to be careful. I want to be careful. I want to show structure. Now, one of the things about that we just did is notice that big structural piece there. We just showed that big structural piece with those selections that we made. I like that. I like seeing the interior. I like seeing those structural elements. I like seeing lines. I like seeing shapes. OK, I don't have the clarity to be able to dig in here to big huge branching decisions where I'm going to be cutting off massive amounts necessarily. But I can start to show those lines. And as I start to whittle through the big components and the big decisions, we start to see as those lines unveil themselves more and more opportunity, OK? Do I want to shorten these pieces? Do I want to keep them long? I don't know yet. I don't know yet. Let's not make such big commitments. But where I have areas of three and I do have to decide, I'm going to keep the tighter and more compact on this interior. Feels to me like this area is still going to have some harshness. It's not totally open. And also, if we want to maintain our hierarchy of thickness, this piece being the smallest of all of the pieces, definitely needs the lowest foyer load. Currently, this piece is exponentially thickening. It's exponentially thickening because it has exponentially greater amounts of foliage than the rest of the tree. So we've got to be thinking about this from a sustainability perspective as well. We said, listen, with the raft formation, with the clump formation, we really do need to be thinking intelligently about that size, that spacing, that height, and that depth-filled distribution. We're going to come back to depth. We've stayed true to the concept of the composition. But inside of this, how do we stop the thickening process? You stop the sugar starch productivity that exists. So as we look into the back, look at how massive this small little trunk is. In terms of this compositional representation, this thing is gargantuan. And now all of a sudden, we're getting this wind. I feel the linear nature. I feel the asymmetrical push here. We have our kind of defining branch existing here. This is just so incredibly interesting, the way that it has worked itself out. But it also feels so incredibly young. I'm going to start to really take back and push into the depth component here. If my asymmetry is pushing here, this big long piece is towards the back. I'm not as big of a fan of those, but I love this piece here. I love that depth piece there. I think that depth piece gives a lot of really true intention, which means I'm going to save that depth piece, and I'm going to start to create the kind of remnants of what was, that negative space and the deadwood that's going to exist in this area to be able to really tell the story of this tree that generated a lot of growth, had some good years, and then all of a sudden, nature came back. It just said, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. I'm going to keep chipping away at these big vertically growing pieces because these are going to be the ones that cause it to thicken unless I can use them as another apacy, which I don't see the purpose or the intent or the value in that currently. Just opening up that space, this is changing a lot about the aesthetic of this composition. It's changing a lot about the aesthetic. Let's take a look. Let's just follow as we go. Now, we see the loss of that. Now, it's starting to shorten it. Now, it's putting priority into this older piece. I need more space. It's still too young. It's still too juvenile. Let's keep building. Let me go ahead and continue to take, take, take, take, more, less. I've got all these pieces in here. Let me take out some of the lesser valuable pieces in here, some of the undergrowing pieces, some of the overly aggressive pieces. Maybe we even create a gin out of this. Maybe this upper piece becomes a big kind of reaching gin, and we leave this piece in the back and we dial it down significantly. Let me make sure I feel, yes, I feel good about this. Now, let's understand why. As we look here, notice this homogenous plane here. I want to see the flow coming through here. We have that flow and everything else. This upper pad right here is staying right at that elevation. That's going to be the piece that as wind comes over here, it's going to want to be crashing into that. There's no way that, that much foyer mass stays on that. Let's go ahead. Let's make that decision. Push that H. Push the degree. This is a very, very healthy. And again, because it has so much foyer mass, we're losing our hierarchy. I'm going to be excessive with the reduction of this piece. I'm going to be committed to keeping this the thinnest piece. We haven't lost it yet, but that means we have to make big decisions right now. And when we start designing with this kind of intention, when you start designing with a real purpose, for your branch reduction, whether it's, whether it's a story that you made to help you understand the process, whether it's a story that you made that helps the viewer understand the process, just having that dialogue in the context of the decision is such an assistance, right? So we're still, and again, even though I'm driving forward a dialogue about a natural occurrence with a tree, understand that this dialogue is still stemming from the fundamental execution of what makes a good raft. What makes a good multi-trunk tree, because if this thing loses its hierarchy in terms of girth, and the height, and all of the things that make a great raft, then we lose the quality of the composition. So just by doing this, and this is the meshing, when you talk about the traditional bonsai form, when you talk about the traditional art of bonsai, you talk about the cultural representation versus the representation of the natural, right? To a large degree, they do overlap, and they overlap, in really beautiful and interesting ways when we start to get into the conversations about these components, and how we choose to use the language and the strategy of design to execute the stories that we're kind of telling right now, because I'm basically just creating a very long-winded dialogue about this super spectacular tree. Just a story, nothing more. Okay, so let me go ahead. Let me make a few more decisions in here. A few more decisions just to age that. A lot of deadwood, a lot of deadwood work, and I'm trying to save as well, when we think about this, I'm trying to save interesting lines that become the deadwood, okay? So now that density, look at the transparency that we have, right? And it was interesting as a dense piece, but it's far more interesting now that it has some balance and distribution to the rest of the tree. The big learning curve for my class this week has been, how much the branch selection process alters your capacity to create interesting design, right? You set your intention through the branch reduction process. We set that intention. We set the shape of that tree. We set the direction of that tree. That's all preloaded in what you choose to eliminate inside of that tree's canopy, and the spaces that you create, and then how you occupy those spaces, okay? This is a great example of how that works out. Okay? Great example of how that works out. I feel good there. I feel very, very content that we are on the right track to having made the best decisions right there, and now we can kind of turn our attention to this big depth-filled piece back here, okay? This is where it's going to get funky, because we have this turn that we've formed in this piece subordinate in the front, okay? We've got an intermediate height. I definitely want to take this height down when we start to talk about how we style this apex. It's going to be compressed and following that wind, okay? But this piece back here, although this return piece right here definitely speaks to that, they call it a caesciata, a returning branch, a balance branch, if you will, right? This is also what is keeping the juvenile form of the tree very much intact, okay? So then the question is, do I want to take those branches and move much like I've done here, circle forward, and generate that direction of wind, or do I just want to take them off and leave behind a remnant of what was? Well, let's understand what's here, okay? And what we have here is we have a two-branch trunk. Let me show you this, okay? Jesus, can you see that? See that right there? Okay, we've got this dominant branch that forms all of those, and then we've got this trunk right here that's going vertical. If that's the case, the last thing for the value of this structure that I could do is cut one of these two off, or turn it into deadwood. So automatically, I know, cool, we're using that. We had one here. This piece died. Let's go ahead and figure out how we use it. Now, I'm going to use this as a return. I'm going to create some elevation change here. So this high branch up in this structure, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to keep. And in order to isolate that and make that feel special and purposeful, I'm going to take off the remainder of this tip because that gives me that beautiful return. Let me come back to my scissors to get in here to the more detailed stuff. Okay, so I'm going to take advantage of that return right there. And that is a big, big, huge gesture towards exactly what we've talked about. Huge gesture, massive gesture, okay? Ooh, interesting. Okay, you see that return there, Jesus? Okay, so now we start to talk about this piece. And this piece also has the return. Notice this elongated piece right here. Now, do we want to keep these pieces as that, as that sort of remnant that maintains that counterbalance right here? I think it's more powerful without it. I think it's more powerful pushing in that direction. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to further open up negative space. I'm going to take away some of this counter and let's go ahead. Let's move. Let's move in that direction. Okay, now we're pushing big time in that arena. Okay, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to continue to open up. I'm going to continue to take off the interior. I want to really create some space. Okay, now, I have to keep more foliar mass on this apical region than this lower piece. If I want the lower piece to stay thinner than this upper apical region. I do. This is more dominant. Okay, so in this foliar reduction, I've got to pull back. Once I start to recognize that I'm now generating enough reduction of foliar mass that I'm going to start to compromise or outweigh the foliar mass in this with this lower piece. Okay, so that's my cut. Off that's where I can make decisions intelligently about the impact of this as I get to the top. I have another return piece right here. I've got a big thick branch and I've got a trio. Let me show you what I got here. Boom, boom, boom. Okay, right left vertical. Okay, I'm going to take off this piece right here. I cannot leave those and have a sound investment of the structure. This keeps my height and prominence. This keeps my directional move to the right. This gives me. My that return piece. We talked about that's going to be the extent of my reduction. This might be the point where we start to have that shift of density that we've got to be a little bit more careful with. Let's go ahead and let's execute that and see where it gets us. We understand this is for the quality of the structure. Commitment to the game. Okay, and my guess is this is going to demand that we take just a little bit more off of that. Smaller weaker piece. Okay, now we're starting to get into rugged. Now we're getting into spacious. Look at that. Look at how less look at how much more line. Look at how much more Alpine. This is Alpine right sparseness this this crushing amount of wind and snow and space and look at when we took this back that dominant chunk. That was here when we pushed just the whole that just happened and that space and the visibility of that line. And the space and the visibility of that line ultimately just through the execution of concept. Okay, and an awareness of what makes a good raft a good rap different thicknesses different heights different spacing different depths and the understanding of the physiology the foyer mass present. That's going to increase the rate of thickening right the management of a clump the management of a raft the management of a multi-trunk composition hinges on the correct amount of foyer mass. On each piece so that that piece stays in its position of hierarchy and does not outgrow its position and start to ruin the aesthetic of that composition right and through the corrective measures. We've taken today. We've given rise to although a diversified very ancient representation informal in every way and deviating to a large degree at first glance when we dig back into the process. We recognize Holy smokes. We still have a cross. Over of those fundamental concepts into the composition and they ring true. No matter what we're working on to maintain that caliber that quality and the strategy the knowledge of how we cultivate that really beautiful and consistently evolving piece to have value over the course of time. Right raft style bonsai one of my favorites one of the most I think lowly represented or maybe rare forms in at least North American bonsai. But I think in the Western world. In general and definitely an opportunity that we need to explore more understand to a greater degree if we're going to create world-class pieces that have that connected route characteristic. Josh do you have a before picture by chance or did we not did we not put that up. We say his is. We're going to get the before because I want you to see it and I want to be able to compare it myself. I feel like we did some very very major decision-making here. I mean we open this thing up. Exponentially and I feel like really tapped into preservation of the hierarchy and everything else that matters. But the original piece here's the original piece Josh has got it up. Okay so here's the original super super dense very very difficult to see what's going on here and definitely not representative of the dead pieces. Now let's come back into studio and we see that representation as we've aged that piece have that hierarchy height thickness depth lines love it. Okay. Really really nice really fun to engage with this piece. I've been super excited it responded to the repotting very well. The the elongating species group did a tremendous job and it was nice for them to get to be here for this too because it is a piece that we all kind of cherished when we created it. Anyways rap style bonsai crammed it in like a snowball into a as short of a period of time as possible will probably show the finished product of this tree at some point. Keep your eyes out. Otherwise enjoy the rest of your Wednesday tomorrow. Live Q&A 3 p.m. We'll do the forum as well. It's full and look forward to next week fall wrap-up winter preparation temperatures susceptibility protected protection mechanisms the net necessity for all artificial light heat. Where do we go wrong? Where can we improve tune in on Tuesday? We'll be out in the wild outskirts of humanity trying to do some interesting stuff, but we'll see you when we get back. Thank you all have a great rest of your week and we'll see you when we get back. Bye. Bye. Thank you. 
