What's going on everybody? Wednesday, mini stream. Right? Super excited for this one. Mainly because, and you all know my affinity for this piece from the initial structural work that we did. I've almost gotten through a majority of the wiring. Let me go ahead and give you a once around. But I really wanted to focus on the apical formation today. Because I didn't get through all the wiring, I'm going to be working on this back trunk and just kind of talking with you about the experience. But you'll notice the apex of each piece is not quite finished yet. So I've left kind of this cap to the design. And I want to walk through specifically when we talk about apical formation as it relates to the design of bonsai. It's the stumbling point for so many I think creations, design finalizations, how do we make it. And my biggest point to my students, to the Moriah Live community is, hey listen, an apex, especially in the initial design of something, is nothing more than another branch. Another branch that has layers, another branch that has depth, but another branch that we put on top of the design. And when we start to talk about specifically having multiple trunks, whether it's a clump, whether it's a forest, whether it's a raft. When we have multiple trunks, we have multiple apices, the biggest deviation in normal bonsai design that I saw throughout my apprenticeship and I came to embody and we see consistently when we create a community of trees is that the apex is no longer this perfectly round dome plopped right on top of a tree. That's not the way that it works. Because the influences of all of these trees working together, the community, the aesthetic, the elements, the environment, all of that, does really treat that apex in a different fashion than the rounded domed crown of traditional bonsai design. And so it's from that perspective that I did really want to focus specifically on apical regions with this composition and this piece. So I'm going to keep on rocking on these smaller branches and just kind of walk you through some of the thought process. If you didn't see the mini stream where we did the structural reduction of this, I would encourage you to look at that. And that was I believe, Eve's in the chat today from afar, I believe she'll give you the link to it, but I think it was something like raft structural decisions or raft pruning or something like that where we really talked about the elements of connected root or raft style design that led to the initial structural reduction to create space, to give rise to a little bit more design nuance and merit and create the opportunity. Now I'll be really honest. with you, that structural pruning from that point to now, I've only spent a little over an hour on this tree, wiring it to this point from the last time that you've seen it. Unwiring, cleaning and rewiring. Because when we start to make those kinds of structural decisions and reductions, we have done a bulk of the work already in terms of design. And that's the pruning process, the structural reduction, the decision making process not something that everybody is talking about or teaching in terms of the bonsai creation and the pattern or the system that we apply to bonsai creation to have the most pivotal impact in terms of making it easy for ourselves to design. But if we put the weight on that branch selection process, specifically using branch selection to guide design and then the structural wiring process to set the tone. By the time we're finished with that structural wiring, which we did a lot of the structural wiring process in that initial selection, at least for the defining branch and a few of the apical regions of the trees, to give rise to the definition of line from base to tip and define where that apex is going to occur. If we put the weight of design on those two actions, by the time we get to the finer wire, this is a formality. Now it does give, and this is where you see the celebration of finer wire being applied. It gives rise to the formality of fine wire. It gives rise to definition. And definition for a lot of people feels like the most important step in bonsai. But what I'm saying is once you're able to finely wire a tree and define pads and create space and give rise to context, definition is a formality because you already see through the branch selection, through the deadwood creation, through the structural setting of those primary lines, you already see the design. It's right here. We understand it. We're able to see past the mess of the finer branching and we recognize, oh, I see how this whole thing in terms of its primary structure is coming together. And so, and Mr. used to always make the comment that a monkey, right, that once he had done the pruning and the structural wiring, that a monkey could do the rest, which I've always also said felt really, really crummy as an apprentice to be equated to a monkey. Not because I felt offended by his comment or anything like that, but it was just like, gosh, I really hope my time in Japan is worth more than sort of a primate's capacity to be able to do bonsai. And I think obviously there was some motivation and only the way that Mr. Kimura could provide motivation in those statements. But to a large degree, he was also right. He was also true. And that maybe even hurt more than anything, was recognizing that he was just being honest. Okay? So as I'm working on this side, right, and you'll notice this, and I want to come in and Josh is going to give you a close-up right here, right? This big long branch, we could have carried that out to the other side of this piece from the front. And I made the decision to bring this back to the inside. Because you see this big heavy blast of dead wood right here, we know that this piece has perished. I will leave the bark on as long as the bark stays, because it is a very beautiful, and it's very rigidly attached right now, very beautiful complement. But this will age over the course of time. But that is a very iconic aesthetic of ancient forests, of heavy wind-influenced directional sort of elements acting on the tree. And I love this as far as the fin where this came from, as far as the elements that these spruce experience in the Rockies. This is very, very authentic. So taking that branch here, common bonsai design would pull that branch over to here. And let me rotate towards the front. I don't want to see foliar mass here. Common bonsai design would have that foliar mass extending as a counterbalance over in here. If I rotate past the point where you see this trunk through this space right here, that's too far. And as we start to see, notice that line, oh there's my space. I have just a hint, but I'm not necessarily wanting that. I might even push past that, because it's nice. It's nice to avoid those pitfalls of this balance where we're moving here and we always have this piece countering that here. That's a very Japanese design principle, to seek balance in the foliar mass and disregard the impact of the base of the tree, of the visual weight, or of that potential insinuation of age that doesn't have a counter creating the perfect system of balance, of that rigid concept of balance, of quietness, etc. So we'll play with this a little bit, but the big move there was the movement of this big piece in here. Now, because the apices are not necessarily styled, there's a little bit of a lack of clarity in the design through the central portion. Let's start with this first apical region. Now, when I'm thinking about a raft, a clump, a forest, I'm always thinking about hierarchy. We talked about this in the initial structural setting. Hierarchy from the perspective that this structurally is the lowest trunk that occurs in the composition here. Go ahead and come in tight for me, Jesus. So we see this piece occurring more low or at a lower elevation. You see this piece occurring at a little bit of a higher elevation, right? You see this piece that has a little bit more girth to it and a little bit more of a hierarchy of size. Already we've got low elevations smaller, higher elevations slightly higher, bigger and more dominant piece here. You have a hierarchy as long as the foliar mass is present to utilize that hierarchy. Lowest apical region, second, and ideally third in terms of the hierarchy of height. This is interesting because in a composition where we start with the highest point, right, potentially even being towards the rear, which is defying common bonsai design already with this composition, but it gives us depth and it's magnificent and we don't want to change it. Moving to low and then coming back to high, that is a real interesting diversification from the standard concept that we would go high, medium, low as a natural transition point. I feel that gives us a lot of authenticity to go high, low, medium in terms of that height and dynamic through the composition. That feels more authentic to an ancient forest, to a forest that has experienced unpredictable elements over a prolonged period of time. So I'm going to already, just in terms of, and why do we talk about that hierarchy at first, we talk about the hierarchy at first because it's necessary to start to orient our expectations and start to orient our goals and objectives of this apical region. Now, in this kind of wind influenced form where we see this, I do want the apical region to carry length, right, I want this to have length, I want this to have direction, because the wind is going to be running over the top of this apex and we're going to have that carry over. However, I already have some fairly long branches in here, so to lay more on top of that creates a very blocky, heavy foliar mass and heavy presence in that region. This is where I'm going to pull back just a little bit. I'm going to pull back to some of these interior pieces so they can lay into the formation of this apical region. And again, I'm saying in the raft style, in the clump style, in the forest style, when we start to insinuate these kind of environmental influences, we do start to think about more of the apex as a branch and less of a rounded dome. To plop a round dome on top of this tree is to nullify all environmental influences that are acting on the aesthetic of the design. So I'm just going to go through here, clean a few of the older needles at the crotches so that I can get wire in without crushing, and I'm going to put, and you're going to recognize, I've saved one or two branches at the top of every tree, and that is the extent of the apical formation that's going to occur in this, because again, it's just one branch. It's just another branch, the highest structural point. It's just one branch that is creating that region and giving me that insinuation. And inside of that, hopefully this simplifies things for you. Hopefully this gives you the ability to think and conduct yourselves in terms of apical formation with a little bit more peace of mind. I'm going to be making a branch, whether it's a raw styling where we're going to flatten out the apical region, or whether it's the desire for the elements to be represented in flattening out the apical region. In the beginning of the design, when we're dealing with multi-trunks, we're dealing with a very simplified flat, laid out, singular branch or branching region concept as the apex. So just making sure that I have a little bit of control, I'm going to grab onto that guy so I can narrow down the apical region, and this is more a product of scale and proportion than anything else. Because this is a small trunk, small tree, and we're trying to represent a macro environment. We're trying to represent something big, something very intense, something very interesting with the composition that we're creating here and the details that it's giving us. So in order to make sure that we maintain that scale, that sense of proportion, that these are big trees, we're going to want to shrink down as much as we can the width, the thickness, in terms of the height of these, as well as just the general foyer mass of the proportional apical region that we're creating. So I'm going to pull this in primarily to narrow that. Now I already have a slightly diagonal rise to this, and I'm going to try to carry that through this theme. It was already imparted onto the material, but notice the lines of the deadwood, of all of these branches, of all of these pieces and remnants. And we can have pieces drop. There are pieces dropping in the other portions of the tree. Very, very beautiful insinuations, specifically lower elevation insinuations, where the lower pieces on the tree have a different character. The upper pieces start to come up and out. That is also being buffered and communicated by this edge of the composition. The wind is hitting here. Bam! There's a little counter piece right here, sitting in defiance of the wind, protected by this trunk. What a beautiful little story right here. To have that piece, let me just rotate a little bit more, to have this piece working back into the wind, protected by this big trunk. Coming from the bristle cones a few weeks ago and just watching how much the foyer mass responded to some of the structural elements of the trees protecting the growth from that wind and causing irregular growth direction against those elements was fascinating. And it really is informing this composition where we're dealing with a significant reference and representation of age. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to carry this piece out as well. Now when I'm dealing with this, I'm not trying to define all of these in a super strict way. I'm not trying to have complete control. In fact, when we start to talk about this, just to get a simple flattening of the apical region, a simple distribution in a way that feels as though it proportionally represents, that is my biggest priority at this point in time. So I see here that I can set some of this apical region down into this portion here. I'm going to pull that together into the main out to the light, into the main out to the light. I'm still going to follow the principles of photosynthetic efficiency and fundamental design as it facilitates the photosystem of the tree. And that means maybe this apex needs to play a role over here in another portion. Maybe we need to increase the breadth of that apical region to embody or interact with some of this deadwood over here. I'm not liking that as much as I thought I would. Let me pull it back. Let me just see what happens here. Does it become too crowded? Does it become a little bit too contrived at this point in time? That feels a little bit better to me in all honesty. And I'll just kind of pick this up here and move this back a little bit to create a little less of a defined line here. I want some diversity in terms of that a nice little topper. Nice little topper there. Now the one thing I want to avoid as we start to get into this, you notice this piece here. And then we have a much bigger space. This piece a much smaller space. Now the temptation is going to be, oh if I just move that down here now I have good distribution. And that's true. But now I have positive, negative, positive, negative, positive, negative. And I start to draw too much homogeny between the positive and the negative. So to allow that to stay up. To allow that to sit in that region. And have that kind of length tapering out here. Maybe we do over the course of time further reduce this. But just to have that differentiation where we have big negative space. Where we see transparently to the back of the tree. And then to have a little bit more of a closer proximity and a tighter knit to the way the branches kind of gather and congregate up in this upper region. Following that sort of sculptural quality of the wind. And you'll see this in wind-influenced areas. Although the branches are sparse, they do tend to congregate in community and carry that contour. And that's really interesting. The way that that starts to work into that piece in regards to the design and consistency that we're seeing here. I like that. I feel like this is very, very beautiful. Now from this perspective because this is the lowest of the hierarchy. And this is where we're blending together the notion of traditional bonsai concepts with the hierarchy of the natural system with the natural representation. I'm saying, listen, wind is influencing this. This is the lowest structural. That's like pulling natural in and traditional in and blending the two of them to have this hierarchy. But those rules or those concepts in traditional bonsai do play a role in creating compelling stories or creating relationships within the multiple trees that exist in this composition. So to make sure that this is low enough that this apex is going to stay higher and to treat this apex instead of trying to crush it down as that depth piece that occupies that next tier of the hierarchy is an important part of the creation process. So now I'm going to swing back to the back. I want to continue to respect the influence of wind, which is to say I'm going to continue using that directionality to really give rise to design that feels authentic and feels accurate to what we're trying to accomplish. But I don't want to compress too much to cause some sort of similarity of that height and that hierarchy to occur in the design. So this is really where we start to, I think, have to walk a very fine line of decision making in the design process. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to put a little bit of wire on here. This is, again, a relatively small apical region. Let me go ahead and get a little bit more organization in this other piece here. I'm using 16 and most people would be using 18 in these regions. But recognize that spruce is extremely phototropic, right? They put out a big, strong growth spurt in the spring. It is a growth spurt. Vascular systems is the epicenter of strength in our elongating species. That's where we see the most massive vascular thickening and growth occur in our elongating species. Hemlocks, spruce put on a lot of vascular tissue. That's where the energy comes from. Do heavy work on the roots in the spring as long as the foyer mass is untouched. Heavy work on the foyer mass as long as the roots are untouched. We have a real opportunity to play on that vascular system in a very strong way. I'm just going to take that height out of it from the perspective of not wanting that to be an upright pointed apex. Not wanting it to be a young, juvenile, or influenced list, right? If we start to talk about elements acting. I still want to maintain that action of wind, but I want to be careful how much I compress. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to carry this piece, again, giving it a little bit of up-down. In addition to the move towards this direction, I'm not fully vacating the fact that there's going to be shorter pieces growing against the wind. I like that. That's very authentic. It's very appropriate. But we have to be aware, right, when we use those, that they've got to be proportional and small. If anything's going to grow against the wind, chances are it's going to be relatively small and relatively scant compared to the pieces that are growing with the direction of the wind. That's where the elongation is going to occur. That's where we're going to see the greatest amount of directionality and asymmetry. By keeping these pieces small and pulled in, we're being true to that wind element. But it is very, very rare that you don't have pieces growing against the wind, right? There will always be something on that side of the tree unless it's just been completely torn off in defiance of that element. Maybe it's protected, like we talked about the shelter over here. Maybe it is just really short and very structurally sound, which is why it can weather that kind of force. So many different ways that plants can accommodate the elements and still have the capacity to photosynthetically thrive. And that's really what this becomes is there's nothing over here impeding photosynthesis. There's nothing over there that's impacting negatively the capacity for a piece to exist there. It just can't get very long. It can't extend itself. The sail effect, the directionality of the wind is what's kind of controlling that growth as a stunting factor. So I'm going to leave these here. Now when I go against the direction of the wind, always a little bit of an upward turn here. They never lay flat down into the wind. They tend to have that little bit of lift that shows just a little bit of blowback, a little bit of resistance. And this also helps us when we start to think about these pieces right here. This helps us achieve that higher formation of that apical region. By having those have that little bit of lift, it keeps the apex up a little bit. Again, just another branch. Just another flat branch that's showing those elemental forces acting on the tree. Maybe we'll pull this piece out here a little bit just to tuck it into that. And then let's take a look at how that works within the system. Take a look at how that works within the system in terms of our hierarchy. Just over the top of it here. Let me put my hand on this so you can see. So we've got this down. We've got this up. You can see that difference of levels. Go ahead and come in close, Jesus. Now you start to see that change. You notice that this is much higher. That this is a little shorter. Now let me rotate. Stay in tight. Now you see that level differentiation. You notice how deep that is and that height occurring in the back. We see how low this is here. I may even want to lower this just a little bit more. I'm going to see what happens if I pull back and I drop that down just a little bit more. I like that. I like that drop a little bit. I like that reduction just a little bit more. It gives me a little bit more dimension and depth in some of those elements. I do feel like I'm a little bit flat to the wind there. There we go. That feels a lot better. Interesting. So we're starting to work it out here. We're starting to pull on some of those elements. I like what we have going here. This feels nice. I'm looking past the camera because there's a screen that I can see. Sometimes when I'm this close. Let me just step in here with you guys real quick. Sometimes when I'm this close, it is hard to see. This is interesting. Now all of a sudden, I'm really starting to be, we've got to reconcile this. Does this come up? Do we lift that up? Let's see what happens there. I like the backside of that. This piece right here feels a little docile. First branch I styled and then all of a sudden things started taking on a different kind of life. Maybe this piece needs to have a little bit of a lift as well. Let's see what we can do with the apical region here. I've got one more little piece of wire. I'm still going to treat this very simple fundamental. Just a little bit of lift is all that I'm looking for. I'm not looking for, again, that domed out round crown. It's so tempting, the Vader helmet. The blue, or excuse me, the green dome. The directionless cap to the design. It feels satisfying. You make it and you're like, ah, that's the end of it. It's a beautiful round green mound on the top. That is the top of the tree. Yes, this is a little bit more obscure. You're putting a lot more faith when you're dealing with clump style trees, when you're dealing with raft style trees, and you're dealing with forest. You're putting a lot more faith in the interpretation of the composition. You're expecting people to be able to cross that threshold. If we created a bunch of really fine green domes on the top of all of these, it would look like Super Mario Land. It would look like a Smurfs set. It would look like something that is unnatural, that we're not familiar with, that we don't necessarily identify or connect with. Maybe that artificiality, maybe that's what speaks to you, and there's nothing wrong with that. I'm not trying to chastise or criticize. I do want to offer the opportunity to think about apical formation and the reasons behind the shapes. I want us to be able to think about it and critically discuss it, because it does become a major point of design focus and debate when we start trying to represent pieces that are expressing elemental forces and the way that they grow in relationship to those environments. But again, even in the traditional form of Japanese bonsai, Mr. Kimura was always pushing what I thought I understood about apical formation when we were dealing specifically with multiple apices. That was a challenging thing to try and learn. It was a challenging thing to understand the formation. It was a challenging thing to understand the hierarchy and all of the different tool sets that you had inside of the consistency of that species and that design to still abide by that hierarchy. But it was important. It was so important to the capacity for the design to have value, to have consistency, to have authenticity. It was one of the best things I learned in my apprenticeship was apical formation of multi-trunk compositions. You don't hear people talk about that. You don't hear this discussed as a nuance where you have to be able to adapt and adjust your common thought around those areas and those regions. But it's real. It's very, very real. If I can just give this area a little bit more flavor and a little bit more nuance. I've got a lot of things happening here. It's all locked into this one singular space. It's a bit of a challenge. It's a challenge to have all of this in that singular space. It's a bit of a challenge to have this central piece be congregating inside. It's big. It's long. There's not a lot of buds on it. I don't want to take it off though. I don't want to take it off and say the way that I'm going to handle this compromising piece is by cutting it off and then growing another piece there again in the future. I might go ahead and reduce this piece back to the base so that I get a little bit of space to be held inside of that. That flattens that out just a little bit. That also gives rise to the capacity for the apex of this piece needing to be, when we talk about the hierarchy, needing to be a little bit taller than this. We need this to have some rise. It's barely, barely, barely there right now. Barely there. I think I want a little bit more delineation. I think a little bit more presence and a little bit more division would go a long ways. I'm going to raise this up again. That means I'm finding spaces for these smaller pieces and I'm putting movement in that's giving me the capacity for this apical region to still show the influence of wind in the composition itself. See how I'm just seeking that space ever so subtly. I want this to stay the common block. I want this to stay the predominant sort of mass. I don't want to evenly distribute all of this and I don't want to raise up a big dome there. I want to have that division accomplished. I like that. That feels better to me. Feels better. Nice little tough there. A little bit of break up here in that pad formation. Not super strict when you go to the wide shot. I think this is where it communicates the best. Now you start to see this here and then you start to see this here. Just a little bit. A little bit of a transition to here. That's nice. I'm okay with that. Subtle. Boom, boom, boom. Really nice gradient of apical regions. Last piece. Let's come back to the back. This was the piece that I had sort of stopped or had gotten to right before we started the stream. I'm going to define this apical line. I had a lot of cleaning to do. I had a lot of decisions to make in terms of the finer branching here. We're at a point where I think we're ready to start wiring and to make the best decisions possible. Now I'm going to go opposite of the current turn in order to be able to avoid the wire scars that existed. This did have quite a few. This was a tree that's been designed quite a while ago by a different owner entirely. It's always nice to take on ownership of trees that have had the impression of other individuals. Now I think in the same way that a lot of us probably would have conceptualized this, this piece used to be very flat. The whole raft was laying down. I had a few students that wanted to be creative in the repotting season this spring, pre-pandemic. They said, what if we put it on this crescent and really elevate it and change the hierarchy of these apical regions? Music to my ears. This was the beginning of a really wonderful composition because it clearly has age. It clearly has interest. But leaving it flat and having all the apical regions be the same, that was a real buzzkill for the design of this piece. Once we took this off of that flat plane and we started to change contextually, what those apical regions were capable of representing, that was a breakthrough in the design. I'm going to take off this lower piece here to create a little bit of space. I'm going to work this lower branch just to get a little bit more of an understanding of what's happening in this region here. I've got two pieces here. I'm going to carry my structural wire in to give myself a little bit of stability right there. I can go ahead and take that off now. Now I can combine those two. I left myself a dagger. Let me take that out or else I will cut myself. I cut myself very frequently. Mariah Bloodstained Jeans. Coming to a boutique fashion vendor near you. You haven't seen, so Josh is with me in the studio today. I don't think I said that. I said Eve was on the chat. Jesus is producing the mini-stream today and Josh is the Lone Ranger in studio. If you haven't appreciated Mondays at Mirai, take a look at our YouTube or our Instagram. It's interesting how quickly other Boneside people jump on board sniping ideas. That's okay. We're not short on ideas. Originality is our strong suit. Josh has done a great job with Mondays at Mirai. Jesus's beard flick on the newest one. That was a moment. Troy's glutes last week were phenomenal. Jesus's beard flick I thought was taking it to the next level. Okay. When I'm building out these branches, I'm also setting myself up for the opportunity to create scale and proportion in the apex. A lot of people tend to think about the apex as this standalone piece. You build up to the apex over the course of the composition. If I take this piece right here, I have a lot of branching right here. I'm trying to show these trees as big trees, which means each pad needs to be relatively small. If I make this one giant pad where all of the branches that are tied in here culminate in the creation of one singular tier or one singular piece of foyer mass, you're going to lose all of the scale and proportion that sets us up for that apex and the size of the apex that we've defined to really work out. If I start to play with, if I elevate this here and I put this on a different level than here and I treat this as its own thing and then I drop some of these down over here and I treat those as their own thing and I bring this to the foreground here, now I've created the kind of diversity in terms of where those pieces exist that allows us to have just a more proportional opportunity to create that large scale feeling in the way that we break down that apical region. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to define this. This is going to be extremely important both in terms of the relationship of this primary trunk to the rest of the pieces in the composition as well as in the set up for the apical formation here. I'm going to carry this, let me just show you. We're now looking almost directly at the back. I'm going to carry this forward so that it starts to insinuate and almost engage with this piece right here. I don't want to avoid, I don't want to steer clear of it because from the front, let's go ahead and take a look at that. When we come back to the front here, the trunk starts to create a relationship of positive, negative, and positive again. It starts to tell the story of the shape of that apex. These branches having continuity with this apex is a part of dealing with a raft style design, a clump style design, etc. Really important that we don't try to avoid everything. Oh, there's a trunk there, I've got to avoid it. That loses the continuity. That all flows together into all of those decisions that we're making. Okay? Go ahead and just get this piece and put it in here. All right. Okay, one more there, one more there. Boom, boom, and then we get to do the apex. Pays. Pays to get all the wiring done first. A really apical formation. Something that takes a lot of time to show because you've got to get through the rest of the tree. It is definitely, I would say, anticlimactic when you start to see how much the work on the rest of the tree kind of already did everything that you needed it to do. To be able to form that apex. And I'm going to give this just a slight little uplift here as it relates to that. Give this a slight little uplift here as it relates to that. Just a little, just a little bit. Just a little whoop, right? Shoop. Just a little whoop. Right there. Okay. Okay, now if you're looking for technical advice about wiring spruce, etc. I have kind of walked us through a lot of technical work on spruce. And spruce do have the nuance. We don't want to crush the needles on spruce. So there's delicate ways to kind of work with wire laying over the needles without crushing them, without breaking them. There are definitely streams and resources for that. I'm not going to spend time. I want to focus on the apical formation specifically. I'm going to roll to the back here so that we can just kind of share the same orientation. Now my apex is going to be working with the direction of these branches. I've got to still be respectful of the hierarchy and the original positions of these things to be able to create sustainable design. But when we start to talk about this, I really want the apex to respond to the environment. So first and foremost, apex is sitting back here. I'm going to take this and I'm going to push this towards the front. Let's get that headed in that direction. Counter to that, we can have some slight short branches working back in here. I'm not worried about having that even distribution of foyer mass. I've got this kind of lift here, this push in here. I'm happy with this. I'm going to drop that in there nice and clean. All my wire combinations, where we terminate the structural wire is what determines how much wire you're going to carry throughout the rest of the structure of the tree. If I carry my structural wire up here, now I link these two and that allows me now to combine these two pieces. I'm going to use that structural wire as an anchor. I'm going to use it as an anchor because now with that structural wire present as an anchor, I can put the weight of the combination of these two pieces on that structural wire. Just a little bit of an overlap there to gain the function of that structural wire being and then an overlap here. A lot of people say don't cross wire. I think crossing wire, again, if it's functional, not if it's a mistake and we're like, oh shoot, I cut my wire short. I intentionally cut my wire where I cut it because I knew I could then use it. I carried it far enough to use it as an anchor, use it as a point of stability. Crossing the wire there allows me to have less wire on the piece over the course of its entire design. The less wire I have, I have two wires here for a turn and a half. I have two wires there for a half turn. I don't have three wires, whereas if I carried this up to here, carried this up to here, I'd have three wires through a full turn and you'd see more wire. It's a way to disguise wire and still have function. So we're using the wire as a tool. We're using it as a very big tool, but we're also treating it aesthetically in a respectful way by not loading the tree up. Now having three wires in one location, not against the rules, not a bad thing. Can you make it more attractive if you carry the structural wire out farther if your skills facilitate that and you don't damage the branches in doing so? Absolutely. Carry it out a little bit farther means you can combine things a little bit more tightly in terms of the distance the wire travels and have less wire on your tree. Less wire on your tree will always look better. Always look better. Of course the trade off to that is if you can't carry the structural wire there without damaging because the branches are too fine or our skills aren't quite there, then put more wire on the tree. Use the trio of wires. That's fine. There's no merit in any technique if the tree dies. There's no merit. We didn't do anything. I used less wire but the branch died. Probably better to use more wire next time then. If you can do it and the tree thrives, now we're accomplishing something because we got something that looks more attractive with less artificiality on the composition itself. Again, a little bit of a lift. A little bit of a lift here. Just keeping those pieces giving us that kind of that flow. Maybe we have a little bit more of a lift here. Let's get that lift. Just a slight. Slight. It's a sensation. Wind coming up. Let me carry this out of the way here. Let's go ahead and get a little bit of it. Now I'm wiring this from the back side. Kind of envisioning what this looks like on the front side. This is where if you follow the system of the tree, I'm not thinking what does this look like from the front. I'm thinking is this the smartest decision to give validation to the structure. If I look at this from the front, will it make sense? My feeling is yes because I'm playing on the hierarchy. I'm letting the position of the tree dictate where all of the pieces that I'm working with go. Again, this is the photosynthetic system. This is the branch selection process. This is clarity of design. Consistency of execution. All of those things. If the tree is guiding the dance, all of those things will serendipitously work out. Now I'll have to tweak it when we go to the front, but I don't have to sit here and look at the front constantly because I know as long as the decisions are being made consistently and in the consideration of photosynthetic efficiency that we're going to have the capacity and we're going to have the aesthetic that's going to mesh with the design that we've been building over the course of time. Really minimal movements. You notice I'm not heavily contorting. I'm not twisting. I'm not trying to do something hyper artificial with the apex that I'm creating. I'm just positioning where the branches naturally exist as I've set with the structure and the definition of the primary lines. Removing a little bit of the older needles. I never want to remove all older needles, but I'm just taking off some of that growth. Again, when I have these two branches here and I come to a junction of three, I want length in my apical region. When you're dealing with wind, you want length in your apical region, but you have to clean out those areas of threes to make sure that you have that natural transition and we don't create structural flaws. When doing so, I'm always thinking, where is that next branch coming, taking off the stronger pieces that are growing in towards that, dictating that staggered layout of branching formation so that as this evolves over the course of time, they fit together. The branching that we build is meant to be built so that they coexist. The branching that we build is meant to be built so that they coexist. Last little piece here. Nice and soft through all these new needles. Last thing I want to do is crush them all, but I do want to have control and I do want to be able to divide all of those shoots. I'm going to come towards the front and now I'm going to start to just spread a little bit. Just spread these buds as I've built in that staggered effect. I come into the main and then I move out. I leave that bud at the corner. Boom. Now I turn again. Boom. I just get a little bit of movement as dictated by my ramification to get that spread. Let's see. Let's see how that worked out from the front. Again, just another branch. I don't want to put so much pressure and weight. I don't want to put so much so much priority on the apical formation. Just another branch in the grand scheme of things. Again, I want to diversify. I want to diversify the space. I'm bringing this piece right here. I'm bringing this up and in. I'm closing that space because I want there to be more space right here. I don't want to have this positive, this negative, this positive, this negative, this positive, this negative, and have it all be stair-stepped. Sometimes, I'm closing up that space. Even for a short branch here, I need to find the position that it can engage with that apical region. I want that apical region just to have a little bit of freedom of form there. I want it to have a little bit of that upward trend. A little bit. Slight. Slightness. Be free. Be free with that formation. It doesn't have to be so rigid. It doesn't have to be so defined. Now we start to see that upward trend. That's kind of right where we're sitting right there. Just this sort of real elegant kind of push into that. Notice the space here. That diversity of that space. If I drop this down, watch what happens. If I drop this down, notice that space. See the equivalent here to here? That's not what I want. That's not what I want. I want that commitment to that space. Allow those pieces to exist. Allow that space to have its own context. Maybe I raise this up just a little bit just to occupy the interior portion of that space. Apical formation. Very simple. Very simple way to conceptualize and the design starts to have a lot of impact when we keep things really, really simple and really, really clean. Maybe I raise this up. Ooh, I like that. Look at that depth. Let's diversify that even a little bit more. Ooh, I like that. Careful to not draw that too similar. Alright. Yes, look at that. That little kiss right there. Jesus, come in tight on Josh's right there. This little kiss right here. Look at that. Where we go out into here. We come back into here in the depth and then we go out into here into the foreground. That's nice. Do we want to close that? I don't think we want to close that. I like that where that's at. Good. Good, good, good, good. Let me step back. I like where the position is in relation to the camera. Yeah. A good, I think a really good first iteration. A really good first iteration a really nice authentic representation. The hierarchy of the apical regions is nice. The one area that I do see is I still feel like this and this are a little bit close together. I don't feel like I can elevate this anymore. Maybe just a little bit. But if we wanted to change this to a degree where we didn't see that proximity we would have to really change the elevation. I think I'm going to give it a season to grow as it sits now. Okay. The only other area that I see that I'm really challenged by and is really kind of compromising is this area right here. Very, very dense and it overlaps this area behind it and I'm wondering what can we do to change that? Obviously if I drop that down it breaks that up but that's not a big enough move. We have quite a bit in here so let me see if I can shed some of the pieces in here. And I wonder if we try to just break this up just a little bit. Just to create a little bit more of a lightening effect. Clean that up a little bit. How does that work on the Y? That's better. That's better. That feels less heavy now. Feels less heavy. Okay and the last thing. It's a little bit tough seeing this piece and this piece interacting together and I see a real slender you see that real slender line right there. I'm going to come towards the front just a little bit more and see if that changes contextually how that piece relates. Okay these are all the small. These are all the small design nuances right? Some of the some of the nitpicking. Now I like how that changed. That's a nice change to that line. Now we don't see that straight line anymore. Okay take some of that out which means I have to close some of this down and then move this out. I'm going to bring this into the fray now of the apical region. I think that's a stronger use of that. I think we want to kind of close that gap. Okay that feels better to me. And then just a little bit of space right there. Certainly would be nice. See if we can get that. We've got kind of multiple tiers. Did that just give you all the same amount of relief that it gave me? I mean that really you know small little change but that space is invaluable in that region of the tree. And for a lot of us I think when we see the size of these apical regions and you see the grandeur of the bigger trunks around them. Think of this as a generational transition. I mean this piece was clearly just like this dominant point of origin. All of these are offspring of this initial piece. Obviously this being a secondary. These are all the small offshoots over the course of time. To have this as a proportional reference but to realize that we have all of these other pieces that are much younger yet still taking on and informed by that. Wow what a interesting tap into ancient as a perspective of the time frame representation and change of aesthetic over the course of thousands of years of existence in an environment. Okay? So again we really dealt with sort of the meshing of some traditional concepts in a multi-trunk form where we talk about the height and the thickness and the elevation as a way to guide our apical creation and maintain that hierarchy. We also talked about sort of that consistency making it simple as just another branch carrying forward and reading some of the older pieces of the tree as influential and informative aspects. But ultimately that notion that the apex of a tree when we deal with multiple trunks in one singular composition is just another branch that is influenced and interacting with the pieces of the other trees that are in that composition is how we really need to adapt and adjust our thought process and if you do that over the course of time you're going to watch these pieces symbiotically engage in photosynthesis and occupy those spaces in ways that really do create a beautiful marriage of all of those trunks and all of those apical regions. Alright? We did it. We did it. I actually used the past two streams with this piece just as an excuse to put my hands on it. That's what's so beautiful about Mirai Live and hopefully it's been a composition that you've enjoyed seeing kind of come to fruition. Appreciate you all very much. We'll be doing the live Q&A tomorrow 3 p.m. Pacific Standard Time or daylight time. I'm not sure where we're at in terms of that but Eve can help you. I think it's Pacific Standard Time now. I don't really know. Anyways, live Q&A tomorrow. I believe the forum Q&A is full and we're still working on some pretty crazy stuff coming your way. So we'll keep at it. We'll let you all go. Stay healthy. Stay safe. Be well. And we'll see you tomorrow, if not tomorrow, next week on the stream. Thank you all. 
