Pinning strategies in the repotting process are something that we have to have a really good hold and grasp upon for them to be functional while also considering how do we maximize the aesthetic quality of our pinning strategy to decrease its visibility to the utmost degree. Pinning strategies are one of these techniques that go hand-in-hand with repotting and we have to have. But in order to execute pinning strategies correctly we need to be thinking about two things. Number one, how do we make this pinning strategy function? And number two, how do we make it as invisible as possible so that aesthetically it doesn't compromise the repotting process? Now when we start to dissect pinning strategy we have two major techniques that we can utilize depending on the strength of the root and how far out of the container it exists. The first technique we're applying is affectionately known as the Bo-Peep. This is the simple, really clean, nice hook that we see often applied to be able to hold roots that don't have a lot of strength, don't have a lot of girth, and we just need to get down below the surface of our soil during the repotting process. When we execute the Bo-Peep, the ideal scenario is that it holds the root where we want it without being visible to the viewer by the time the repotting process is complete, potting is done and in order to do that there are a few specific things that we need to do. Number one, always straighten the wire. Starting out with a nice straight wire is going to give us the best possible aesthetic as well as the best penetration into the root mass to provide function for our bow peep hook. Number two, cleanly form a nice small hook. One of the worst things about a poorly executed bow peep hook is some big sloppy nasty hook that doesn't go all the way into the soil and we see all of that visible information of a poorly executed technique. Just get a little piece of it in your plier, use the plier as the guide to form the arc, and we maintain that clean line and that clean hook to be able to minimize the amount of wire we apply to the root system. Number three, find the point on the root that you need to hit with your bow peep hook so that the entire root sits down underneath the surface of the soil. Roots are really important in bow peeping. They're really important in bow peeping. Roots are really important in bow peeping. They're really important in bow peeping. This will function differently depending on what location we try to hold. Finding that singular location that minimizes the number of bow peep hooks and maximizes the movement of the root is how we accomplish the best aesthetic with the application of this technique. Let's take a look at a little bit more complex version now that we understand the bow peep hook and the lighter application. The fish hook is a technique that literally is designed to go fishing in the root system. Catch on a thicker structural root and provide that really strong holding capacity so we can push a thick root down into the root system, hook it with the remainder of the wire sticking out, and have that structural wire that we caught with our fish hook support that root being compressed into the soil mass. This can accommodate the movement of very, very thick roots if executed correctly, but it's imperative we understand, again, the function and the aesthetics of the technique. Number one. We want to start out much in the same way with a bow peep hook where we straighten the wire. Always starting with a straight wire means we're going to have the cleanest, most direct application of force. Number two. We want to create the bow peep hook again, but notice how we leave more wire outside of the plier, a longer hook if you will than on the bow peep hook. Once we've created that bow peep hook, we get into the third technique and this is really what creates the fish hook. As you can see, the bamboo stake pushes out that fish hook and forms the functional aspect of this technique. Now it's time to go fishing. When we start to insert this piece, we have to understand that that compressed point is what allows us to penetrate the soil. We're going to be entering the root mass as deep as we possibly can, which means we need a longer piece on our fish hook, and once we get into the structural root zone, we're going to rotate that and we're just going to tug slightly and see if we can catch that big thick root. If we don't catch a root, we might go back in, we might rotate a little bit more, and we'll continue working, being careful to not damage the root system, but fishing for that structural root until we get that nice solid grip and that nice solid hold. Once we have that catch, we're compressing that thick root, utilizing tension on that catch, and folding that wire over the top of that. This is a really nice, strong root mass we're trying to lower to get the function of the technique. This is a very functional and aesthetic way to pin those big powerful roots down and improve the aesthetic of your repot. You now have two new techniques to be able to pin roots in a functional and attractive way and be able to maximize the potential of your repot to really bring about the most beauty in your tree. Good luck, happy repotting, and we'll look forward to seeing the product of all your hard work. Subtitles by the Amara.org community 
