Shall we dig in? Yes, okay. Soils. Woo! This is the big one, right? Now, how many of you guys saw the very first stream of 2018, the Fundamental Repot stream? Anybody? Raise your hands. Yes, please. No. More, more, more. You guys aren't tuning in enough, okay? Okay, so soils. Big ideas. I'm not going to break down what we did in that video. If you guys want to know Fundamental Repotting at its very root element layer, check that out. The first video of 2018, was that Fundamental Repotting? No, it's actually called Nursery Stock Series Part 4. There you go. That's why you guys probably didn't raise your hands. That makes sense. Called Nursery Stock Series Part 4. Nursery Stock Series Part 4. Again, I just, here, please. No, that one's had a couple titles, but it ended up being that. All right, cool. Okay, so inside of the Bonesite container, when we talk about how we set this system, I'm going to say repotting, probably the most mispracticed technique in Bonesite. Second. Second only to watering, okay? Watering, that's that one out here that I'm still working on diligently. Repotting, feeling more comfortable after my, this is now my eighth year at Mirai, post-apprenticeship. Six years in Japan, so we're going on 14 years where I would consider solid knowledge being delivered to me to improve my skills. And here's what I've learned. What we're trying to achieve when we're repotting is establishing a balance of water, H2O, and O2. Now, what a lot of us don't recognize, or realize, we talk about strength in pines comes from the roots, strength in junipers comes from the foliage, strength in elongating species comes from the vascular system. But all of our trees, when we start to talk about that immunity, okay, or the immune system of the tree is sourced from the root system. And the only way we get that tree to be able to provide all of the resources and response to the actions we take on a Bonesite is building that balance of water and oxygen, okay? Now, I've talked to you guys about this before, and if you want more information, come back to that repotting nursery stock series four, part four of that one, okay? There's two ways that we do this. Number one is composition in terms of what do we use, and number two is particle size, okay? And these two things are extremely, extremely important. We've got to focus on composition. What do we use? Why do we use it, okay? We've got to focus on particle size. What size cultivates? The size of roots that gives us the most, not just a living tree, right? And this is where we have to reset our threshold. It's not about keeping the tree alive. I mean, that's a good thing, too. Don't get me wrong, right? It's got to be alive. It's about getting that tree to a portion and a stage of health that allows you to do the things we do in Bonesite, right? And setting that bar high in terms of what does an established root system look like, what does that level of immunity give us the opportunity to do is where we've got to raise that bar in our level of expectation. And that's what we're going to be focusing on, okay? And that's what we're going to be focusing on, okay? So, I'm going to break down composition very, very quickly because the point of composition and the deep dive tonight is to advance and expand on what we've already talked about, okay? So, let's come back to composition, and anybody online who's got questions, feel free to fire away. You guys, this is our last time together, so you're all very passive this evening, but go ahead and feel free to engage, all right? Composition. Okay. So, we said we need a balance of what? Water and oxygen. Water and oxygen. Very good. So, that means we need a particle that holds water, okay, and we need a particle that maintains O2, right? And then what else is imperative for this tree to have sunlight? We know that that's not a part of the soil system. What else is imperative for the tree to have in the containerized environment to be able to develop, expand, and continue to evolve as a Bonesite? Nutrition. Nutrition. Nutrition. Very good. Fertilizer, we say, or nutrition. And then what about the soil particles interacts with nutrition? Cation exchange capacity. So, we need something that binds nutrition, okay, and that comes in the form of a particle that has a high or at least a moderate ability. Cation exchange capacity, the ability to bond anions and cations. If we break that down, stinky organisms. Okay. Okay. Okay. So, one organic fertilizer breaks down into ions that are the usable form of the nutrition. Okay. So, we're saying, listen. In our Bonesite container, here's our Bonesite. Very happy guy, okay. We've got these fertilizers. They're getting stinky, which means the decomposition process is happening. We've got flies just loving that, maggots, and we're saying, God, Ryan's been talking organic, and it's getting pretty ripe in here. Okay. But what happens is we start to get nitrogen breaking off. We start to get phosphorus. Phosphorus becoming available we start to get potassium and these ions are charged particles Okay, now the decomposition process is being handled by the microbiotic material in the container, which is why we use organic fertilizer We've talked about that before okay, but we need a particle in this soil that has charges on its surface Capable of locking these ions to the particle surface so as the root grows and it needs those elements It can access them right now the big thing about chemical fertilizer We don't need microbiotic material to break it down and it washes through the soil very quickly doesn't necessarily decompose and bond to those cation exchange sites And so we have less of the trees Choosing and selection of that nutrition to be able to fundamentally grow and increase the efficiency of metabolic processes, okay? What is the component that we are most familiar with? That love-hate relationship that we have That gives us that nutrient binding capacity Akadama Akadama Akadama Akadama, so what I wanted to talk to you guys about tonight in terms of the soil deep dive is why is Akadama special What does it do and how can you potentially replace it or find a substitute for it that? Might quite not get there, but be close okay, so let's dive into that we okay here everybody feel good. Yeah, all right here. We go Oh Akadama So just in the fundamental form Let me ask you guys is Akadama fired or is it raw? Fired fired why do you say that? Why do you say Akadama is fired? Says it on the bag Is the bag still have roots in it that's the question It does doesn't it if it were fired would it still have roots in it? I got it. You know this is the dangerous thing about talking about Akadama Akadama in its functional form is raw clay Okay, now what do we know about clay? We're all from the piss well maybe not all from the Pacific Northwest, but we're all currently in the Pacific Northwest physically tonight Why is the Pacific Northwest the nursery capital of the world? Because of the quality of the soil and and probably the rainfall too right but the quality of the soil so when we start to talk about clay as a particle We have all of these sites that lock up nutrition high cation exchange capacity Right plant available water, and we're saying this is a high nutrient rich soil capable of cultivating and giving a tree Exactly what it needs to grow grow fast grow strong grow at the high level of immunity Okay, now here's the problem with most clays most clays have a very plate like structure to the clay right so when you guys go out into the Willamette Valley or two? Any growing fields in the region and you start digging and you're saying boy? Ryan says clay is good Akadama is a clay this seems like a bad idea right I could make a dinner plate with this Why is this not working because it's definitively different in its form our? Standard clay with a plate like structure means when it shrinks as it dries and it swells as it gets wet We start to get fractures on these plate like forms, and it breaks up into a smaller and smaller particle, okay? now when we talk about particles in terms of their Activity inside of the soil if we take one particle and we break it down the middle into two particles We have a measurable amount of moisture retention or nutrient retention Directly correlated to the surface area okay, so when we break this into two Do we double the surface area? Yes, we do no yes does it decrease? it increases and it increases by what an exponential factor We start to talk about exponential increase in surface area ie Exponential increase in water holding capacity now what happens if we've got two big particles of this size and now they break into two Smaller particles each what happens to the spaces that exist between the particles do they get bigger or smaller? This is where o2 exists in our container so as we get decomposition of the soil we start to shrink down the o2 Increase the h2o and that fundamental concept that we talked about for balance of water and oxygen That we're striving to achieve Ah is lost right this is why we can't use a fundamental clay ah cool So then what's different about Akadama? Let's understand that? Akadama structure is very very special as a clay particle. It's not made of plates anymore via volcanic activity and mineral content Akadama and this is very very generic broad brushstroke of its structure. Okay, we could go way deeper We're gonna keep it as just a fundamental tubular form, okay What these tubes allow this to do is have flexibility in the expansion of being wet and the contraction of being dry But here's the bigger thing that they allow it to do all of a sudden With Akadama there's opportunity for our root system to start entering that soil particle Okay, and when they enter that soil particle just like the twig of a branch the more foliage mass a twig gets the thicker that becomes as that root enters that and continues growing it starts to thicken Well in that thickening process all of a sudden you start to cause Akadama to fracture into two smaller particles and when that fracture occurs this root root starts to branch into the tubular structures of the smaller particles. Ooh, cool. So then these fracture, and these fracture, and they branch, and they branch, and they branch, and they branch, and they fracture, and they fracture, and they branch, and they branch, and they fracture, and they fracture, and they branch, and they branch. And all of a sudden, we've got this fine, massive network of water uptake, nutrient uptake, nutrient binding capacity, water holding capacity, scalable to the size of the root system as it actively breaks down that particle. So we're saying wait, but you lose oxygen spaces. Yes, but if you have a finer and finer root, does a finer and finer root have the ability to access the smaller and smaller oxygen spaces? Yes, it's a proportional decomposition actively occurring with the expansion of the root system. And this component is what makes Akadama so very special. So let's come back to just some fundamental concepts about soils and the development of the root system where we can see this action giving us the most high refinable quality root system. So when we have a refined tree, and when we start to look at Japanese bonsai sort of as that pinnacle of refinement, you've got tiny leaves on all of the deciduous trees, and you're like, ah, how'd they get the leaves so small? They defoliate, and you defoliate, and your leaves aren't that small, and they get tiny agreement on their pines. You say, how do they do that? I decandal, I don't fertilize, I starve it of water, still my needles are too big. Right? How does this happen? How does this happen? How does this happen? Well when we start to think about this the root system here and the canopy here are a mere reflection of each other. So if we have this fine ramification being developed by this component Akadama that is self-scaling to the expansion of the root system, giving us a continual balance of water and oxygen while also increasing nutrient availability with the expansion of that surface area, greater and greater cation exchange capacity because of those sites being opened up. What we get up here is a greater and greater expansion of ramification and a reduction of the needle as we start to take that energy that exists here and dilute it across more and more of those growing tips. This is the process of bonsai. This is how we get to a refinable tree. But if we take this and we blow this up just into this microcosm of the container, and we're not even going to focus on the tree now. We're going to have a nice little foot here, nice little foot there, and we start to look at this root system as it exists in this container. There's one area where every time we repot, that refinement is maintained and those roots originate from that are going to replenish that environment. This is what we call the sheen of the root mass. Sheen. S-H-I-N. In Japanese, this means the beating heart. The sheen. This is the epicenter of life. For us as bonsai practitioners, the sheen, this root system directly underneath the trunk of the tree, this is the epicenter of refinement and new root regeneration, and also the fundamental basic building block of ultimate health balance of water and oxygen. What do you got? In that case, why would you ever repot? Yeah. Why would you ever repot? That's a great question. Can you guys give me a reason why you would repot? Okay. If we're changing stylistic, this is an art form, so stylistic changes would cause us to repot. Okay. Absolutely. Stylistic changes. Now, somebody said the roots outgrow the pot, and this is an interesting idea. If we get those roots to divide and divide and divide and divide, and that particle self-scales and self-scales and self-scales and self-scales, all of a sudden, we're not going to have much space left. Right? But we actually want that. We want that limitation of the containerized environment to slow down the energy, to slow down the growth. This is what shrinks the internode and shrinks the leaf. Now, where is the cutoff point? Where is, if one drop is enough, a full container, 10 drops is too many, which is the tree growing up out of the container, loss of percolation of water. Okay? Because any time we set up a system where now all of a sudden the balance of water and oxygen is lost, we start heading the other way. So one of our biggest reasons that we repot is loss of percolation. Water can't enter that dense, fine root system because of the creation of that. Alan, what do you got? When your soil breaks down, your akadama breaks down, those tubes have to shatter sometimes, don't they? Yes. Or don't they get full sometimes? With the root, right? And there's a lot of photographs, if you guys look at soil studies, a lot of photographs of roots growing straight through the center of an akadama particle. Okay. But you describe these tubes. Mm-hmm. I assume that they're molecular structure that you can't see with the naked eye. Of course. Of course. Okay. Right? This is a micron or electronic microscope sort of photograph type of thing. And then when I say, I'm doing the gross overstatement by this, these tubes would be three-dimensional objects with things entering from all sides and whatnot. It's not just a singular tube, right? But it's flexible. So they're tubes that are like, you threw a bunch of pipes up in the air and they landed. That would be how the akadama particle. Yeah. Like a million pipes in the air and you crushed them onto that turntable. That's what it would look like. Okay. Thank you. Yeah. Exactly. Okay. So then we still have one more reason that we would repot. Because we're saying, well, wait. Hang on. You want this system. You want all this. This is good. Refinement. Smaller. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Ooh. Sure. Things are going the opposite way. A loss of balance of water and oxygen. So we say, if we have decomposition, meaning we have the particle breaking down, which is, right? Which increases surface area, increases water retention, decreases oxygen being present. But you guys should be saying, wait, didn't you just say you wanted that? Didn't I say I wanted that? Okay. So what's that? Okay. You want a balance. Now, what's the difference between akadama actively breaking down and passively breaking down? Okay. Because we got to understand there's different levels to the game, right? You can't just have every particle. You can't just have every particle of akadama created equal, right? This is, we have good akadama. We got okay akadama. And we've got, boy, you shouldn't touch that akadama, right? And that really good akadama has been dried correctly and sourced from a location that has the right mineral content with the right heat from the volcanic activity. And all of those things happen. Water percolated, the correct plants above it, and the right strata in the soil. That's what gives us good akadama. And then there's a whole bunch of clay, right? So understanding that, if we start to get decomposition because we have more of a plate structure than we do a tube structure, that will do exactly what we see happening when we're out there digging and we're saying, boy, this is some crappy clay, right? So be careful because that quality akadama is a very fundamental aspect of high-end bonsai, right? How do you know? How do you know if it's good? How do you know if it's bad? How do you know? Brand? Brand? Yeah, sure. Brand. Sure. Sure. Sure. Sure. Possibly. Except for there's like ten new brands every week of akadama and we're like, is that one good, right? And then I'm like, I don't know. I've never seen that before, and they say it's fired to 3,000 degrees and it's not pink, it's brown and it's got roots in it, and I don't know what to tell you. Look at the amount of dust on the bottom of the bag. This is just a very simple, quick, passive way to tell if that akadama in the transport from Japan to the United States, containers, trucks, cars, trains, ships, all of a sudden it's at your house. Is it three-quarters dust, or is there a very minimal amount of broken-down Akadama that will immediately tell you, when you're buying it, roll that bag over. If you're buying it mail-order, buy one bag first. See how much dust is in the bottom of that bag. You should not have very much dust if it's a high-quality Akadama. Okay? We got any questions from online? Yeah. A gazillion? A lot. Okay, hit me with them. Patrick wants to know if there's any trees that Akadama doesn't work with. Yes, common juniper. Juniperus communis. Never put a common juniper in Akadama. Ever. Is that this year? It's still alive? Wow. Wow. Every single common juniper that I've put in Akadama, seen in Akadama, or talked with people that have success with that species, say never let Akadama touch the tree. This is interesting, though. Keep going. Keep going with it, right? Keep going. If you're having success, don't stop. I am, too. I am, too. I'm afraid for you. I had the best. Oh, I had the best common juniper from the lava flows. The best common juniper I've ever seen. It was healthy. It was growing. It was doing. I'm saying I'm defying the Akadama odds. Just one day. Just gone. But in Europe, in Europe, when you talk to the people that have the long-standing common junipers, they say, okay, we never let it touch Akadama. That was their big point. Okay? So I'm just throwing it out there. Take it as you will. What else we got? Do we have any idea why? No. I don't. I do not have any idea why. Could you comment on Thiatomaceous Earth, Zeolite, and Chalbasai? Okay. We'll come back to that, right? We're getting there. You're jumping ahead. Okay. What else you got? About Akadama? Just anything that's related to what we've talked about so far. Oh. So Paul wants to know if we can get fire ramification without using Akadama. We're going to try. We're going to try. The question is, is can we get the same quality, right? Might not be able to do better, but can we get the same? And then Brian wants to know, how important is the 1 16th to 1 8th size, especially in Oregon where it's so wet? 1 16th to 1 quarter is that size, that particle size for that best root growth. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Yeah. Okay. Okay. Yeah. Okay. Okay. Yeah. Okay. And then a lot of folks are just asking about substitutes for Akadama. Okay. Well, we're getting there. Everybody, calm down. Settle down. Okay. Settle down. All right. Let's come back to this sheen. Okay. So we're saying, listen, this sheen is the epicenter of refinement, epicenter of root regeneration, epicenter of health, balance of water and oxygen here. Now notice, when we get root growth post repot, where is the first place that the roots grow to? Where do they go? They go to the edge, right? Number one, they occupy the wall. Why? Water, oxygen, heat. H2O, O2, and heat, roots like heat. Number one on the walls. Where do they go after they occupy the walls? Go to the bottom. Why to the bottom? H2O, O2 coming in, H2O going out. H2O holds heat. Excellent, okay? Number one on the walls, number two on the bottom. Where's the last place they go? The sheen, okay? Because the surface here, if we top dress H2O, O2, right? We just don't even count that though. That's already occupied if we're handling this correctly. This is the last place roots want to go. It's the wettest, it's the driest, and it's the coldest. So if you're a root and you're coming into the movie late, right? You already missed the beginning. You don't know who the characters are. You missed the critical plot. You're not going to understand anything, and you get the crappiest seat in the theater. That's what happens to the roots that grow into the sheen. They're just like, I don't know. I don't even know. I wanted the wall, bottom, surface. This is what I got, right? I got to go here. Now we've got this big trunk. We've got this big nebari, right? How does water even get into the sheen when we're watering our bonsai and it's directly underneath the base of this tree? This is important, right? So now we're talking about water runs, right? It runs through our container. We get a high concentration of water at the bottom of the container. Once we get gravity pulling all of the excess out, that water, via capillary action, particle to particle, starts moving back up and evening out the concentration of water throughout that container. Now it also starts moving in to even out that concentration of water in the container. And this is, if we have good particles, balance of water and oxygen, correct size and correct composition, we get all these fine roots forming here because they're saying, you know what? You're going to get a lot of water. You're going to get a lot of water. You're going to get a lot of water. You're going to get a lot of water. You know what? This isn't so bad. This is OK. You guys hang out on the wall during the summer. You're going to hate that spot. You guys go to the bottom. I feel sorry for you in the winter. We're going to party right here. We're good. You do your thing. This is a nightclub, right? This is after hours. And we get this fine, dense mass. And these guys are like, oh, I want in there. Now I don't have any water because I've lost percolation. And these guys are like, oh, jeez, this particle size is giving me an awful lot of oxygen. I can't quite produce the kind of fine water root system I want. And all of a sudden, we start to occupy the sheen. Once we get here, we win. We won. We won the game of bonsai, right? At least for now. Because this is when we see this tree go from this field-grown piece that had a shoot here, and a shoot here, and a shoot here. And all of a sudden, this turns into this pad, and this pad, and this apex, and this pad, and this pad. This is the kind of a tree where when you dig into the sheen, this is just a solid. This is just a mass of roots, right? The only way you get that sheen that self-scales and creates that kind of ramification, fineness, refinability, origin of that epicenter of root regeneration is by using a particle that holds up to that process, carries nutrition, carries water, holds oxygen, and creates that environment for root growth to occur. That makes sense? No, no, and most of the time, no roots start in the sheen, right? Which is why the sheen is so easy to fix. But we've got to understand the process, okay? Let's talk about the process. I've got a question about Akadama, Ryan. What do you got? Well, it's not directly. Maybe you can cover it later if it would fit in better. But my wife and I lived in Los Angeles during the John and Naka days in the early 70s, and when we were there, what they had discovered was crushed granite. Everybody was switching to crushed granite. Nowadays, you don't hear anything about crushed granite. Maybe that was all before your time, but do you have any comments on that? Are you going to get to that? I mean, I think that as far as a component that doesn't break down and maintain spaces for oxygen, crushed granite is one option. But when you look at the highest quality bonsai in the world, very rarely is crushed granite. It's a component of that soil mixture, right? Because there are other things like lava that do what crushed granite does and more by the larger pore spaces that they allow oxygen to move in the particle itself. But it's still an option, right? It's never going to break down, okay? Or at least we hope. Decomposed granite start. We're slippery slope there, okay? So say, for example, we have a tree, right? And we're going to be repotting some trees tonight just to show you guys how we handle the root system. And set you guys up, kind of prime you for the repotting season. Most mispracticed technique in bonsai, second only to watering, okay? We'll get right there, okay? But we have this situation. And you guys have this all the time. Or we've got a tree in a nursery container. And we're saying, man, I can't cut all those roots off to get that into a bonsai container. Any time that we repot, our goal, our mission, our thought process should be, how do we get this into an appropriate size bonsai container? Now. A lot of you guys are going to be saying, well, that sounds sacrilege. He's talking about the quality of the root system. It doesn't seem like that's the right call. This is one of those guys practicing instant bonsai. But let me just walk you through this process and help you kind of understand, right? Because each professional has their approach. This goes hand in hand with understanding water dynamics in the soils. Our process at Mariah's, we always start from the path of greatest resistance, right? So we're saying the farthest point from the trunk, if that's a odd root structure. If that's a root structure on a pine out at the corner of a box. If that's the depth of a nursery container that's been growing in the container yard for 10 years, right? These are still preventing you from getting this into an appropriate proportion container that makes it a good bonsai, correct? Good? OK. So if we preserve this area here and we start this reduction, we can do very severe work on these areas as long as we've got roots in this area that we don't touch and we don't bear root, which is why we start here. OK. Can I reduce this? Yes, I can. Now that means there's less work. Because I reduce this, there's less work I can do in this area. So I'm going to take a little soil here. I'm going to take a little soil there. I'm going to take a little soil there. And that's going to be my repot. OK. So I'm going to put that into an appropriately sized container. Beautiful. And I've got a little bit of soil out here, new soil. And I've got a little bit of new soil in here. And I've got a little bit of new soil in here. And that's all I got. But Ryan said that we have to build up the health of the sheen. What the heck? This isn't. That's like counter, right? Isn't there still field soil in here? Isn't that set up for an imbalance of water and oxygen? But follow me here, OK? Water is going to take the path of least resistance, OK? Naturally. Now we want to make sure to try and mesh these two as closely as we can, just in terms of creating kind of an ugly interface here, not a nice, clean, smooth. We get that. We get those roots exposed. We do some of that, right? And we get all that water leaving that container. And then we have this excess water. And it starts moving back up. And this is where capillary action starts to send water back to the middle. Now this sheen, because it's denser, is naturally going to say, man, the balance of water and oxygen is out at the wall. The warmth is out at the wall. Those roots occupy the wall. Those roots occupy the bottom. And all of a sudden, three or four years later, this sheen doesn't have any roots left in it. And because it doesn't have any roots left in it, it starts to become hyper-loaded with water. That water starts to move out here and impact the balance of water and oxygen there. And this is our key decomposition. This is when we go back in and we repot. We leave the edges intact. We try to do as minimal disturbance to the bottom as possible outside of removing the matted roots. And we find that this field soil literally falls out of the sheen. We replace it. And in two repottings, we have a completely renovated, bonsai soil system, where the sheen is now set up for success. What do you got? You mentioned that you get finer and finer ramification based upon the breakdown of the soil. Active, active breakdown. So would you want to repot with smaller Akadama? Or do you just continue to use the same standard formula? And if you do, do your leaves become big and everything gets out of portion and you're starting all over? Yeah. So this is the kicker, though, right? Yeah. At every turn, at every turn, if we try to shortcut the system, we set ourselves up, right? OK, so if we want smaller and smaller, let's use a smaller particle. But to get the root growth that's going to grow through that Akadama particle and is going to cause it to actively scale or break down, we got to have a balance of water and oxygen with the roots that exist. And that is 1 16th to 1 quarter, right? With that 1 quarter to 1 half layer to allow oxygen into the soil on the bottom of the container, that will always build. Build your best balance of water and oxygen to facilitate root growth. Now, at that point, once the roots are growing, they start penetrating that Akadama, breaking it apart, self-scaling, branching, refining, refining, refining. And we see this canopy. Oh, man, I'm getting smaller leaves. I'm getting smaller internodes. I'm getting a robust performance in the canopy of the tree. What is happening? That is happening, right? But that initiation of that growth comes from that initial balance of water and oxygen. I've got some stuff. I decomposed granite. You want me to wait? OK. All right. All right. So hold that thought just one second. OK. Akadama substitutes, right? Yeah. All right. Here we go. It's a big hot topic. Kendall's over there like, I have the chat. Everybody's just like, I can't get Akadama. What do I do? It's heating up. It's heating up. It's heating up. OK. All right. So come back to what is it that, besides the whole self-scaling thing, because I don't know. How many of you guys knew that? How many of you knew that? Yeah, Mirai students. Cool. OK. This is, as far as the world of bonsai is concerned, probably tonight might be the most comprehensive discussion of why we care about Akadama so much. Nobody knew that. You didn't know that happened, right? Akadama's single point of success in Japanese bonsai refinement to bring it to the level that it has, OK? Great. Akadama is expensive. It's hard to get. The majority of what we are getting is a very low quality and potentially not even of the structure that gives us that. What do we do? Let's go back to its function. Our composition needs to hold water, H2O, maintain O2, and bind nutrition, CEC. So if we can't get Akadama, we start looking at what else has cation exchange capacity. OK. So we have decomposed pine bark. Don't worry. Don't get excited. That's not what I'm suggesting. OK. We've got sphagnum moss. We've got peat moss. And now what we're starting to find is we've got these other components that are a little bit more stable, like diatomaceous. There's a strong chance this is spelled wrong. Earth, right? In France and in Canada, boy, good luck. Chabu's eye. OK. And so we're saying, listen, with these organic components, this is no different than the plate-like clay structure. You have two max three years before those break down, and all of a sudden you have an imbalance of water and oxygen through passive decomposition. But we're saying, listen, in this container, if we're talking about conifers, in order to get that sheen to be occupied, six to eight years, six to eight years of growth before everybody stops partying on the walls, everybody's done with the basement. party, and they all of a sudden move back to, right, the center of the city, and they're like, okay, this is where I want to be, right? Six to eight years of shining on all of the things that we're going to endure, these are done after two to three years. If we use these components, we never build that sheen, we never get that refined bonsai. Hence, we've been doing bonsai in the United States a long time. Where are all the dense, super refined, amazing trees? They're building now because we just started to understand this concept, okay? So when we start looking, diatomaceous earth, horticultural grade, same particle size, high cation exchange capacity, porosity, large amount of plant-available water, as far as I'm concerned, where we stand right now, number one substitute for Akadama in terms of delivering that cation exchange capacity, that nutrient-holding component, while being able to maintain these other pieces, okay? And what about particle size ends? So if you're substituting it for Akadama, it has to hold, right, the same quantity inside of your soil mix to get the balance of water and oxygen and have that nutrient-holding capacity. Still saying, one-sixteenth to one-quarter, as far as particle size, gives us the size of root that builds fine ramification, takes in water and nutrition, all right? Are there others? I am sure. I talked to a soil scientist from California, and I said, listen, there's this soil that exists in Japan, volcanic, this and that, and it's this, and I sent him a bag of Akadama, and he analyzed it, and he said, oh, yes, when I look at soil maps around the world, I see one place where those could exist outside of Japan, Mount Hood, Oregon. I'm not kidding, either, right? I'm not kidding. And there was a gentleman in BSOP, I don't know who he was, who went up to Mount Hood and collected some of the soil, and we sent that to him, and he said, well, I don't know who he is, but he sent that soil to the same soil scientist, and he said it's identical. The right meshing, right, from the ring of fire, Pacific ring of fire, volcanic activity, mineral content, all things taken into account, it gave us Akadama. Now, who wants to go mine half of Mount Hood? All right, there you go, business idea. You guys take it and run with it, okay? So it exists. He said that nature never creates one solution. There are other options. Something, it's a work in process. Right now, what are we doing at Mirai? We're doing a lot of experimentation with diatomaceous earth, knowing that at some point, Akadama is not going to be what we're utilizing, okay? Why do you hate Turfus so much? Oh, because Turfus doesn't know its job. It doesn't know what it's supposed to do. It didn't get the memo, or it got the wrong memo, or the boss got fired that wrote the memo, okay? We're saying, listen, we need something that holds water. But when we start talking about holding water, we're saying, listen, balance of water and oxygen doesn't mean that we stop watering, and a balance of water and oxygen doesn't mean that the tree wants a ton of water. It just needs to have access to that water, okay? Now, Turfus being this angular, very small, poor product, right? When you talk about components that hold water, it's not how much water it holds, it's how much water it gives. Turfus doesn't give the water back, and that's why it stops being such a usable component to create the kind of root system that builds the bonsai that we're talking about here, that high-level root system. Can we get a mic over here, Brandon? I wish I could like Turfus. I have like 50 bags of Turfus. In college, it was what everybody told me to use. I still have it. I don't know what to do with it. It just takes up space. What about Zeolite? Zeolite. Zeolite. You know, I don't know that much about Zeolite, so I don't want to say it's good or I don't want to say it's bad. I don't know that much about it, but I'll do some research on it. What do you got? Doesn't Turfus also hold together without holes in between it? It has very, very small oxygen spaces, yeah. So it holds a lot of water. It doesn't give it back, and very minimal amount of oxygen. Absolutely. Yep, yep. What do you got, Doug? There's some folks who are asking for substitutes for pumice and lava. Substitutes for pumice and lava. That's a good question. So, the gentleman mentioned granite, right? Or crushed granite, or decomposed granite is a common substitute for lava, right? Because we're just talking about lava being a component that maintains. It doesn't break down. It doesn't scale, right? It just stays the same and holds those spaces particle to particle. Now, lava is superior because oxygen can pass through the particle itself, right? And this is where, when we start to look at lava, there's even... There's a lot of people who say, oh, I've never seen lava that looks like that, right? That looks like a rock. And then you have lava that looks like craters on the moon. That crater on the moon lava is giving you oxygen exchange at a maximum capacity without holding the water actively in the particle itself, okay? That's what we're looking for. As far as pumice, holding the water, which means it's also retaining heat because water has a high heat retention capacity. In the UK, right, the big substitute and the component that produces the best roots in the nursery industry is perlite because it holds the water and it gives the water back and that holding of the water also retains the heat. They don't have volcanoes in the UK that give them pumice. That's been a big component. That also is a substitute for us here. Yes, it does float. Yes, it does have a high content of fluoride, so don't grow fuchsia in it. Otherwise, you're good to go. Oh, and then Christopher came back and said zeolite. As far as they know, zeolite and chalboside are the same thing. So, what's your opinion on? So, I was gifted a bag of chalboside from some students in Montreal, and I'm kind of blown away. I'm not going to lie. It's pretty darn good. It holds its form, has really good cation exchange capacity, has some silica content, which helps with root division. Yeah, it's really, really nice. I haven't used it long term. I haven't seen what the results are in comparison to Akadama. I think you probably have something that could potentially be a really quality substitute. The only problem is, is it's not available to us in the United States. And then Abdiel is curious if there's a reason we don't use Kiryu in our soil. Because we've got lava. So, when we talk about Japanese particles, right, you've got Akadama, you've got Kiryu, and you've got Hyuga. Hyuga is pumice. It's the Japanese pumice. Kiryu is lava. It's the Japanese lava. So, when you import those things, they don't know what they are. They spend a lot of money for imported soil components, and then all of a sudden you realize you're just buying a Japanese version of what we have readily available here. Okay. I wanted to, and actually I think I'll start with this one. I wanted to just kind of set the tone for some repotting, get you guys warmed up, prime the gears a little bit, and more than anything, as we've been kind of moving forward, and this is an awkward one, but we're going to go for it. As we've been moving forward with sort of the evolution of bonsai, one of our... Biggest goals, and I know one of BSOP's biggest goals is to make it accessible, right? This is a tree that I found in 2010, was being thrown out. You can see it's still in the same container I found it in eight years ago, and it was probably already five years old at that point. Okay. This is a Colorado blue spruce, and when we start to look through nurseries and try to find quality material, we're always looking for those things, right? Where's the base, the line, any features? And this tree was just kind of this whimsical, literal... And this tree was just kind of this whimsical, literal... Colorado spruce that had this big buttressing base and this rugged bark, and so this was one that I couldn't turn away, and in fact, the nursery gave it to me for free. I would tell you guys all where that nursery is, except for the fact that that nursery is now apartment buildings in the Willamette Valley. Okay? So, when we start to talk about, and we've done several different renditions, you guys waiting for that to fall just like me? We've done several different renditions of repotting on Mariah Live, but I wanted to come back... We've done several different renditions of repotting on Mariah Live, but I wanted to come back to the very sort of epicenter of accessibility in the nursery container and show you guys how I handle this, right? Now, when we say, when we start the repotting process, and I actually, this is kind of a good opportunity. Ricardo, can you kind of zoom in here to those white spots? Ah, bonsai ninjas. Hey, these are rude aphids. You guys ever heard of rude aphids? Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Ah, son of a gun. Ryan Neal has rude aphids? Don't touch him. Okay, I'm going to show you guys this. You guys see these little spots, these cottony masses here? Yeah? Now, a lot of times, people mistake rude aphids for mycorrhizae, right? Now, what's the difference? What's the difference in appearance? What's the difference in the structure? How do we know the difference between rude aphids and mycorrhizae? Now, you can look. There's actual aphids in here, right? But you would have to look pretty hard. You would have to look with a lens to actually see them really well. What's the difference, then, between when you pull a root mass out, you say, no, that's not rude aphids. That's just really good mycorrhizae. Look at that. That looks like really good mycorrhizae. More web-like. Mycorrhizae occupies the soil. Okay? It occupies the soil. Rude aphids occupy the root. So they are physically placed. When you look at these patches, they're always on top of a physical root. Mycorrhizae spans. The gap between the root and the soil because they're pulling the nutrition off of the soil, the water off of the soil, and they're feeding that into the root. Rude aphids are just eating, right? They're eating all of the sugars and starches that create all of the immunity that this plant needs to thrive. They are ninjas. Okay? Anyways, I want to show you that this isn't a big deal. Nematodes will take care of that. Okay? Starting on a nursery container, we say start at the point of greatest limitation. And for this tree, in order to maximize the aesthetic of a literati, shallow container. Right? The taller we get, the shallower and the wider we get, this is what maximizes the aesthetic. But we don't know where the surface is. We don't know where the nebari is yet. Right? So I'm going to start here and just kind of start dissecting this to see if I get a further basal spread of this already very, very chunky, cool, special root base that we've got here. Okay? And this is where I would start almost any nursery tree unless I had an inverse taper that already existed in the trunk prior to starting this process, which you shouldn't have bought. Anyways, but if you did, this is, you know, it is what it is. You've got to learn. Kendall, we got any questions? Yeah. A bunch. Yeah. Fire. Where to begin? Yeah, they're mostly following up from what we were discussing before. Keep it going. Let's talk about Akadama. Okay. This root system is going to take me a minute. A hot minute. You guys got a hot minute? Yeah. You got some time? We're all chilling. We're all chilling. We're all here. We're all chilling. Bill wants to know about if you know haydite. Haydite? Yeah. As a, haydite's a fired component though, right? So any time that you take an organic component and you fire it, you change its properties. You change its behavior, right? And that's where when we say, oh, okay, Akadama is fired. If it were fired, the color would change. It wouldn't be beige anymore. It would be pink, right? And if you fire it, it wouldn't have cation exchange capacity anymore. It would be inert, just like pumice, right? It would just turn into pumice. So when you talk about haydite, haydite, probably a potential substitute for pumice as a water holding component, potentially. And then what about horticultural charcoal? Do we use it at Mirai? No. No. No. No. No. And here's the thing about horticultural charcoal, right? This question exists a lot across the world of bonsai because there's a lot of bonsai professionals that use horticultural charcoal. I don't want to poo-poo horticultural charcoal too much because I don't actually know if it would improve performance. But the reasons for using horticultural charcoal seem to be very skewed and misunderstood, right? Because people say, okay, well, you use charcoal and charcoal. What's the common phrase for charcoal? It sweetens the soil. What does that mean? That it sweetens the soil? It eats up the acid. Is acid sour? Is that what we're thinking? It's like pickles, sweet, sour? Right. Huh. Has anybody ever eaten sulfur? I mean, because isn't sulfur extremely... Sulfur's an acid? It's not... It isn't... It's a what? It makes acid. It makes acid. Okay, sulfuric acid. There you go. Okay, all right. Okay, so this could be correct. You may be onto something here. Well, I'm just going to make it. Uh-huh. Okay. Okay, okay. That makes sense. That makes sense. But this is where we're going with it, though, right? The biggest reason that people say they typically use charcoal is to purify, right? To purify. To soak up the toxins, to soak up the impurities, et cetera. And maybe you guys know something more about this than me, because this is a question that I'm asked frequently. And Mr. Kimura used to say, listen, if you're going to put charcoal in the root system, hasn't the water already passed through the root system, been absorbed by the porosity of the particles that can hold it? What is the charcoal going to do at that point? And that was always my question. Now, passing it through a charcoal filter, this is another level, right? Or it's sitting in your stomach lining, waiting for the capillaries to absorb it and carry it into your... Your bloodstream. Cool, got it. Sitting in the bonsai container, though, it never made sense to me. And so we've never used it because I've never seen a root system that has charcoal in it that looks really good and robust and dense and healthy. I always associated crappy roots to charcoal, I guess. Maybe. Maybe that would be more effective. Charcoal in the water bucket might be more effective. Or a charcoal filter, right, is typically where you see charcoal have the ability to... To purify anything that's passing through it prior to it going to where you want it to go, right? And that seems to be where the effective use of charcoal would stem from if I'm just looking at it objectively. But again, I don't know enough about it to say that it doesn't work. I just don't understand how it does work. All right, Ryan Ross says, I recently saw a video that compared how various soil components handled going through freeze-thaw cycles. And it looked like akadama and pumice broke down pretty severely. Is that something you've seen? Um... So, I've seen akadama break down if it's not protected, right? And any time you start to talk, one of the beautiful things about getting to work with BSOP and you guys is we've gotten to go through the whole system, right? So, now we're setting up the balance of water and oxygen and all of a sudden this impacts our fertilization. And the fertilization impacts the way that we pinch, prune, and manage growth. And then we go through and we decandle. And then in the summertime, it changes our watering habits. And we top dress to preserve the integrity of that soil on the surface so that it doesn't decompose, right? So, that... That protection, that top dressing, is one of the biggest ways that we can preserve the quality of the soil on its surface so that it doesn't, in fact, decompose through the freeze-thaw. And believe it or not, a small layer of top dressing will massively change the durability of akadama in a colder climate. But if you went all the way up to Hokkaido, right, the northern island of Japan, they don't use a high quantity of akadama. They use a much lower quantity. Mr. Kimura would use three, four parts akadama to one part pumice, or... Hyuga, and one part lava, kiryu. And he used that on his pines, which was very abnormal, right? You're talking about pines that have a very oxygen-rich, or oxygen-rich necessity to survive. And he would still use a copious quantity of akadama, but he was down in Tokyo. Okay. Notice how this base has just gotten, like, astronomically better. Basically filling up the entire container. Now, if you guys get lucky enough to score something like this, right? This is where we see... This is where we start. Identify that base. Now, I've stopped, because over here, I'm starting to notice that it's not flaring anymore. And this is where I draw the line. This is where we establish nabari. If it's not getting wider anymore, we start getting straight, or we start going in, we pull back. Because if you pull that soil away, you've got to replace it. And a lot of times, with a solid root mass like this, it's hard to get that soil to stay in that position, okay? So now that I'm aware, I can come back to that original greatest point of limitation, which is at the bottom of the container. But I'm not just going to come down there and start breaking that apart, right? I need to be looking at the angle that I'm going to be planting this tree at, because we've got this big, tall tree. We want to be establishing a platform down here that establishes that nice, flat surface that holds this angle. Now, the way a lot of us handle repotting is we'll just mound a bunch of soil up underneath this, kind of stuff it in there, and it should be good, right? Over time, though, if we're clear, that soil is constantly breaking down. And if we're self-scaling or passively decomposing, this tree's angle starts to change. And then it starts to wobble in the pot. And then we're like, what the heck? I tied it in really solid. What happened? I had it perfect. What's going on? Over six months, all of a sudden, we've got this system falling apart because we didn't do it right, okay? So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to make sure of my angle, just past vertical here, making sure that's there. I'm going to make note of that. I'm going to drop that straight back. People always say, do you always have an assistant? Yeah. Yeah. Do you always have an assistant? No. It just looks a lot more elegant when you do. Okay. And I'm going to establish, I'm going to establish that platform. Now, this is a three-dimensional, yeah, this tree was designed by a student at Murai last year. Lee was in this class. Lee, were you in this class? Yeah. I think Lee's comment was junk pile. Forrest, forrest, there we go. Okay, so you guys need to keep in mind, and for everybody online, keep in mind that we're dealing with a three-dimensional system here, right? So when I come in and I'm trying to establish this pad on a cylindrical root system, I've got to be taking into account the taper, right, of this root system. So it starts to form almost like a half moon in terms of the shape that I'm going to be taking off to establish that. And you want to give yourself a nice just little impression, nice little guideline, so that you know where you're working and you don't have to focus on this and keep it exactly right. But it's also very wise to keep this tree parallel to the surface so you can work perpendicularly to the root mass and have confidence that you're taking away the correct amount of soil, okay? So I'm going to be working along that line that I've set for myself, just kind of freeing. And the only thing that I'm concerned with right now is establishing that angle. I don't care about anything else. I'm not worried about how far I'm going to take it. I'm not worried about anything else. I set it. It's where it needs to be, parallel, work perpendicular. I've got that dialed in. So I'm going to get this set first. Now, I don't know how far back I'm going to be able to take it. I don't really care at this point in time. My only concern is establishing my platform, okay? And this is how we deal with these points of limitation. Set that angle. Set that angle first and foremost, okay? So now here's my established angle, and you can see the whole root system has this sort of slant to it. Now, I want to change that to here. Do you guys see that? So now I've got to take off this corner a little bit, okay? I'm going to show you guys. I want to roll this over to here. That means I've just got a small point of contact there that I'm going to be adjusting. I'm going to come back, and I'm going to work in this area, just to take that off so that I get that to roll over right where we want it. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. Hey, Ryan, I was just curious. Turfus is a clay? Ryan Seidman Turfus is a fired clay that they use in turf  turfus? Sporting fields, baseball, diamonds, et cetera, to absorb moisture in the grass, lawn, as well as on the playing surface itself. So they can hydrate it. It doesn't  it's not dusty, but it's not wet. Right? Yeah. It's a big golf course amendment. Right? how's that that feel good okay i've got a little bit of a high point here because this should be perfectly solid when i'm done with this okay so i'm going to take out that high point now just kind of working it making sure i've got exactly what i want before i start really reducing this because if i focus my energy on getting this right at this point in time then i don't have to focus on doing it again i can now move to moving this up as one singular surface and treating this as one flat pad with this newly established angle so you see how important this is set it now and then you can work freely what do you got reed ryan i've read that uh akadama is acidic and diatomaceous earth is alkaline are you seeing a difference in ph as you're switching over so that's interesting because akadama in all of the soil tests that i've personally done on the akadama that we use it's always been neutral and um and for the diatomaceous earth it too has been neutral but i don't know if that is across the board for every variety of akadama because what i hope you guys take from this in regards to akadama is akadama is not akadama is not akadama right in fact it would be like saying well the clay in the willamette valley is the same as the clay in japan it's all very different right okay how's this is that okay and okay does that feel like all my branches are relatively flat kind of lined up stylistically it's so cool close it's a rough styling okay here we go all right yeah how we chose the front yeah i'll come back to that when we actually when i make sure i've got this dialed in anybody online got questions these yeah uh marcia asked if you lost the sheen can you cultivate it back can you what cultivate the sheen back yeah and in fact most of the time we end up having to dissect the sheen and we end up having to dissect the sheen and we end up having to create the sheen at all right so never fear losing the sheen you can always rebuild the sheen with healthy soil and good good solid composition of your soil particles good solid particle size to facilitate balance of water and oxygen and now your sheen will come back okay so now i've got this nice flat pad i've taken out all the high points where the rocking was now i'm going to go one sheet at a time and when i say one sheet at a time half inch three quarters of an inch we're going to go in and we're going to take this off at this angle we're going to maintain this angle but you culling out your it masses clear water off the sheet is really cool you really don't have to do much to because the sheet is going to This is like a tank tank that's going to be a couple of inches in the same spot a little bit longer where it's actually stuck on so the name doesn't have to hurt you it just has to be amazing when they but i run you have to be able to make sure the alongside with enough insulation little insulation i'm doing on here that sees that everything's level to make sure i can soak it clean that it's not going to break and break can do and i can get some material out of it i can all afraid i'm going to go to this and you don't want your kid to chop the dog's leash or whatever is happening right the ability to focus and not want to wander and come back to that area where you're working to maintain those things that you've established this is the discipline and repotting that makes it so incredibly challenging ryan edgardo says do you have any thoughts about the ph in the soil and how we could control the water ph for better nutrient uptake yeah that's a really good question so when we start talking ph and bone side terms right neutrality is is key and neutrality is king in terms of ph because when you start to talk about ph the bigger thing about ph is not actually the ph it's what the ph does in terms of availability of nutrients right and we know that ph ph that's too low too acidic can stop the absorption of some components or decrease the ability for those to be soluble we know ph that's too high can decrease other components and so we know that ph that's too high can decrease other components and so we know that ph that's too high can decrease other components and you need that balance so when we talk about that that neutrality 6.5 6.2 6.5 6.8 as a ph and it used to be 7 they've dropped it down to 6.5 as neutral is right around that range that we get maximum absorption of all of the nutrients that the tree needs to maximize metabolic activity and there are exceptions to that what would the exception to that be azaleas azaleas would be one are there others rhododendrons so the azaleas are part of the rhododendron family right yeah gardenias maybe right there's some of those nuanced pieces of that puzzle okay what about pines what about pines yeah that's what christopher asked yeah what about pines right if you go basic ph you get above say 7.5 and pines what starts to happen they start to go yellow why do they go yellow yeah i know it gives me a headache too ok so they go yellow because they have a lack of nitrogen you said or iron right so they go yellow because they have a lack of nitrogen you said or iron right but what ends up happening is iron becomes no longer absorbable right becomes insoluble and and uhm what do they call it deficiency in iron prevents the processing a nitrogen to create chlorophyll so now all the sudden chlorophyll productions inhibited in and and were saying i'm giving it nitrogen I'm giving it nitrogen give it nitrogen but in these the iron right and this is where liquid iron comes in and knew deuces with liquid iron and it turns green for two weeks and then all of a sudden it goes yellow by the way and then dude i was thinking about negligible oxygen andices but the showon which is a sr. fizner douse it with liquid iron and it turns green for two weeks and then all of a sudden it goes yellow again you say what the heck liquid i gave it iron well you did but iron was water soluble in that form and now all of a sudden you have the same ph issue and it's still not available and nitrogen can't be processed and no chlorophyll exists jeez repotting is hard work right i'm just i'm just kidding this is my favorite time of year ryan can i ask you a question about kanuma i've read about i'm over here oh okay i've read about using um the more acidic kanuma for the azaleas and things do you like it use it do i use kanuma uh for azaleas absolutely but there's more than just acidity that makes it valuable for azaleas you know that the answer can't be that simple right it doesn't work that way why else is kanuma valuable for azaleas do you guys know where kanuma comes from do you know where in the strata of soil it exists etc etc etc this is important so when you start to talk about kanuma and acidity right you're talking about decomposition of organic matter creating an acidic environment in the kanuma but is kanuma hard or is kanuma soft so is it softer than akadama or harder than akadama softer than akadama right which makes it very difficult for kanuma to be utilized outside of trees who have a very fine low impact root system now what is the root system of an azalea look like extremely fine steel wool fine so delicate you can just kind of pull tufts of the roots out right that's why kanuma works so well acidic soft occupiable by a weaker root system right and also azaleas have to be repotted frequently right i don't know if you guys saw the azalea stream with peter warren on mirai live but i was really shocked by the knowledge that he dropped there that azaleas need to be repotted every every two to three years for an established azalea right because of that kanuma relationship the nature of their roots the balance of water and oxygen etc we getting closer here closer and closer it's getting more and more stable which makes ryan you might have to uh finish during the break because the auction okay so i've uh i've kind of changed my deciduous design it's called sorry deciduous design so if you guys want to see the styling of this tree that we did a stream on this tree uh this is a stewardia monodelpha which is a wonderful wonderful species of azalea tree absolutely amazing tiny beautiful leaves tiny cream uh flowers with a yellow center um yeah very very beautiful and the bark of this if you guys check out the stream you'll see that we clean the bark um because it exfoliates it's not bad to leave the bark but you get this very smooth coppery tone on the bark and what i kind of wanted to do i got the spruce to a point where i feel very comfortable with the root system i want to get this to a point where i feel comfortable with the root system and i want to talk about what containers we can select what containers we can select what the merits are shape color style etc uh we're not going to go super deep into like a gestalt of containers tonight but i want to get you guys thinking about this because i think our concept of containers is very narrow right and i think that there is an ever-evolving sort of ability to expand what it is we conceptualize as being an appropriate match so if we understand form color function texture etc that allows us to kind of branch out and i just want to kind of open that conversation tonight so i'm trying to as rapidly as i can while still being respectful of the tree kind of get this stewardia down to a size that allows us to play a little bit you guys have any questions my time at b-stop have you ever used uh kanuma on uh stewardia have i ever used kanuma on us on stewardia i've never used kanuma on stewardia kanuma would stewardia would destroy kanuma it would absolutely eat kanuma alive the action of the roots would would break kanuma down so fast it would be virtually functionless in an extremely short period of time okay so now notice the difference when you look at this root system and you look at that root system obviously that's a nursery situation but that's a very dense root system now the soil is broken down notice that all of this akadama even though it's had the action of roots the akadama is still holding its particle shape inside of that and then if you want to talk about that self scaling right that's a this is an interesting interesting thing to observe when you have roots growing straight through the akadama particles right that's the exact situation can you see that that's the exact situation that we were talking about where it grows through it expands it cracks it ramifies it grows through it expands it cracks it ramifies and this is the kind of root system when you start to look at this stewardia this stewardia is two years out of the field virtually no significant work done outside of selection and a little bit of structural wiring which happened in the late spring actually that was i guess more close to late summer we were pushing the time frame on that but in two years out of the field this is the root system that you get that's impressive right that's really impressive so anyways it's nice to have a little bit of a to be able to put that sort of image to work that we've kind of established right and just the same way as i was working that spruce i'm changing the angle on this stewardia i'm going to rotate this now you'll notice when i stand this up that it changes everything okay so you guys see there now this is where we actually styled it from right there okay and you're looking kind of you're looking kind of off so that you see this space in that branch looks like this might have gotten bumped a little bit hey see that super soft feminine elegant tree yeah we wrapped the wires in paper towel because stewardia is a very soft bark tree we didn't want to scratch and we didn't want to harm uh the branches when we were wiring it even though we were using aluminum and this was as much a a performance to show technique and the opportunity to perform the work that we were doing and so i'm going to show you a little bit of a little bit of a demonstration of how you can protect soft bark trees as it was the fact that stewardia needed it you could go ahead and wire with aluminum um without wrapping it as long as your technique was on point but um it definitely has a preservative capacity to um protect the the structural branches and big styling if you wrap it with paper towels and if you guys again if you want to see that technique refer to the stream it's all there for you hey ryan are you willing to tell us about uh where we could find awesome stewardias here in the valley you know had you come to me like two years ago reed i could have sent you to the best field that ever existed for stewardia yeah yeah dang but i'll tell you this too uh when we were at portland nursery sourcing the nursery tree stock for the um for the nursery tree styling that we did at the end of 2017 they had a absolutely brilliant stewardia monodelpha that ricardo and i were sitting there kind of geeking out on and we were like oh my god we're going to have to do this for a moment and i was like we're not here to buy that i need to walk away i i wanted to walk home with like a solid 10 12 trees from there just because they have these like specialty cedars and this these amazing stewardias they exist they're around they're a common landscape piece in the pacific northwest keep your eyes peeled uh and you'll know them because you'll see the the trunk won't look like this it'll be it'll look incredibly unsightly compared to what this looks like but you'll see this ramification and this is the dead giveaway for stewardia ryan yeah real quick question we've got some shy members here and they wanted me to ask so here we go that's my disclaimer anyway could you expand more on the trees that actually do use kanuma and what you replace for common juniper for the akadama ah yeah so that's a good question i appreciate you asking that so as far as the trees that do use kanuma the only trees so there's there's two instances that kanuma is used that i'm familiar with and that i have a experience with number one is obviously with azaleas or rhododendrons okay and number two in europe a lot of times with the cork oaks that come out of the wild in europe they have a hard time with those cork oaks sustaining life in a bonsai container if akadama is used they substitute in a 20 30 percent uh component of kanuma and that has almost remedied all disease issues as well as extended the life of their collected cork oaks now does that mean you guys that are have that have really healthy cork oaks should go start putting them in kanuma no that's not what i'm saying but i am saying that as far as this discussion is concerned that is another time where kanuma has been seen to be a positive amendment or addition to the soil composition and sharif asked specifically about cork oak should they mix anything else with it along with kanuma yeah so cork oak would be your standard kind of um mediterranean in in terms of its environment which means heat and drought are commonality of cork oak it has very thick waxy covered leaves which resist transpiration at a rapid rate obviously when we put it into a bonsai container we do start to change some of its behavior right because we start to domesticate that foliage mass it gets a little bit thinner that cuticle does less waxy less sharp and as a result right it it does need a little bit more water retention so that's where you can use that um you can use that akadama pumice lava mix and then substitute in the kanuma and that's been really helpful to us in terms of the what I've been told from top European professionals to maximize your cork oak. Hey Ryan. Yeah. Do we know if diatomaceous earth lets roots grow through it like Akadama does? Well, so this is the thing, right? Who asked me that? Ah, so this is the thing. Diatomaceous earth is a silicate-based carbon backbone of invertebrates that existed at the bottom of a lake bed millions of years ago, right? And so as a result, it's not breakdownable. It's almost like a stone product. It's very rigid. It's very sharp. Does Akadama grow through it potentially? If it does, can it scale the soil particle? No. But does the silica backbone cause it to divide as it's growing through it? There is the question, because there still could be a different function that causes root division to occur, and that's what we need to know, right? And then the other problem with that is that it's not breakable. It's not breakable. It's not breakable. It's not breakable. The question is, if it does occur, do you have an increasing amount of water and a proportional amount of oxygen and nutrient retention to be able to facilitate the health and expansion of those finer particles or those finer roots like we do in Akadama? That, too, is a very complex question. Another complex question. Backcountry Dan asked if you think there are any beneficial minerals found in granite that conifers could utilize. Ooh, I don't know. That is a really good question. I do not know that. Roger, do you know? Do you know anything about mineral composition of granite? Hang on, hang on, hang on. Let's get you a mic, because you've been speaking about granite all night, so I'm going to pull you into this conversation. We use decomposed granite in New Mexico a great deal. It does decompose into clay when it comes apart, but I don't know the geology of it. Okay. Interesting. So we don't know what kind of mineral content. Yeah, I don't know that either. Backcountry Dan? It obviously also depends on the type of granite. Sure, sure. Because there are massive differences in the type of granite. Right, and the other potential components that it's mixed with. Okay, so I'm going to take you guys away from the soil discussion. Actually, I'm going to make one more point, and then I'm going to take you away. Okay. Dennis came up at the break, and he said, hey, you've been talking a lot about water and oxygen building the sheen pumice lava. Akadama. Are you talking about conifers, or are you talking about deciduous trees as well? And I should have drawn that delineation from the beginning. I was speaking from a conifer-based perspective on soils. Now, what you guys are seeing in the stewardia is 100% Akadama mix, right? And we're saying, well, how come the stewardia has 100% Akadama mix? Deciduous trees move more water, right, produce more ramification, thinner leaves, thinner cuticle, which means they're constantly transpiring. They're transpiring at a more rapid rate, and their root system produces such a fine, copious quantity, if you strike that balance, that you're going to be repotting frequently enough that even the active breakdown of Akadama is going to facilitate a balance that allows you to have success. So for our deciduous and our really high water-loving species, we use solid Akadama, okay? So that pumice lava-Akadama mix, that was very much a discussion of sort of that universal temperate, coniferous-based sort of strategy of Akadama. So I'm going to take you guys away from the repotting. Okay. Now that I've made that point and feel like I've righted my wrongs, I want to talk about containers. And I've got two containers that I've potentially brought as options. I'm not going to actually put this tree into a container tonight, but I wanted to explore with you guys what the different merits would be if it went into this as opposed to that, okay? So number one, first and foremost, I brought a really beautiful Tom Benda dark blue. I'm going to pull that out. Just so we have kind of the angle, okay? And I want to show this to you guys. Now, this is just in consideration. You might be saying, oh gosh, are you going to put it in there? No, again, I'm not going to repot this tonight. I wanted it to be a topic of discussion. Now, when you're dealing with glazed containers in terms of selection for a deciduous tree, what is the color? What are we trying to do with the color in terms of its relationship to the tree? Do you guys have any idea what the color is supposed to do? Okay. So you're saying contrast or highlight, right? So when we're talking about contrast, Stewardia's primary color here is sort of an orangey red, right? And when we start to talk about complementary colors to that, right, complementary colors showing that maximum contrast, that greenish, that bluish, what does this do? When you see this in this blue, what does it do? Where does your eye go? It goes to the tree. It's very interesting, right? You would think the blue would take your eye away. And the leaves are red in fall. And the leaves are also red in the fall, which now you start to place seasonally on the new tree. So you're going to have nuances of this, okay? So this is a very interesting thing, because I'm going to bring up another container here, right? And this is where containers start to be fun. Now, everybody's shaking their head. Are you shaking your head because it doesn't look good? Or are you shaking your head because you haven't seen it before? You need to ask if you like it. You like it. Plays on the bark. How does it play on the bark? It's analogous now, right? And so when we say analogous on the color wheel, we're saying, listen, we have a tone of orangey, yellowy, maybe reddish. And we've got another tone of orangey, yellowy, reddish. And they exist right next to each other. These are called analogous colors. Now, if we say, okay, let's hop back into the blue, okay? And I'll just do this like this and kind of go, here's blue. Pops, complementary, right? Blue, pops. Orange, softens, analogous, right? Now all of a sudden it's quiet. Sure, okay, so we're saying shape-wise too, more feminine shape, better with the tree. I couldn't agree more, which is why I won't be repotting it tonight, right? Because depending on what you guys want to accomplish, we have these sort of dynamics that are established in bonsai. Oh, okay, we should always choose a complementary color for the tree, right? The primary color of the tree. If we're talking about stewardia in winter color, right? Then we could be talking about a blue or a green because it's orange in nature, okay? And then we start to say, but what is setting that standard for your decision-making process? What is setting that standard? What is setting, what is guiding your eyes? People say, okay, maybe personal taste, I'm going to say that we're being influenced by all of the pictures of all of the trees that we've ever seen in a bonsai book before. And we have now established that this is what's right, this is how we do it. When he asks me if I like it or not, I've seen that before, I like it. I like it, right? Here's what I'm challenging you guys to do. Learn why you like it, learn what you can do to change the impact of it, and all of a sudden now we're actually using containers for what they're supposed to be used for, which is elitist. Eliciting and contributing to the composition, eliciting a feeling from the person who's viewing this tree. So if you said, listen, I'm going to be creating a very lonely, soul sort of singular tree display in winter silhouette, and I want this to be very quiet, right? I want to play on that winter silhouette. This kind of container with this stewardia creates that sort of shh composition, right? It just dials down the volume. It's all sort of cohesive. And we say, no, I want everybody to see my stewardia for all that it's worth. There is my stewardia, right? That's also valid, also very valid, right? But we have to understand, Lyle, what do you got? Hang on, get the mic. Totally understanding what you're saying, but if you were to show that tree, let's say spring, would the blue pot be the choice? If you're doing the fall, quiet, things are going to sleep, the red pot or the reddish pot would have a more, you know, a lot more value. More correct feeling for the time of year, too. We'll say, and so this is what I'm asking you is, you're asking me if it's correct, and I'm saying, Lyle, what do you want people to interpret about your composition, right? So if you're saying, hey, I want a quieter composition, right, you know how to do that. That's the whole purpose, because we talk about analogous and complementary, and that's out here in the nebulous brainwaves, right? But then when you guys get to see it, a one-to-one, boom, boom, okay? This is entirely different. The impact is entirely, entirely different, and just in terms of color, right? Now, shape-wise, when we start to talk about which is the better shape, this gentleman here said, hey, man, the oval, way better in terms of feminine. This rectangle feels a little bit more masculine, right? Now, there are elements to this rectangle, and I'm going to go ahead and just kind of set this off to the side. I want to talk about this just in terms of elements that do soften this. Maybe they don't soften it enough for this particular tree, but they soften this a little bit, okay? We've got some cut corners here, as opposed to a very, very hard, sharp, geometric, rectangular corner. This is a softening component that starts to decrease that really violent or that really strong masculine feel of that angularity, okay? So note that. You have a floral relief carving here, right? Connotation-wise, soft, also chewing up some of the space here on the front of this container that makes it feel more visually massive, so it lightens the container. When we start looking at all of the elements that exist inside of these containers, you've really got to take into account every single component before we say, ah, it's a rectangle, it doesn't work. Maybe in this instance, this rectangle doesn't. Maybe if this was a solid radius, as opposed to this sort of beveled indent on the corner, this might work very, very well, right? And these are the ways that we tweak ceramics to really find that beautiful match for that tree, color, shape, size, and details. Make sense? We feel good about that? Brian, you got a question? Yes. What about fruits and flowers? That is a white flower. If you were going to put that in a show when it was flowering, would you use a white pot or? If you used a white pot, the flowers stop mattering, right? And that's the point, okay? So if you use an orange container, the trunk stops mattering, right? Maybe that's what you want, Brian. Maybe you want to say, I don't want you to walk in and say, blue pot, orange trunk, whoa. Maybe you want somebody to walk in and say, oh, I want a blue pot, orange trunk, whoa. Conversely, crabapple or cotoneaster, would you use a red pot then? If you didn't want the berries to have as big of an impact. But you do, so you wouldn't. But if you want the berries to have an impact, and again, there is no convention to this. This is where I want to free your guys' mind, right? If you want those berries to matter, put that cotoneaster in a lime green container. Put it in a blue container. Put it in a yellow container and see what happens. If you want those berries to disappear, and you want people to focus on more of a harmonious composition when it is in fruit, put it in a red container. Put it in an orange container. Create that analogy to that color that starts to become a dominant attention draw, and you start to play with and manipulate the convention of bonsai now. And that's where the fun is. You guys are free. You recognize you're free. You're asking me if it's right or wrong. I'm telling you, I don't know. You tell me, right? And this is where you have the fun. This is where you have the freedom to play. This is a, I'm telling you, repotting hands down Christmas in bonsai right now, because you find all these, look at this root base. I'm going to show this on camera. You've got all of this really strong established root base that's developed over the past two years, right? This wasn't there, or at least it wasn't nearly as strong as it was. You've got this beautiful, fine root mass. And now all of a sudden, what went into this really junky pot, because it was a very affordable piece of nursery stock, is deserving of a very beautiful bonsai container. Now, this is the most magical time of year. The most magical time. So I worked about the difference between evergreens and deciduous. I was working under the impression that evergreens and conifers should be in a non-glazed pot, and deciduous should always be in a glazed pot. Sure. So. So that is a discussion for another time. We're going to say yes, and we can play there as well. OK? We're going to say yes, and. We're definitely going to be talking a lot about ceramics on Mariah Live as the season comes forward. The ceramics is just beginning. I'm trying to crack the seal so you guys can jump off in not the same way that you've jumped off in every other repotting season. OK. I brought a few interesting pieces of ceramic here. OK? Now, this is really counterintuitive. Roger's already shaking his head. He's saying, absolutely not. You won't make me do that. I love it. Yeah? I'm such a fan of Donathan Cross. Dave Cross, yeah, yeah. This is a ceramicist down in Los Angeles. The Mariah team got to go down and watch him sculpt. He's a sculptor first. He's kind of retrofitted his sculptures for bonsai. He's a fine artist in high demand. It's very flattering that he's willing to stoop to our level and make bonsai containers, right? Somewhere he sees potential in it, though, and I'm really, really excited. So this is a very interesting composition, because with this big, long extension of weight. Now, when we have a slender trunk in design, we say, how do you maximize feminine? You elongate. How do you maximize masculine? You compact. OK? So this is kind of, I've started off with the avant garde, because now I want to come back. I hope that I've ruined you guys. I hope that I've completely destroyed you, because now I want to come back to what we would typically see this in. Now, does this feel comfortable? Feels like home, right? It feels like mom's spaghetti. OK, yeah, valid, valid. Listen, there's a reason, there's a reason why this shape, and maybe this container might be, I don't know, I'm having a hard time. No, that's proportionally pretty right. I mean, maybe I'll take that foot off. This is Dave Georgie. Not saying, let's not deface Dave Georgie, because these pots are incredible and very functional. But you see, for this tree, if you start off with something out of the box and you put it back in the box, it changes things, right? So let's kind of stay out of the box. You've seen it. Maybe we do come back to this, OK? Let's try another one. Now, I'm going to use direction. This piece gives us the opportunity to use direction, right, because we've got that shape right there. Ooh, fun, fun, right? Tell me about it. Let's see what we got here. Holy smoly. How many people out there are like, this sucks? No. That's fair enough, man. So here's the deal. I made a deal with myself long, long ago. I said, I want somebody to love it, or I want somebody to hate it, OK? One or the other. That's a sweet spot. That's where you want to be. But if you can walk by it and be ambivalent, I have failed, right? I have failed. If it elicits a violent, detestable feeling in you, I win. I win, because now you looked. And now you care, right? This is fun, huh? A little bit, right? He's touching on the geology of the mountain. He's touching on the formation. Now, here's another little interesting play. And this is where we can go deep and go super geeky in ceramics. Notice the undercut in the shadow at the point where the physical weight of the tree is pointing, right? Now, this is something that you just do not do, right? The fundamental. The fundamental sort of idea that guides and dictates containers is in a round or a container that would hold a tree of this nature, you have a foot where the physical weight of the tree is present. This is how you maintain functionality in the container. Because of the nature of this particular piece of work, we're playing on direction. And we're also removing that stability. Now you're really starting to play with somebody's emotion. Now, I'm going to take this, and I'm going to turn this, OK? I'm going to take this container, and I'm going to turn it. And you tell me. What's the impact? This is going to change things, too. Lost it, right? I want to make sure to show the camera. What's that? Let the camera see. I did. I did. I did. But Ricardo can't get the whole thing. He's got this. So Ryan, both the first pot and this pot are mimicking kind of strata or geology in some way. But the first one looks like a piece of Columbia River basalt, which is the kind of tree we're kind of working with. This one, to me, looks like Flintstones. OK, Flintstones. Maybe a little bit more of that desert vibe. And pretend. Oh, OK. Cool. All right. So you're saying, when I said, does anybody hate this, your hand was straight up in the air. Totally respect that. If you had one that you hated less, it's that one. Oh, you like that one. You love that one. Yes. And Brian, you're saying, the depth over here, too deep, too shallow? Oh, if that was this shallow, then it would be. OK, but here's the interesting thing. You've just touched on the exact magic of ceramics. We call this the rubber band theory at Bonsai Mirai. And any Mirai student in the room will know that very well. I'm going to move this here. So when we start to narrow the container, we have a visual mass that anchors this tree. This anchors this tree. This anchors this tree. They have two different dynamics. And so when I show you guys online, two different dynamics. You've got a shallow wide, or you've got a deeper narrow. Both of these are the same visual mass for the tree. They both will hold the tree. The tree will not fall over physically or visually in either one of them. But it does change the nuance of the composition when we start to put that tree into these different dynamics of the container. Do you see that? This is where, listen. As far as we've practiced Bonsai to date, we've only just nicked. Not even scratched. This isn't even a scratch. There's no blood coming out. We've literally just like, there's like going to be a mark for a day where we've started to explore the relationship of the tree in the container. This is a large, broad, scary, exciting, uncharted territory, universe, frontier, whatever you want to call it. Because there's so much more that we have to play with outside of the formalized form. Now there's always going to be a place for that container. Right? There is always going to be a place for that container. What I want you guys to do is start to open up your concept of, but what about that? Right? I'm going to show you one more little tool here tonight. And then I'm going to go ahead and make a decision and repot this tree. OK? So I'm going to just hold this while I do this, because I've got a lot going on here. OK, so take a look at this container. I'm going to show everybody online. Notice the face of this container. This is a very common thing, because you say, I like the width of that. This is a little bit deep. What can we do? We've got a square container here. OK, square container, square container. You got that? Right, now there's a dynamic with a square container that says, listen, this face is the shortest face in the design. Now when we start to show this corner, you're picking up the width of corner to corner instead of corner to corner on the short face. You're picking up the diagonal width. So I'm going to rotate this as I place this tree in the diagonal so that you guys are now looking at this corner as the official front of the container. Now you're picking up more of this width. Now this could increase the mass of the container to be far too large. Or you might say, ah, it felt a little too narrow compared to that. The depth, yeah, it's a little bit deep. So maybe this face is appropriate to reduce that distance. Or maybe I needed that width. I'm going to go corner to corner and look off that front here. You guys see that? See that increase in width? And we're talking. It's small. In the Coke Fu exhibition, this is what allowed Mr. Kimura to win Coke Fu prizes, being able to pull off stuff like this. Both of those pots give that tree a reason for struggle. Sure. Sure. Sure. Absolutely. Right? His work is very organic. We have a whole, we're going to have a whole presentation on his work later this year. Scott, what do you got? If you, the face that's facing you, if you notice there's an undercut there. You want that? So when the light hits the top part of that, it makes it look narrower. Like the previous container. And the shadow comes underneath. And so it makes it a little bit thinner looking. That's spoken like somebody who knows design well. Spoken like a designer. Spoken like a designer. What does everybody, anybody online have any passionate thoughts about how much they hate or love this? They're wondering if Kimura would ever use a pot like this. No, heavens no. No. No. No. But, you know, here's the thing. Mr. Kimura also took a big block of, you know, soapstone and carved, you know, the most radical looking cliff into it and soaked it in cement. And then planted, you know, a ton of trees on it. Who's ever done that before? Not many people, right? He took stone slabs and notched them and put them together and used their own weight to hold them. That's pretty, that's pretty tempting. Which one do you guys like best? You want this face or this face? You want the angle. And what if, what if we go here? That better? And you're saying you like this one. You like this one because of the depth? Why did you like this one? Ah, so you're saying this face here or this face here, this one, with this shadow, this relief, the angles here, ah, oh, here, actually here. So you're physically increasing. It's like a knot. So as far as being able to see right there. Yeah? And the color . So now you've just swung right back to the stewardia discussion. Thank you very much for pulling us back into this. And now we recognize this is not unique to deciduous trees. And we have this dynamic that permeates bonsai across the board. We have something that causes dramatic, creates a ton of contrast. This creates an entirely synonymous. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Sort of feeling in the composition. Very, very natural for sure. Ooh. What do you think, Kendall? Yeah, I think I've seen the other one that we have at Mirai, and it's on Lace Rock. But this is like a similar vibe. Yeah, very much so, huh? Yeah. Interesting. All right, here we go. Most everybody in the chat likes the. They like the deeper one. They like the deeper one. You guys like the deeper one. Everybody seems to be sold on this, right? . Is it? Yeah. We're officially setting a sail? . I got super thumbs down, just bastardizing the sailing industry, right? . And we're like, absolutely not. He's like, I hate it back here. I got it. I got it. Yeah. Yeah. Scott's like, amen. I got thumbs up. Yeah. Yes. Yes. Yeah. Robert in the back. All right. Oh, man. Yeah. If I hadn't shown you one or the other, right? And then we compared it to the more formal form, and then this one. Right. Very interesting. OK. So I'm not going to make any decisions. I can't see it myself. I wanted to get this to a point where we could have this discussion tonight and just kind of. You know, there's this year, as far as our relationship in bonsai has been concerned, it's been very, I would say, limited in terms of design. We've discussed it. We've scratched it. We haven't really dove in. And it's been way more hardcore about what we do, when we do it, why we do it. And I wanted to just kind of finish off our evening tonight and sort of the last BSOP meeting, getting back into that design component because we're starting a fresh year, and you guys are now in the repotting season. And I wanted to open the door a little bit to what is possible, some concepts you can play with, and start to, you know, just toy with breaking down that formality. OK? BSOP, from the team at Mirai Live, we very, very, very much appreciate all of your support. We could not have done the Artisans' Cup without you. We couldn't have done Spectrum and Unbridled without you. And this single BSOP relationship that we've had with Mirai Live has blasted Mirai Live into the stratosphere as far as an online platform to learn from. So thank you guys very, very much for your support. And we will continue to work together, I'm sure. 
