what's up guys super tuesday holy smokes super super tuesday this is like a quadruple super tuesday i don't even know what to say we've been uh hammering since last week web store sale sale happens you guys were amazing we really appreciate the support tremendously uh sale closes covered wagon launches tonight after this stream so we've been preparing trees packing pots uh corresponding with everyone right now they're getting the truck packed while i'm doing the stream and then we're gonna wrap up and i'm going across the country to deliver trees to you guys so um anyways it's been a whirlwind and uh and i just wanted to come back and say thank you guys again for watching and i'll see you guys next week bye again for all of the support mirai live the family community really uh showed up and uh we're big supporters of us we greatly appreciate that um i had a an amazing um we had an amazing team session for about 40 hours of binge uh web store upload and everybody's a little bit crazier because of it so that was for you guys but uh for all of our tier one appreciators super stoked that you guys are joining us live for our tier two uh matchups and we'll see you guys next week bye mastery uh i hope you guys are enjoying the archives and continuing to reference that information but welcome this evening and then for our tier three innovators as always you know we're looking forward to wrapping with you guys tonight and the feedback we've been getting from everybody has been amazing um one last thing before we dive in i just i really wanted to apologize for the web sale launching um earlier than we had said we said 9 a.m pacific standard time um as we were arranging all of the things trees started selling before we could even before we could even actually get set up and uh our whole team had been up for about 40 hours and so um by that point everybody was toast and we just said all right it is what it is we're gonna have to suck this one up and apologize so i am sorry to those of you that didn't get the trees that you wanted because it started a little bit earlier um we know next time live and learn uh you make mistakes but we'll do it better and uh trust me there's more trees where those came from so uh we'll always be able to we know next time to not stay up we know next time to start a little earlier yeah yeah uh so anyways tonight's stream i'm really excited about tonight's stream this is something i'm extremely passionate about watering uh you guys are in the workshop because so much of what we need to talk about is going to be a board discussion and then uh and we've got some cool clips for you guys where there's just some ongoing application of the knowledge that we're going to lay down um and then we've got something special for you tonight we're going to dive into air layering which is something that we talk about so much and we're going to talk about air layering and we're going to talk about air layering so much i've never actually uh i have done this with classes way back in the day haven't done it in a long time i'm going to show you guys some techniques to air layers so let's dive in and uh the focus here when we're talking today in in particular is spring watering and there's a very big difference when we start talking about seasonality of watering application everybody says watering is so important um why don't more professionals teach watering and and uh i've asked myself that a lot and the question is how do you teach watering and i've asked myself that a lot how do you teach watering right because teaching watering for me in japan was uh was watching mr kimura water and making sure the hose didn't kink and inside of that kind of following his thought process through that whole thing um we've done some of that for you guys but first of all i think we've got to have a really solid understanding of what we're trying to accomplish and the things that water is contributing to at this time of year okay so uh just in terms of general watering concepts all right when we start to talk about general these are the the must know for uh water watering general watering concepts number one so these are big round figures that i'm going to give you guys but it's important that you have a fundamental foundation for for water's utilization inside a tree and i always like to think about water as a vehicle right so if we think about water h2o and we think about water as a vehicle you have to ask yourself what is water transporting right and the major thing that water transports is heat so we talk about water in terms of its ability to cool the tree this is almost like a swamp cooler like an air conditioner so we're so you have a sedentary tree that can't physically get out of the heat the intense sun etc like we have mobility trees don't okay so if they're going to be able to continue to metabolize and photosynthesize and do all these things when it's really really hot they've got to have a way to cool down their system so that their structure the leaves the branches the tissue doesn't burn doesn't degrade doesn't decay okay and this is what water's function inside of this system is so if we look at our tree here okay and again anybody who studies at mirai knows that my drawings are amazing okay and i'm sharing this is a happy tree this is a healthy happy tree this tree got watered this tree got watered that's what i'm saying and this and then this mr sunshine is always pretty happy okay so when this is happening right we have a lot of transpiration at the foliar level so when we look here and we'll just break this down into this can even be a happy leaf okay and at this happy leaf we're having constant evaporation of water molecules from the leaf surface okay now whether this is a conifer whether this is a deciduous whether this is a broadleaf evergreen whether it's a tropical it works the same okay water is evaporating from the leaf surface now if we look at the bottom and let's just pretend that mr happy leaf we're going to take this off we're going to flip him over this is his backside we've got these little holes on the bottom of the leaf okay those holes are called stoma stomata okay stomata are the holes where gaseous exchange is taking place carbon dioxide is coming in oxygen is leaving and this is where we say trees make oxygen that's amazing okay that process is very sophisticated carbon dioxide comes in oxygen leaves okay just keep that in mind so through that stomata this is where water is evaporating and we call the evaporation of water in a tree transpiration we break that down it's literally the same thing as human beings in terms of sweating okay so these water molecules are attached to each other they have a very very strong bond molecule to molecule water does and they form a chain and this chain flows all the way down through the root system okay all the way down to the tips of these finer roots and it even flows outside of the root and into the soil mass still maintaining cohesion between the water molecules okay so when this water molecule turns into gas right that applies tension on that chain because it's saying i'm going i'm going i'm right and then that next water molecule was pulled into that place and it's like no no no and then the next one is yeah and it's just this continual process that puts this tension on this chain okay this theory cohesion tension theory okay this is your fundamental building block of how water is moved through a what we would call an advanced plant system or for us a tree okay this is the the fundamental thought process that allows water movement to defy gravity and reach such heights now when we get to something like a redwood that changes a little bit the canopy of the tree different structure than the lower portion because we get to a point where it can't raise that water against gravity just via the tension on that chain we're not going to talk talk about that right now. So cohesion tension theory, evaporation is taking place. Now, when that molecule is moving through this system, water as a fundamental resource has an extremely high heat retention capacity. Let's go back to that. Water as a fundamental element, high heat retention capacity, which means as a molecule, it's able to bind and hold heat for a prolonged period of time. So as it's moving through this system, you have all of this heat accumulating. Those water molecules are grabbing onto that warmth, and they're carrying it through the tree. When they evaporate, that energy that is that heat is also released, and this is what forms the cooling cycle for a tree. So this is a very interesting thing. When we say number one function is cooling, we could very easily say and very safely say 85% of all water is for air conditioning alone. Now, if I get, I'm assuming, if I asked you guys what is watering used for, most of us would say transport, okay, as a vehicle, but I doubt we would have said transport of heat. I bet we would have thought transport of molecules or transport of nutrition, right, or transport of sugars or carbohydrates, okay, which is totally different, entirely different system, okay? Now, inside of that, when we talk about it being a vehicle, okay, we've also got to think about water as a mechanism that, you know, allows gaseous exchange, okay? Allows gaseous exchange. Now, you may be saying, well, how, I understand water turns into gas, but how does water allow gaseous exchange to take place in a tree? Well, there's something interesting inside of this stomata, right? We've got these very interesting, it's almost like, you know, clowns at a kid's birthday party that create balloon animals. That's what these things look like, okay? Now, this is the stomata. This is the hole and this is the opening, all right? And these cells that exist around that are filled with water. When they're filled with water, it causes them to bend. And when they're bent, this hole is open. The stomata is open. Now, while that stomata is open, there's a free exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide passing in and out, as well as other gaseous elements in the atmosphere, nitrogen being one of them, okay? But we've got the in and out of CO2 and oxygen, taking place here. When this tree starts to experience water shortage in the roots, or when we see the roots take on damage, that would impair their ability to deliver water, which from overwatering, we can see this happening, right? We see damage in the roots, maybe too much heat with too much water caused a condition that broke down the organic matter in this, or the organic components in the soil. Maybe we saw too much dryness cause the roots to completely desiccate and die. And now we don't have our water. Water transport capacity. Or, you know, a lot of times when we start to see too much salt accumulating in the container, it's competing with that water uptake ability in the root system. And all of a sudden, we start to see this turgid pressure, okay? We call this turgid pressure. We see turgid pressure or water content inside of the cell start to drop, okay? As that turgid pressure starts to drop, what happens is your balloon animals, they start to lose their turgidity, they start to lose the flex that keeps that stomata very wide open. And as that continues to progress, they eventually close. Now, if you think about this mechanism, the tree is basically saying, listen, I'm going to get real hot, but I would rather be hot and risk heat breaking in. I'm going to get real hot, but I would rather be hot and risk heat breaking in. I'm going to get real hot, but I would rather be hot and risk heat breaking in. If I'm not taking down my system, then lose all of my water and completely shut down or completely desiccate entirely, right? Because now when they're closed, we're at a very water minimal state, and the tree is saying, I'm trying to conserve, I don't want water transpiring or evaporating anymore, I'm trying to conserve all of my resources, I'm going to close it down. But this means nothing's taking the heat out of the system, and this also means that photosynthesis is shutting down, right? Because now we don't have carbon dioxide moving in and oxygen moving in. out, okay? So when we start to talk about allows gaseous exchange, this is one of the biggies in wintertime, right? Where we have a frozen root system, we have a high wind situation, we're saying 85% contributes to cooling, but what about those winter situations? Well, this is one of those things where when that starts to lose too much water, everything starts to shut down, right? Very fundamental aspect of plant growth in terms of those stomatal openings on the bottom or on the sides of your needle mass or leaves, okay? Number three, fundamental aspects of watering. Plant material generation, okay? So we could call this photosynthetic mass. So when we start to talk about what is it that actually creates that physical leaf, right? That physical leaf is created by cellular division. What drives cellular division? Sugars and carbohydrates or energy. What creates that energy? Well, let's take a look at that. Energy in its basic form for a plant is C6H12O6, okay? If we break this down, when we start to look at the carbon, that's a CO2 that originates, that gives us that carbon molecule for our long term energy. But when we start to talk about the hydrogen and oxygen, we start to talk about the oxygen that comes from water, okay? So even when we start to look at our fundamental building blocks, we're building plant material out of gas and water, and that's making a leaf that photosynthesizes and drives a battery forward, okay? So when we come back, just fundamental aspects of watering. In the springtime, you've got a lot of evapotranspiration as trees are starting to grow, right? You've got this soft new leaf mass that's requiring an exponential amount of water to actually physically grow. So when we come back, we've got a lot of evapotranspiration as trees are starting to grow, right? You've got this soft new leaf mass that's requiring an exponential amount of water to actually physically create that leaf mass. And you've got to maintain that gaseous exchange by keeping turgid pressure in those leaves so you can have that in and out, heat going out, oxygen going out, carbon dioxide coming in, creating this energy that allows that plant to continue to metabolize and build. This is a fundamental thing that you have to understand about spring watering, to know that in the springtime, your plants will probably be using more water now than at any other time of the season because they're having to use water. They're having to use water for so many different functions, okay? I want you guys to take a quick look at this clip that we created. It'll just show kind of me going through the watering process and wrapping with you guys a little bit. Have a look at this. When we come back, we're going to talk about foliar misting and how that functions into this whole system. But have a look at this and we'll catch you with questions and start on that next topic when we come back. It's so, so hot in here and the humidity drops. Exponentially when it gets too hot. Part of the whole process of watering as we're moving trees out of the greenhouse, the trees that are in here may not be adapted or ready for full sun or more than the sun is probably the wind. So we've got them in here, but just to come in and hose down the benches and raise the humidity and when you start thinking about water, you almost have to think about water as a mechanism for air conditioning. On all fronts. Because ultimately that's how trees are using water. They're not, they're not thinking about thirst. They're thinking about how hot they are and how much they want to be cooling themselves and the water is, is such a, is such a transport mechanism and they've also got to be thinking about maintaining turgidity in the cells in the leaves to be able to allow gaseous exchange. And this is another thing, you know, when we talk about like, okay, well, trees are going to be using water. Trees still need water in the winter time, but it's, it's cold in the winter time. So if you're saying, you know, the majority of water that's used in a tree is used for cooling in the winter time, why do we still have to water when it's super windy and, and, and frozen? Or how does freeze damage occur if you're only worried about cooling the plant? And this would be where now we start to talk about too, in order for a tree to photosynthesize, it has to be able to exchange gases through the stomata. Or the openings in the needle mass at the tips of the branches. If, if you have wind removing too much water from that location, what ends up happening is via the loss of turgid pressure, right, or the loss of water, those cells have a mechanism where that loss of water, independent of what the tree wants, causes the, the stomata or that opening to close. And so in addition to, you know, cooling the tree via evaporation. There's also the necessity to maintain the ability to exchange gases and photosynthesize, and that also drives, right, via wind, the loss and movement of water. So there's two things that we really got to think about. Now, as I'm in here doing this and I'm kind of wetting things down, I'm not really misting the foliage of the trees because the trees are transpiring via the foliage mass on their own. I don't, I don't need to. I don't need to be wetting that foliage mass. Maybe if I had a tree that I was worried was not going to survive the repotting process, I could supplement the water loss or reduce the water loss by momentarily putting moisture on the foliage and stopping that transpiration or loss of water. But for the most part, you want to keep water off the foliage mass and really motivate the water movement from the roots to the foliage mass and that transpiration that's taking place. So that's going to be the driving force in the mechanism that stimulates that water movement. So during the spring, obviously, our watering requirements are going to be significantly different because in addition to cooling or in addition to maintaining hydration in the cells in the foliage mass to allow gaseous exchange, we also have the production of new photosynthetic surface area or foliage mass. And that takes a lot of time. And that takes a lot of resources because water is one of the big things that helps create the sugars and carbohydrates and the plant matter, the physical mass itself by the hydrogen and oxygen in the water molecule that's broken up via the sun's energy through that photosynthetic process and then reaccumulated and reconstructed into sugars and carbohydrates, C6H12O6. And this is a very simplified discussion. . . Yeah. Right. Absolutely. So let me just go ahead and just quickly show the mutual phases. . . Mmm hmm. Notice how I keep the water moving and when I'm watering, you know, really nice, fine, really nice, fine nozzle so that I deliver that water gently. I don't wanna be moving that soil. I don't wanna be blasting that soil away. The solidarity of that soil in terms of the technique and application of water, that stability is what we're looking for. It's the reason that we top dress. And that stability is what allows roots to occupy those areas of the soil mass. If you don't have that stability, if you don't have that soil mass concretely or at least firmly anchored with that top dressing and it's shifting around, roots will not occupy that location. They just simply won't. So that's a really important aspect of the repotting process. People talk about taking the moss off the surface of your soil and whatnot, cause it's bad for your tree. It's the most ludicrous thing I've ever heard. All right, so I hope that kind of helped you guys gonna walk with me through some of the processes of water. I find water to be absolutely fascinating. And watering was the very first thing, and I mean like literally the first thing I started learning when I began my apprenticeship with Mr. Kimura. All of the apprentices were gone. I walked into his garden. Nobody was there. He came out of the house. I didn't speak Japanese at the time. I'm like, and he like walked by me, didn't even acknowledge me, and he just started watering. And I was watching him water and watching him water and the hose would kink. And he'd kind of look at me like, are you gonna do something? And I would unkink it and then he would keep watering. And that became constant. You know, when I learned how to water, it was just by watching that whole process happen. And then all of this science behind it kind of came as I progressed in watering, but more since coming back to the United States and starting to look at the trees in my garden, how they behave in my garden and what the indicators are. Now, one of the things we didn't establish in the beginning because I didn't want to dilute our understanding of water molecules and their movement through the plant was what we're trying to accomplish in bonsai inside the container, which is a balance of water and oxygen, right? Because just having water, water is so important to cool, water is so important to keep gaseous exchange moving forward. Water is so important to be creating that plant material, but we also need to understand that oxygen in the root system is equally as necessary. And that balance of the two is what maintains that healthy ecosystem in the container and allows all of that uptake to continue to take place. So whenever we're thinking about applying water, So whenever we're thinking about applying water, we've got to be considering that balance of water and oxygen. And this is one of the things that's not very frequently discussed when we start talking about the topic of misting or applying water to the foliage mass of the tree, okay? Now, when we start talking about misting, people say, do you mist? Do you apply water to the foliage mass of the tree? Not typically, sometimes. Sometimes I'll apply water to the foliage mass of the tree. The question is, why? Why would you apply water to the foliage mass of the tree, okay? So I'm gonna ask you guys that. I don't necessarily want you to answer because I'm gonna keep rocking. We've got a lot of cool stuff to talk to you about tonight, but I do want you to answer that for yourselves right now. Why? Why would you apply water to the foliage mass of the tree? Okay? As you're thinking about that, we did have one question from the previous clip. Kendall, what was that question? Yeah, well, first question is what's the pH of our water? Ah, pH of our water. pH of our water at Bonsai Morai, pH is 6.5. And then to follow up, Brian asked, our pH is 7.5? Uh-huh. Is it koi pond water? Should they worry about this? As koi pond water? Is that? He said their pH is 7.5, and it says in parentheses, koi pond water. Oh, okay, like that's good for a koi pond. I don't know much about koi, so I... Um... I think that's good. Ideally, when we start to talk about neutral, 6.5 to 7.0 is typically considered neutral. When we say pH is neutral in water, we're saying this is the point where that pH, that acidity or basic nature of the water, is at a neutrality that allows the most ionic concentration to move and be readily available inside of the water, right? So if you get too acidic, all of a sudden certain components no longer can make the water neutral. So if you get too acidic, all of a sudden certain components no longer can make the water neutral. So if you get too acidic, all of a sudden certain components no longer can make the water neutral. You know, that's the point. can maintain their cannot no longer maintain their position in that solution they start to drop out they start to precipitate or if we get too basic the same thing happens they start to drop out they start to precipitate this is why when we have very basic water you start to see calcium deposits because you're actually seeing the calcium precipitate out of the water at that pH now what happens when that starts to occur is we start to see mineral deficiencies and this is why when we have a very high pH all of a sudden we start to see yellowing needles well yellowing needles or chlorosis is generally a discussion of loss of nitrogen but what happens at a higher pH is not that nitrogen starts dropping out of solution but that iron starts dropping out of solution and when iron starts dropping out of solution you get iron deficiency which disables the plant from being able to use that nitrogen to create chlorophyll and photosynthesize and this is that process okay so pH is important okay so pH is important okay so pH is important okay so pH is important I want to come back to what was the I want to come back to what was the I want to come back to what was the question about the flower buds and Aaron question about the flower buds and Aaron question about the flower buds and Aaron asked he said I've heard that a bud asked he said I've heard that a bud asked he said I've heard that a bud he says easy example is a flower bud he says easy example is a flower bud he says easy example is a flower bud which has no meristem so he's heard that which has no meristem so he's heard that which has no meristem so he's heard that a bud contains all of the cells that a bud contains all of the cells that a bud contains all of the cells that will develop into a mature flower that will develop into a mature flower that will develop into a mature flower that and that the tiny cells just need to be inflated with water. Is this true? And then he commented, this makes me think about the energy required for bud set and emergence differently. Yeah, interesting. So I've never actually heard that. I'm unaware of that information. If that is true, I've never actually studied that or learned that. Now, I do know that one of the five meristems on a plant is the flowering fruiting meristem that gives rise to cellular division that creates the flowering and the fruiting bodies. So I tend to think about that and wonder if that is, in fact, accurate based on the fact that there is a specific meristem, a meristem being where cellular division taking place and cellular division being that catalyst for growth. Seems a little bit suspicious, but you never know. The plant world is full of all kinds of magical things and you very well could be right, Aaron. I can't speak to that, though. But coming back to this concept of misting, why full your mist? Now, bonsai merai, we try to keep moisture off of the grandson. We try to keep moisture off of the grandson. So we try to keep moisture off of the grandson. So we try to keep moisture off of the foliage because here we have the ideal conditions for fungal booms or fungal infection to take place if we're constantly applying moisture to the foliage mass it allows the the spores to germinate it decreases the amount of oxygen exchange that's happening in the foyer mass right and it also continues to transport spores throughout the foyer mass so that you get a broader wider spectrum of infection with these fungal organisms okay but there is a very specific time that we would mist that we would use foyer misting to start to give that tree an advantageous stance and that happens when we have this system and we no longer have a happy tree right because something has happened that's decreasing either decreasing the quantity decreasing the speed or completely impairing the ability for water to get from the roots up to the the foliage mass. And this is particularly important for bonsai because we're so often manipulating that root mass that's taking in all of that moisture into the root system via that soil container and those soil particles. If we have damage to the root system via the repotting process, we can very easily impair this chain of movement. Now we're also continually manipulating the branches and trunks. We're wiring, we're bending, we're raffia, we're splitting. All of these things start to happen and we start to see the fact that we're impairing the movement of water in the quantity that's necessary from the roots to the foliage mass. So when we start to get that situation, to come in and give this plant more or less a protective bubble around the plant that for a moment stops transpiration from taking place, for a moment stops gaseous exchange from taking place, for a moment halts the tension that's being created. So we're constantly being placed on that chain in such great demand without the ability for it to continually move so smoothly. And a lot of times what happens when we just stop that process for a moment, we may be pulling so hard because there's a lack of ability for water to move, that when we stop that process for a moment, we allow all of those water molecules to just catch up enough to maintain flow movement, rehydrate that water, rehydrate that water content in the foliar mass on a cellular level before that water evaporates and that whole process starts again. But if you're constantly foliar misting, you're also shutting down the photosynthetic process, right? And so you've got to be weighing these things continuously. Okay, I can get fungus, I can shut down photosynthesis, I've got a tree that's not functioning correctly, I can give it a little bit of a break from transpiration, right? We've got a clip prepared for you guys with a tree that suffered some very significant damage. We discussed the misting process. When we come back, we'll touch on a few more details, move forward with the watering, but take a look at this and enjoy. Now over on this pad right here, these trees are getting morning sun. This is where we keep a lot of our spruce, a lot of our dug fir, keep our redwoods over here, trees that are coming out of the greenhouse from being repotted that we're acclimating. This is a great location to kind of make that transition because they're going to get morning sun and then it's going to start to, they're going to actually start to get shade in about 30 minutes. You can see it creeping in from the chicken coop. So when it gets to be really hot, when we hit 85, this area over here will be in complete shade and be really, really nice. Lots of humidity from the surrounding trees help protect from that intense heat. Now this spruce right here, the trunk broke in half. We just pulled it out of the greenhouse because the greenhouse is going to start to become extremely dry and hot. For a spruce that's not favorable. So you notice I just all I'm doing when I'm misting that foliage, the only thing I just did was I just stopped transpiration for a moment because I've covered the surface of that needle in a sheet of water. Gaseous exchange and the loss of that water molecule via transpiration has slowed down and it allows the roots to transport that moisture up to that foliage mass to rehydrate it before that water evaporates so that each time that I'm misting I'm just kind of allowing the tree to catch up. Just allowing it to catch up. Stopping transpiration for a moment, allowing everything to catch up and then it starts transpiring again once that surface of mist that I just put on that foliage mass evaporates. So it's my firm conviction and belief that via that misting process that spruce was able to survive a very major trunk split while we were bending that tree and styling it this spring. It continued to move forward very slow at first. we supplemented the loss of water a little bit with foyer misting and we were able to re-establish that connectivity it was able to generate enough tissue to get the enough water to be able to push those buds and that was a really fundamental time where i would use foyer misting there are a few trees in the garden that have had some rough repots or the root system wasn't what we expected we've been continuing to foyer mist those to help slow that loss for the moment ease the tension on the chain allow the cells to rehydrate and then continue photosynthesizing now i want to go back i started off with this concept of balance of water and oxygen when we talked about misting for a reason because one of the biggest downsides to misting is we're paying so much attention to the foliage mass that we stop focusing on the root system where that balance of water is and excuse me balance of water and oxygen is imperative for root growth to take place and to take the place of foyer misting by re-establishing that chain so when we start applying heavy water to the foliage mass here right all of that water has to go somewhere and if all of that water is moving into that soil mass and we already have a system that isn't working very efficiently then we start to accumulate too much water and not enough oxygen and the foyer misting process actually does a disservice to the health of the tree so as you guys are using these techniques you've always got to be paying attention to all of the surroundings that are in occurrence as a result of your actions for that one singular thing so that you're able to monitor all of those systems and this is the single biggest weakness that i see in novice bonsai practitioners is your uh... peripheral vision of bonsai is not yet well honed because you're still focused on this technique so much i saw it even today uh... working on packing the trees and what not there's just small things that we can be aware of i know you guys have some questions kendall what do we got? um some questions about ph again um... gerald says he's in a desert albuquerque range k 7.2 to 8.3 7.7 is the average should water be corrected jeez yikes k what else do we have for ph seven point seven eight point three got that we have uh someone has seven point five wondering if thats too high um someone has oh uh someone is using city water seven point oh with fluoride and chlorine added hmmm Wondering if that's detrimental to the health of the tree. Nice, nice. Okay, so the only way that you guys can know if it's detrimental to the tree is by looking at the tree. Is the tree giving you indications that it's detrimental? Do you have stunted growth? Do you have yellowing needles or purpling needles or browning needles? Do you have any kind of weakness or do you have heavy deposits on your container? These are all things that would be indicators that you may need to take some action to correct the pH of your water, right? Now, there's a few different ways that we can correct pH in terms of adjusting and removing or reducing the pH, right? One, we can do an injection system. Okay, there's common, simple siphon injection systems. I know Mike Hagedorn has spent a lot of time on this. If you guys check out critagus.com and Mike Hagedorn's blog, he talks about how he uses the simple product of vinegar to reduce the pH of his watering system this requires calculation, this requires some steps to get that done, but that is one way that this can happen, okay? Number two, we call these RO systems or reverse osmosis systems, okay? Now, reverse osmosis means we're going to be removing all of the ionic concentration that's in that water and literally reduce it down to H2O, okay? When we do this, what we don't realize about water that we're using is it's loaded with minerals, right? Here, at Bontai Mirai, if you look at Bontai Mirai, Here, at Bontai Mirai, if you look at Bontai Mirai, if we leave water in a toilet bowl for two months, that toilet bowl will turn, you know, a brilliant red color because we've got so much iron in our water. Now, when you just drink it and the well's been functioning, it's very clear, you would never know, right? But we have a super high iron content. Some of you guys have a lot of calcium. Some of you guys have a lot of magnesium. Some of you guys have a lot of fluoride. These are all different dissolved solutes inside of that water concentration. RO removes all of that. We use a reverse osmosis system. We probably need to add additional nutrition because we're losing any ionic concentration that was already there. So you've got to be aware of the nutritional factors now. But that is a solution to very, very low or poor quality water, okay? Number three, we can go with a much less aggressive simple charcoal filter system, right? The simple charcoal filter systems mean you'd have a charcoal filter on the area where you're getting water out of whatever cistern or whatever component you're holding your water in. Now, charcoal has long been a great filtration process to remove toxins or to remove debris from water or from fluids in general, right? The first time that anybody suffers from alcohol poisoning or they ingest a poison in their stomach, the first thing that the paramedics do is they dump charcoal into their system, right? Because that starts to neutralize all of those toxins and components. So when we start to think about that, charcoal filters have been around for forever and continue to be a great solution. Now, I'm going to go back to the ultimate poor man's technique for improving your quality of water, particularly if you're on city water, and that is simply open air, off gas, okay? And that is to say when we start to look at chlorine, and in particular chlorine in our city water systems, chlorine is a gas. So if we have city water and we're concerned about chlorine content, which is very toxic to plants in high quantities, it's also toxic to humans, so be careful, right? Very toxic to plants in high quantities, the simple practice of allowing your water to sit out in open air, leaving the lid off of a cistern, having your water basins that you're holding the water in before you use it to apply to your plants, these are very easy, cheap ways to be able to allow that chlorine and some of those other gases that could be polluting our water system or the water we're applying to our trees, allowing those things to dissipate before we go in and we utilize that water to give our trees what they need. Okay? We have any other questions we need to tackle? So would you suggest anything outside of the range 6.5 to 7 you'd use one of these techniques on to adjust? Again, I think when we start to talk about when do I need to address a water issue, when the water issue starts to cause a problem, right? And that is the fundamental fact of all things considered. And we'll talk about water application to offset some of these issues moving forward in one of the upcoming clips. But heavy, saturating water application is one of the best ways to reduce the amount of solutes that remain inside of the system, right? So you could have a high calcium water content, you water heavily, and a lot of that calcium is going to be continually removed from the system. If you're lightly watering constantly, if you're foliar misting just a little bit all the time, you're putting a little layer of water on that evaporates and leaves that ionic concentration or those dissolved solutes on the surface of the plant or container, that is a great way to start to cause that buildup to occur, right? But when we're deep flushing, that can reduce that. If you see problems, nutrient deficient signs, that means that the pH or your water quality is starting to impair the health of the tree, that's when I would encourage you guys to start diving into manipulating and improving the system. Maybe start out with some simple methods to see if it improves, and if it doesn't, you can go to more advanced methods, which also become more costly, but also have a very high level of success, okay? All right, okay. Greg has a question. What do you got? Greg was wondering if you can use your idea behind the misting via high humidity, like in a greenhouse. Absolutely, absolutely. And we're just going there right now, okay? So we've been talking about the fact that during the spring season, we have a lot of transpiration taking place with raising temperatures and fresh new plant tissue that's losing water rapidly, okay? We want to maintain that gaseous exchange because that's what's allowing us to drive photosynthesis, right? We want to be removing heat, we want to be moving nutrition, water as a vehicle, okay? And we also talked about the fact that that fundamental aspect of the hydrogen and oxygen are what contribute to that fundamental carbohydrate and sugar that generates the energy to create that plant matter, okay? Those are all big concepts, but let's get down to what you guys really want to know. How do we know when to water? Right? How do we know when to water? That's great. You've just told me all about water. I understand now that water is used for these different things. I get it. Maybe my water sucks, maybe it doesn't. How do I actually know when to water? This is one of the fundamental things that is mispracticed in bonsai. I think watering is the most difficult thing that we do. Let's go into this from a different avenue than we typically enter watering. Because I'm guessing, if I asked you guys, how do you know when to water, you'd say when the soil is dry. I'm guessing. I'm guessing, right? And if we had that conversation and that was your answer to me, I would say, oh, gosh, come on. We've got to go deeper. We've got to dig deeper, right? Watering is too important to be able to say, soil is dry, I've got to water, okay? Let's look at the mechanism that drives movement and back into this from there, okay? We're saying, listen, transpiration is what drives water, okay? So how do you increase that? How do you increase the quantity of transpiration? Expand the foliage mass, right? Expand the foliage mass. So when I walk out into that garden, one of the funny things about being a professional is somebody will bring you a tree and they'll say, here, take care of my tree. Well, you don't know when that was repotted. You don't know what was done to it. You don't know what soil it's in. You don't know anything about that. They hand you your tree. How do I identify what's going to be using more water than what's not? First thing is how much surface area is transpiring? How big is that canopy of foliage mass? Because I know that's where water is being lost. So when I'm looking at how do we know when to water or how do we know how to water, I always ask myself, how much foliage? How much foliage is on the tree, which means how much water is being lost, okay? So if we're looking at how much water is being lost, the next thing we've got to ask ourselves is how big is the reservoir that's supplying that water? How big? How big is the container? How much water does it have to pull from, okay? So once we've looked at the foliage mass, we're saying it's losing a lot of water. Maybe it's losing very little water. Maybe it has a very small foliage mass in a big container. This is the most dangerous situation in the world, also one of the reasons that I don't encourage people to slip pot into larger containers when the root mass is compromised, okay? But let's say we have a ton of foliage and we have a very tiny container, okay? That is a situation where that tree is going to be using a lot of water. So here we're going to say, what are the preferences and tolerances of the species? Are we dealing with a ponderosa pine or a Japanese white pine that can go five or six days without water? Are we dealing with a juniper that has very lush growth that needs a lot of water to supplement that? Are we dealing with a Japanese maple, that doesn't have a consistent amount of moisture in the soil? We're going to see definitive burn or problems with the foliar mass. All of these things we have to take into account before we ever look at that soil mass and say it's dry or it's wet, okay? Because we've got to be looking at the system and understanding the system and knowing how this system works. So we're looking at the foliage mass, we're looking at the reservoir, the container, we're looking at the species and what it prefers and what it can tolerate, okay? And then we've got to be looking at those fundamental things of what is the relative humidity? The question that was asked, what about a greenhouse where you have high humidity? High humidity means less evapotranspiration and this is why in the summers in Japan the trees used exponentially lower quantities of water. You get high humidity, you get high temperatures, trees shut down, that cooling system stops working as well, right? Like a swamp cooler down in a very humid environment does not cool the house nearly as well as it does in a very dry environment. Okay, so we're looking at relative humidity, we're looking at sun exposure, okay, we're looking at temperature and we're looking at wind. These are all the environmental factors after we've been looking at the tree and saying how much foliage does it have? How big or small is that container? What are the preferences and tolerances of the species? Is it a humid day or a dry day? Is it intense sun or is it cloudy? Is it hot or is it cool or is it cold? And is it windy? After we've looked at that, we look at the soil, we say this soil is moist but this soil isn't dry, right? This soil is moist but it isn't dry. Okay, it's moist, I'm not going to come back for four more hours, this tree has a robust canopy and a small container, I'm going to water it, right? This tree is moist, I'm around all day, it's got a small canopy and a large container, I better hold off. Because ultimately, the thing that we're striving to achieve is balance of water and oxygen. Balance of water and oxygen is what we're trying to achieve. So we've got to constantly be weighing all of these factors before we decide whether or not we're actually physically going to be watering. We prepared a clip for you guys that shows just a little bit of indicator in terms of water content in Akadama as a soil particle, how we see wet, how we see dry, right? Looking at the entire tree for canopy, container, all of these things and then looking at that soil to say this is dry, this is wet. Have a look at this, we'll come back, I got one more little point for you and then I want to show you guys how to air layer like a professional. So this tree was allowed to grow pretty free last year, it's got a very robust foliage mass, it's a Sierra juniper which is a high water consumptive, maybe the most water consumptive juniper. species that we have. And it's been in this container for almost three years. Hot day like this, this tree will probably be watering two times at least during the spring season. There's even a chance that if it's really rocking and rolling we would have to come back for a third. I don't think this tree has the foliage mass to warrant three waterings today but we'll just have to see. We'll have to see what happens over the course of the next six to eight hours that we have sunshine. And when we're talking about Ponderosa, you know a lot of people talk about starving Ponderosa or cutting back on water in the spring and all that stuff. We kind of handle it the opposite. We try to give our Ponderosa everything that they need. And what ends up happening is we get significantly better back budding. So we'll let these big strong shoots run out, take a lot of the energy. There's much smaller shoots right here at the base, we can come back in and take that whole strong shoot out, take that whole tip off and get back down to a very tight compact tree very easily. Just another, just another way, another deviation on how we handle growth and different characteristics. We'll come back to single flush long needle trees though. Notice when I pull that aside how moist and wet that is. See that dark color? The dark color is showing the Akadama is hydrated. You can see the beige color of the surface Akadama. Notice those beige pieces? That's dry. We see that dark brown color. That says that there's still a lot of moisture in it and it's wet. Okay? So when I'm looking at this, we'll have to re-top dress this tree. This is a tree that we pulled back on the top dressing because it had such a minimal root mass last year and we wanted to really make sure we got good oxygen exchange. But I'm looking at this tree and my initial even encouragement to inspect the moisture quantity in the soil was seeing that the foliar mass is not super large. There isn't an exhaustive amount of transpiration taking place even though there's new growth. And so I'm being very careful and detail oriented about the way that I water this tree. Okay? And because of that watering, because of that detailed watering over the course of last year, we were able to get the tree to where it is right now producing an immense amount of growth. So if we fertilize correctly, we continue to give it the balance of water and oxygen that it needs, this tree is only going to get healthier this year and with the increase in foliar mass, the increase in water demand will also come with that. So we're just going to let that continue to expand, continue to accumulate, continue to need more water. So I hope that makes a little bit more sense. This is, watering as a discussion is something that we're going to do over the course of the season together. And we're going to talk about the nuances of how watering shifts and considerations shift. And I'm really looking forward to being able to share some of the nuances and to let you guys in on how we handle the trees around here because watering is a very serious, serious thing. We don't have anything on sprinklers. Everything is hand watered. Before I go into the topic of air layering, I want to come back to your guys' questions. I know that they're building up. Kendall, what do you got? Grant says, I've always tried to avoid water on my maple leaves in the sun because of an increased susceptibility to leaf scorch. Is this a rational concern? That's an interesting question because, you know, Bonsai Books would have you believe that, that water is magnifying the intensity of the rays of sunlight that are coming in and inside of that you can burn the leaf. I've never seen that physically happen. And my original teacher, Harold Sasaki, back in Denver, used to always make a very good point. And he said, if that's true, then how come when the sun comes out after a rain is every deciduous tree not riddled with burn spots on the leaves? And I sat down and I thought about that and I thought, yeah, yeah, that's interesting, isn't it? Now I'm assuming that you could probably have some issue with accumulation of salts or content inside of the water cause issues with burn or potentially chemicals and phytotoxicity would be another thing that I would almost assume that could have been mistaken for. And maybe there's some rare and random cases throughout the world in different conditions where that actually is true. I don't necessarily think that that is something I would concern myself with a whole lot. Um, piggybacking just off of what you said, Brian asked, um, can foliage absorb nutrients from the misting, i.e. nitrogen compounds? Ah, the idea of foliar feeding is a very, um, is a very interesting discussion. Now, obviously you have these stomata. Stomata allow gaseous exchange. There's a lot of debate inside of the science world. Can water molecules pass through that opening or not? Can water molecules pass through that wax covering that protects from excessive moisture loss, i.e. the cuticle on the foliar mass? And, um, you know, that is always gonna be a topic of discussion. There are research projects that show that foliar feeding is a significant benefit to some species. There are research projects that show that foliar feeding has no impact on the health or on the growth of, of specific species. And I think you're always gonna have a diversity of opinions about this. I personally do believe that once you put a tree into demand, you're gonna have a much more aggressive loss of water in an environment that has a very limited amount of water supply. And you bring them into bonsai cultivation where they have all the water and nutrition that they need in a much friendlier condition, that you have a thinner cuticle, which probably allows foliar feeding to potentially have a greater impact on species that have a heavily, heavy reliance on the foliage for storage. So, um, I don't think you're gonna see foli, foliage for strength, i.e., junipers in particular respond extremely well, or do respond, at least, to foliar feeding. Pines? Probably never gonna see pines respond to foliar feeding very well, except for maybe the potential for that highly water-soluble nitrogen to enter the system. So it's not a replacement ever for root feeding. And there are some species that I don't think you're gonna see a huge benefit from. Does it work? Does it not? It's in debate. I think to some degree it probably does. I choose to use it sparingly on trees. That have an impacted root system and need some nutrition. Okay. Matt was wondering, in high wind conditions, does foliar misting help deter leaf desiccation? Absolutely. Absolutely. Because it shuts down, again, that loss of those water molecules via the stomata that are evapotranspiring very quickly. For a moment, right, it closes that system down, allows that cell to replenish its water content, and then it begins that process again. Of trying to keep up with the loss of water via the transportation from the roots to the vascular system to the needle mass. So yes, in high wind situations, it will help replenish the turgidity or water content of the foliage mass. Chris was wondering, do you ever recommend using anti-desiccants? Ah. Anti-wilt? So here's the thing about this. Anti-desiccants are the coatings that you can apply, which are often, I'm trying to think of what the polymer-based components, I'm trying to think of what the word is. Anyways, like cloud cover used to be a big one. I don't know if it's still around as a company, but there are a lot of people that heavily touted it. And my question was, okay, you stop water from leaving, do you stop gas from going in? Because I don't understand how you stop something from leaving and still allow the exchange to take place of the gaseous movement. And if you don't have gaseous movement, you don't have photosynthesis. And if you don't have photosynthesis, you don't have food. And it'll take a tree, you know, two or three months to starve to death because it has a reserve of carbohydrates and sugars. And is that because it was an improper collection? It was an improper collect that it died? Or was that because it starved to death based on that covering that you used, that it died? And that was always the question that I had. I moved away from using anti-desiccants because nobody could answer that effectively in my mind. Okay. All right. Let's blast into air layering. Air layering for me is one of the most exciting things. And the reason that we're talking about today with water transport is because air layering depends and hinges on the efficiency of water transport to be successful. So, let's just establish a little bit of an understanding of what's happening in an air layer. I don't know why I'm drawing this blocky thing, but I did. And let me come back here. Okay. So, when we start to talk about the fundamental vascular system, my son Taft likes to color on the board, so he's used my blue. That means that our xylem or our water conducting component is going to be red. Okay. So, when we start to talk about water movement up the trunk, that is moving through a tissue called xylem. And xylem exists in the center of the tree. Okay. So, all water transport from the roots is moving up the central portion of the tree. Now, just outside of the xylem, we've got one cell layer thick. We call this the cambial layer. Now, it's interesting, as we talk about horticulture across the globe, a lot of people tend to think that the cambial layer or the cambium is what transports water. And that is not true. Okay. The cambium is a meristematic tissue. Meristematic tissue being, tissue that cellularly divides. So, the cambium creates xylem and phloem via cellular division. Okay. And then just outside of the cambium, obviously if the meristem is creating xylem on the inside, it's creating phloem on the outside. Okay. So, xylem is transporting H2O. The cambial layer is creating xylem. So, xylem and phloem. And phloem is transporting sugars and carbos, carbohydrates down to other branches, to other growing portions of the tree or to the root system itself. Okay. When we perform an air layer, we're actually stopping the ability for the cambial layer to divide and create tissue. Right. And we're also stopping the flow of sugars and carbohydrates from moving down beyond that point where we choose to create that incision in the plant tissue. And so, what we're doing and what we're focusing on when we're air layering is we're removing the phloem and the cambial layer. We've got to remove that entire cambial layer. Otherwise, it will just give rise to more vascular tissue. It will create callus and it will heal and it will re, sort of, connect that channel that's transporting those sugars. So, if we do this effectively, right, and we cut that cambial layer, now what happens is we start to get this accumulation of sugars flowing down through the phloem. And if this is a three-dimensional model and we've got this circular cross-section here, right, and we've got our phloem and we've also got our cambium, which means we have cambium all the way around that, right, what happens is we get these, the accumulation of sugars and carbohydrates because we've cut through the phloem. We don't get any new cellular production or callus forming in this section of the trunk because we've cut the cambium. But we do have the cambium sitting right here with the phloem and it's surrounded by sugars and carbohydrates that are accumulating because we still have our tree out here and we still have Mr. Sunshine and we still have water hydrating that whole system, allowing that system, remember, carbon dioxide and water, CO2, H2O, CHO, C6H12O6, this is our source of energy, okay? Water, carbon dioxide creates this accumulation of resources. If we put the appropriate conditions around this, which means balance of water and oxygen, all of a sudden, from this callus, because we have the cambium layer cellularly dividing at a pace that's extremely rapid because we've got the accumulations of sugars and carbohydrates, bah, we get root growth to occur, okay? And the process of air layering is one of the very best techniques to creating material out of pieces or plant material that doesn't have as desirable characteristics or significant flaws. Inverse taper is very easily remedied by air layering, right? The utilization of different chunks of the plant for one plant to create two or three trees, very easy to do with the process of air layering. So what I want to do, we're going to blast you guys into a short little clip here that kind of finalizes and puts that little cap on the technique of watering, more from the perspective of having that excess water in the container can give rise to some issues that you need to be aware of. And then when we come back, we're going to walk you through the air layering of a deciduous tree, and the air layering of a conifer, okay? We'll check you guys up in the studio. On a bonsai root system, cranefly larva is not particularly harmful in small quantities. But when you start to get enough of them, they can do damage, particularly if you're top dressing and you're keeping a lot of, or facilitating the growth of a lot of finer roots on the surface. They can do some damage to the tree because those finer roots are what's facilitating the expansion and development of this foliar mass. See that worm-like thing right there? That's cranefly larva. See it moving? Any time you get grubs in your soil, you can bet that they're feeding on something. And these guys feed, again, you can see the moss and how tore up the moss is, and it's almost like powdered. It's very weird. And the birds are trying to get to that, so the birds are pecking the moss away, but then the grubs will come in and they'll undercut the moss. It's like this powdery moss that just kind of brushes off the surface of the soil from where the grubs have been feeding. You can see right here, notice how this is just kind of powdery? They've basically undercut all of the root system of the moss. They've just been feeding right on that boundary like this. Look at this. See how it's kind of just like dusty as opposed to solid moss? That's cranefly larva. I'm not sure about doing that. Okay, so what we have here is we've actually, we have a hornbeam, an American hornbeam, okay? And this is an American hornbeam where if you're looking in here, you can see that this has a very significantly flawed base. In fact, it actually has inverse taper below this very grotesque root and this root sticking up so high and just growing out. This is clearly a field-grown piece of stock, right? We have some roots over here that are very beautiful, but in order to get that really wonderful spread and that buttress on a trunk that we want out of a deciduous tree, and this is a worthy deciduous tree, wonderful trunk, wonderful branching, great interesting lines that are throughout it, we're going to go ahead and we're going to improve the base of this by the process of air layering. So I've changed the angle a little bit to get the trunk up in a position that I really feel is going to maximize the visibility and the quality of the tree. And the beauty of air layering is, I very easily, and if we're in close with Ricardo, I can show you guys this, if I want to, I can very easily air layer, now I'm not going to do this, but I can very easily make my air layer on a diagonal and take advantage of an extremely wide point on the trunk if I were going to have a major position change in the trunk and generate a root system that would accommodate that very major position change. So by establishing my angle with these blocks here, and getting the position of the trunk to be just right, it changes the level of the air layer location that I'm going to be creating. So I just wanted to throw that in there so that you guys understand how malleable and flexible this situation is. Now typically, we want this space between the top cut where the roots are going to emerge and the bottom cut where we're going to be severing sort of that connectivity to remove a ring of bark. We typically want this spacing to be equivalent to the width of the trunk. Now that is particularly important when we're dealing with very, very vigorous species like an elm or a very vigorous species like a trident maple. This is a hornbeam, and so you'll notice this spacing is definitively less than the width of the trunk. But for a hornbeam, we don't have a species that's going to produce such an aggressive callus that it's going to be able to close that gap. So I feel pretty comfortable being able to take advantage of what this tree is giving me and just make some incisions that allow this entire system to function without going so big and so wide on that cut. And the main reason that I don't want to go so big and so wide is because I'm going to start bumping into the roots and experiencing a very difficult kind of situation to remove that ring of bark from. So I'm going to be using an extremely sharp box knife. And I know a lot of people have... a lot of preconceived notions about do we use a grafting knife? Do we use a handsaw? How do we do this? For me, a really good, sharp box cutter or just one of these breakable blades, but a fairly thick, beefy blade is the best tool that you can use for this. And this is brand new blade. It's never cut anything before, so it is sharp. Because we want this very top cut to be as clean as it physically and possibly can be. The cleaner this top cut is, the greater the chance that roots are going to emerge throughout or across that 360 degree cut. Having said that, I'm going to start with this and I'm going to start with this top cut because I would never want to start with the bottom cut and dull this blade if the bottom cut isn't the point where the new roots are going to emerge from. So just kind of watch as I go through this process. I'll touch on some high points and we'll come back and answer your guys' questions here real quick. And hopefully you guys will consider this in the beginning, but my personal experience, I have no doubt about this. So these are the three tools that I have. And I'll just start with the top cut. I've got a sharp, fresh cut. So I'm just going to start with the tip of a straight knife. Because there's a lot of different tools that you can use. I'm going to start with the top cut. This is a larger knife, which is a bit more thin and harder to use. I'm going to start with the neither, which is a bigger size, but I don't mean to make it too big. so did you guys notice how i went real deep and kind of worked on that cut site and then i kept it along that line as i went if you don't draw that line you won't have a reference for whether or not you're going to connect to the same point that you started from and you can create a totally lopsided cut and you don't want to do that that's a that's a significantly detrimental to the success of the operation okay so now that i've got that top cut uh in that incision made in a 360 degree circumference of the trunk i'm going to come down to this bottom one and i'm not as concerned about the cleanliness of the bottom one but exercising good technique it's always good to have a clean cut top and bottom okay now while i'm doing this because you guys have now seen this and kind of had the chance without me speaking to to misdirect your attention i'm going to go ahead and answer some questions so kindle i know they're building up uh fire away and i'll just kind of go through this yeah so jaja was wondering how do you identify the cambium layer how do you know if you're going too deep or how deep to make the cut ah yeah that's a really good question so there's a a definitive difference between the hardness of the heartwood or the xylem when we start to talk about xylem and you talk about heartwood on trees xylem always forms the heartwood which is an extremely hard layer of wood so when you're cutting through this there's no way with a sharp blade unless you're doing this on a very very small tree or a very thin tree there's no way that you're going to be able to cut through the heartwood or the xylem but the the phloem and the cambium layer are extremely soft they're extremely fleshy fleshy and so when you start to say how do you identify those when you're cutting how do you know you've cut deep enough if you cut with force all the way through your blade will only stop on the heartwood nothing else will stop it okay and that's a great indicator of how you know you've gone deep enough uh tonya asked if you know you can't be home to water a thirsty tree is it wrong to plant the tree in a large container oh tanya oh tanya well i mean so anytime we're talking about bonsai we're walking the line of function and aesthetics right and that function and aesthetics that functional point of bonsai is can we sustain this tree knowing the conditions that we can provide for it can we sustain this tree in this container and and i think that's one of the biggest decisions to container selection is knowing what you what kind of care you can provide that tree on a daily basis to sustain it in the container that you've chosen for it and i think that it's a very responsible decision when you say although i would love to put it in this container that would be you know proportionally maximize the aesthetic of the tree i know that i can't keep this tree alive in that container and so i'm going to go ahead and use a little bit of a larger vessel to cultivate this tree in i think that's a very egoless responsible decision but it is hard to deny how good they look in that small container right this is an art form you know so i feel you i totally hear you and i'm constantly fighting with myself about that too okay i got both lines cut now here comes the the moment of truth this is how we'll know if we made a really good beautiful incision all the way down to the heartwood or not i'm going to take my blade and i'm going to use the tip and i'm going to be very careful about the cut and i'm going to be very careful with that upper cut because i don't want to i don't want to damage that line that i've created and you guys can't see it it's so fine because this is a very sharp blade i'm going to bury that all the way down to the heartwood and i'm just going to pull this straight down and create a vertical incision and what i'm trying to do is i'm trying to separate these two pieces okay so that i have the ability to to insert a tool and hopefully if i've done this well i can insert that tool down to that heartwood and pull these two pieces apart now i've never actually tried to air layer a horn beam and i can already tell this is going to be a bit of a fight so i'm going to come back to my root cutters here and the beauty of these is i still have a really nice tip but i've got the ability to pry and i've got a strip here that's wide enough that it can accommodate the head of this tool so i can bring this in here and i can kind of use this just to scrape and pull that layer back okay and if i cut it really well we should see see that up there where i cut you see how clean that is right there i'll continue to show you guys as that comes off if you cut it really well you should see a very very clean removal of that section and you don't want to damage that you don't want to get your tool up onto that line so i'm trying to keep it just below that line but notice how clean and sharp that line is now you see these little stragglers hanging down here don't worry about those yet we'll come back and get those okay ryan are there any species that are particularly fit for air layering or ones that don't react well to it i think when we talk about species that are fit for air layering i literally think almost any deciduous tree is fit to be air layered and here's why when we start to talk about deciduous trees you're talking about deciduous trees you're talking about deciduous trees you're talking about deciduous trees you're talking about a genre of trees and a genre of growth that moves a lot and i mean a lot of water through the system and the reason you know when we talk about air layering in combination with water discussions you have this very very thin leaf that has very large stomatal openings because deciduous trees have got to regenerate a lot of energy to produce this much leaf matter excuse me from nothing every year conifers continue to photo and such even during the winter season if temperatures are 42 degrees or above metabolic activity you have movement happening in that tree okay so you've got a continual source of nutrition albeit slow but it's still there deciduous trees they don't they have to recreate that every single year that means they need more resources which means they have to move water more freely which means their vascular system is really compatible for this kind of an operation to accumulate those resources and produce that root mass so i would say deciduous trees now when we get to conifers you know the the vice versa of that question is are there any trees that are really poorly adapted to air layering and i would say you know pines are one of the most difficult species of trees to air layer because they're they don't move resources very fast at all okay so coming back to this operation now you guys can see i'm just going to do one one lap around you can see there's a little bit my cut was up a little bit in the middle there's a little bit in the middle there's a little bit here that lower portion didn't get didn't quite get removed uh cleanly i'm not going to fight that because i'm going to come back with my razor blade and i'm going to fix that right now so anywhere where i have an uncapped or unclean cut i'm just going to come back in here and i'm going to re-establish re-establish that boundary use the tip of that blade to get that line really nice and maybe i need to come back underneath this now when we look at hornbeam as a species hornbeam as a deciduous species is a very dry deciduous species and we say dry if we compare it to a japanese maple that if you prune it at the wrong time of year will physically bleed water that is a very wet deciduous species hornbeam is almost closer to conifer in terms of its vascular system but it will still air layer very very easily okay is this hornbeam related to a beach or is it so this is an american hornbeam and you can tell it's an american hornbeam because of the serration on its foliar mass and this if it were a beach right a beach would have a much smoother leaf but but this is an american hornbeam a hornbeam has a very very deeply veined deeply serrated leaf on in in terms of this margin has all of these notches beach do not beach are smooth but could you use this technique with beach yeah in the same way absolutely any any deciduous tree any deciduous tree any deciduous tree i mean this is a very you know it's interesting a lot of the deciduous material that we have at mirai was field grown stock that everybody said ah that's not good field grown stock and so i said well you know i mean if you can air layer you can take inverse taper or a crappy root system and make it really really beautiful and a lot of the deciduous stock that we sell at mirai or create at mirai is the product of the process of air layering roger said i put some layers on a japanese beach last year he looked at them a couple weeks ago and with they have a lot of callus but no roots the layer isn't healed over should should they wait another year uh so what you want to do roger is you want to go back in and re-cut that just above the location where you cut the first one or if you have callus and a buttress forming on the callus you just want to damage that make a nice clean cut right at the bottom of that callus and you'll be able to stimulate the growth of roots from that location and this is why i said air layers are better than listeners if you're looking for and you're looking for dead Pablo so and above the chrysalis on the Kanagawa water column is the part of the beautiful the red drawn layer is where you've to now it's not going to stay in place though this is what i meant by this area but this is what i'm doing making english cupboards a little bit too big i'm just Uhrubukis we air layered deciduous and conifers, when we were doing air layers, we literally wouldn't water those air layers for the first three or four weeks. We would get them wet once, and then we would let them dry out, almost to the point where the moss was dry, but not till it was bone dry, because then it becomes hydrophobic, but almost. I mean, we would keep them really dry, and that oxygen-rich situation with that accumulation of tissue is what would catalyze new root production to occur. Douglas asked, as far as timing, when's the best time to air layer deciduous species? There it is. There it is. That is the question. So I'm going to fire this back at you guys and ask you, why am I doing... I mean, obviously, I'm air layering today, not because it's a terrible time of year, but probably because it's a good time of year, but the question is, why? Why is right now a good time of year? That's what I'm asking you guys. Why would I be doing this now? It feels like I've gotten it all off, and then I just keep turning, and it's still there. I have a question from Dwayne. We got Dwayne. Kind of from our conversation before. Dwayne lives in Fresno, and they say that temperatures often exceed 90 degrees in the spring. They water early in the morning, and mist is... Would you think that's a good thing to do, or is watering in 90 degree temperatures advisable? Well, so, but I mean... Dwayne, you're dealing with something where you have a very low relative humidity, which means you have a very high transpiration. And again, if you understand that, you know, I'm saying in Oregon, we don't, because we have extremely high relative humidity in the spring, and that favors the growth of pathogens, and then foyer misting on top of that helps distribute those pathogens, and you're creating an environment where you're basically guaranteed to suffer from disease. So for you guys, where you've got that really low relative humidity, then I would think that you could... You could definitely ease the transition on your trees, you know, and help rehydrate the foyer mass when you're experiencing those massively warm conditions with all of that new growth via foyer misting from time to time. I don't know that I would say every time you water, you should be misting the foliage, though. I don't know that I would agree with that, but I definitely see more of a function for it in the Central Valley than in other places. So if you guys notice... If we can come in close here, you guys can see all of this kind of brown or caramelly tissue, and I keep rotating around and around and around and having to come back, because any time that you leave the cambial layer intact on a tree, this is what you're seeing the color change occur in, this caramelly color. This is actually the cambial layer, and it's interesting, when you guys expose the cambial layer on junipers... You need that up? Let me wire that up. When you expose the cambial layer on junipers, it very quickly starts to turn red, and within two or three days, you won't see a significant nick or scar that you put into the live vein of a juniper. Well, now you're seeing on this hornbeam, you're seeing that turn that caramelly brown. What that's saying is it's just going to start to harden off, reproduce tissue. We've got to make sure that we're not seeing that happen anymore, that we're actually down to white. Because if that connects anywhere from here to here, to this bottom band that we made, what's going to happen is we're going to get the reconnection or the bridging. What's going to happen is we're going to get the reconnection or the bridging of that caramelly. And then we're going to have to do a little bridging of that tissue, and it's going to cause our air layer to fail or to be much less successful. So that's why I'm continuing to work hard to kind of scrape all this off and just get that really nice, clean boundary. Now, what Mr. Kimura used to do, Mr. Kimura would come in with a rasp. So he would come in with like a file or a rasp, and he would just rub this wood to make sure that he had disconnected any of the cambial layer that was still attached. And in particular, in these divots here, areas where you don't want to have any of these divots, you want to make sure that you don't have any of these insets that tend to escape your box cutter blade. You can have a lot of attached tissue that can kind of foil your air layering attempts. So you've got to be very attentive to that. Now notice now, up at the top, we have kind of a band. Here's another one. See that? Just set right in there in that recess. And I'm going to take that out. I want to be careful of that upper cut site and make sure that I don't damage that because that's where my new roots are going to emerge. I've got to get in there and get that tissue out. There you go. You can take that out. You can see that come out now. That's good. That breaks that bridge. So I'm just kind of continually, here's a little bit more. So let me just continue to scrape here. This is another one of those inset areas that's kind of giving me fits. Make sure that's nice and clean. All right. We got some feedback about the timing. Okay. Why? Why now? Folks online are saying you do it, you air layer in spring as soon as the new growth happens. When things are hardened off, resources are moving in the tree. There's good movement of sugars in the system. Foliage has hardened off and it is in an energy positive state. Okay. I like that. I like that. So I like when we talk about energy content in the tree because I think that those are concepts that allow us to really understand what exactly we're talking about. Right? So when we say the tree is hardened off, I think that that's accurate. This first flush of this hornbeam has definitively hardened off. Okay. But when we say it's hardened off, why does that matter? That needs to become the fundamental piece that we've got to understand. The reason that that matters, hardening off says we've established the cuticle or that protective barrier that's preventing excessive moisture loss or transpiration. And in order to create that cuticle, that tree has to be back in an energy positive. It has to have reaccumulated the sugars and carbohydrates that it's spent to create that foliar mass. Okay. So that's a really important thing to understand when we start talking about this because that energy that's coming back to the tree, right? That's what allows this abundant flow of resources from this foliage mass back. these are still very soft and supple and consumptive of energy, and we stop that system, what happens is we don't get very good root production from that cut site, but now that these are hardened, they're rapidly photosynthesizing, they're rapidly reaccumulating, we're going to capture all of that right there, get that callus to form, and get those new roots to emerge. Okay, so I've done a technique here where I've wrapped wire immediately underneath that cut site, okay, and gotten it up tight as much as I can, now obviously where the two wires come together, I do form a little bit of a space. This is a technique that usually is applied to species that tend to callus very rapidly and very aggressively and can bridge that gap, okay, and we've said hornbeam, not so much, has a hard time bridging that gap, we're still going to use this wire because the other thing that it does is it causes the callus to buttress a little bit, and it gives us a little bit more of a flare at that base before those roots emerge, and so on a tree where we're trying to get that buttress, or we're trying to get that transition into a very solid root base, this can be a technique that can greatly assist that, it can also be a technique that greatly assists the reduction of bridging of that gap so that you do have a successful air layer, okay, all right? Do you always use a wire tourniquet? I don't, I don't, in fact, you know, like on a beach and typically on a hornbeam, I wouldn't either, I really... This tree doesn't feel like it needs this, but just in the spirit of showing you guys some of the tools and tricks you can utilize, if you're doing a trident maple, you almost have to do this, right? A trident maple will literally close a gap much larger than the girth of the trunk, so you've got a trunk this big, and you cut a slot that big, a trident maple will very easily bridge that, so will an elm, very easily bridge that, those vigorous, really strong, aggressive trees have an easy time closing that distance, so just to show you the technique so you have it in your back pocket is, I think, fundamental and important. Okay, so I've prepared an actual container here that I'm going to be pushing into the soil around the root base. Now, I've got this root here that's kind of giving me a little bit of a buttress and a bulge, so I'm just going to cut this out, and I'm going to accommodate the shape, I'm going to accommodate the shape of this root system to be able to adequately fit this container essentially into the soil and use the... The natural container that this tree's in to produce and generate the roots, it's growing very healthy, and it seems to be doing quite well in the situation that it's in, and so there's no reason that I can't piggyback off of that to generate a root system. Can we back up a little? Yeah. Richard says, I'm confused. If you're cutting back to the heartwood, doesn't that mean that you've removed the phloem, cambium, and xylem from the exterior of the tree? How does H2O move from the roots to the canopy with the xylem? Right up the center, right up the center, right up the center. So what exists beyond the xylem? Nothing. This entire thing that I've left is conducting water. That is the xylem. This is the heartwood. So when I'm taking away these pieces, this thin little piece is the cambium and the phloem. That thin little piece is the cambium and phloem. Everything else is xylem. You can see how much water, the gross disproportion of xylem to phloem. It's ridiculous. Which is to say that every time a cell divides in the cambial layer, it's creating exponentially greater numbers of xylem and maintaining its meristematic formation as well to continue and carry on the cambial production, right? But every once in a while, it produces a phloem. You know, we've got to move those sugars somehow. So the question that you've got to ask yourself is, what is this? And I'm telling you guys, this whole trunk beyond this exterior layer, this is all xylem. And this is really where air layering is sorely misunderstood. Because you think, okay, well, I'm going to remove, if I could remove too much xylem. Yeah, if you went in and you chiseled away at that and you chipped away and you chipped away and you chipped away, you might remove. You might remove enough water-conducting tissue that the tree can't sustain itself. But it's all xylem. You're just chipping away at xylem and chipping away at xylem. And if you got to the center, it would still be xylem. Is there a difference between xylem that's not conducting water and some that is? Sure. Like, when you get closer to the center, is it more dead? Sure, sure, sure. Absolutely. So, like, when we talk about species of trees that have an incredible heartwood, like redwood, right? The heartwood of redwood. The heartwood, very, very red. You look at junipers, you cut junipers in half, it's red or purple. Now, this is heartwood that's been loaded with sap, right? Sap is generally used in a tree to repair damage, push out intrusion, or bind toxins in a location. And where they bind toxins is typically moved to the center of the xylem or the core of the tree because it creates a very solid backbone. It's resistant to disease and pests and deterioration of roots. And also, it's not as functional as the newer layers of tissue, and so they use it as a waste disposal site, and it officially seals it off as a functional transport of resources. So, yeah, that does happen from time to time, particularly when we look at conifers. A very big thing to have happen in conifers. So, how does this tree get taken care of in the winter with this air layering? Yeah, that's a good question, right? So, I've actually had air... I've had air layers in Oregon, which typically, you know, we have mild winters, but that's... I'm lying to you if you actually believe that. Just kind of working this down into the soil. So, I've had air layers that have existed in two degrees outside with no protection, no greenhouse, nothing. And had... Better luck surviving than trees that had a full root system in a container. And so, I don't know what it is, but I'm assuming it's the massive amount of sugars and carbohydrates that are being stored in that section of the tree that are making those roots extremely cold tolerant, more so than if there was a greater distribution of those sugars and carbohydrates. But I've never had a winter problem with air layers in Oregon. It was very, very interesting. I was shocked when I experimented with it. Okay. So, that gives me my track. Now, I've got a little bit of a guide here, and I'm just going to kind of remove some of this soil. Even though this tree is growing, I'm not going to do tremendous damage to a large portion of the root mass, but I do want to seat this container down in here and kind of create a nice little area for it to exist so that it doesn't necessarily pull itself up. And I'll show you guys how we'll secure it down to the soil mass. Chris commented that they still see quite a bit of darker wood left on the xylem. Is that okay? If it wasn't a demo, would you remove more? No, I feel pretty good. I feel pretty good. I mean, this isn't a demo because I'm going to stick this outside, and I'm going to hope to goodness that it grows roots. I'm not going to go, like, do this again, right? And that's kind of the beauty of Mirai Live is you guys are literally seeing me do it how I do it. And so, I feel really good about this. Now, you do see some darker parts. You do see some darker parts. You do see some darker parts. You do see some darker parts. You do see some darker portions down in here and stuff. Up along this cut site, it was all very white. There are a few beige-ish areas, but they're not getting that really dark brown. That kind of tells me, like, okay, you've gone, you know, far enough. I feel comfortable with it. If you guys have apprehension about it, you can go a little bit more. I have heard of people getting really, really aggressive and actually cutting into the xylem. I disagree with that. And a lot of times, you can see that cause some major problems and issues, mainly, the tree might not survive that operation. So, I tend to not go overboard with application of technique. I try to be balanced in one area of my life. Sophia is wondering if air layers can survive in a Chicago winter and if an air layer can be completed in one season, specifically on a bald cypress. Specifically on a bald cypress. So, could it survive a Chicago winter? Could a bald cypress survive a Chicago winter? That would be another thing that I would probably ask. And if a bald cypress alone without being an air layer couldn't, then an air layer definitely probably won't. But if that's not an issue, if a bald cypress can, in fact, endure those Chicago winters, then I would say your air layer would probably be okay. But if you guys are concerned about it, just put it in winter protection or give it some added protection. That would be your best. That would be the best solution. And the best solution to that question would be just give it a situation that doesn't challenge whether or not it would survive. Okay, so I'm removing some of this surface debris where these roots are going to be growing. Now, ideally what's going to happen is the roots are going to occupy the okadama because it's going to be a much higher quality substrate. And typically, when we start to do this kind of air layering, you know, we're going to have to be very careful about water and oxygen. Now, what Mr. Kimura used to do is he used to put a board under his air layers to keep them separate. And for me, particularly in the case of this tree, that makes it very difficult because I would have to raise the level of the air layer higher than I want to. I still want, when I'm looking at this, I still want this buttress to start to form here. And I'm getting that and I'm getting that initial area where the age of the trunk is starting to swell, which is a characteristic of hornbeam. And so I don't want to get do away with that. So I'm trying to keep this as low as I possibly can. Are you going to use any rooting hormones on the cut? I am not going to use any rooting hormones on the cut area. I don't think that rooting hormone is necessary for this particular species of tree. There are some species that do benefit from the use of rooting hormone. What did I do with those? So I've got my container really well seated in there. Okay. Okay. So it's sitting right on top of that root. Now I don't want to cut this big giant hole because I'm trying to keep soil in that system. I'm not trying to allow soil out of the system. And I'm actually going to use this root as an interesting little anchor here. Let's see if this little situation works for me because I think I can get underneath it. Yeah, perfect. So I can get underneath this, use this as a hook, and watch what I'm going to do here. I'm just going to... Let me get that in a little bit more. Okay. So I'm going to get this inside of underneath this root here. One more time, boss. There we go. Okay. And I'm going to go straight up, and I'm just going to hook the inside of that, and that secures that container down, okay? Now over here, if I don't have any root to hook into, I'm going to do that same thing, but I'm going to do it at a diagonal. I'm going to do it at a diagonal into the container, and I'm going to pull on a fairly significant amount of this soil mass all the way down to the bottom, and then I'm going to come up and over. I'm going to hook that right to it. So I went in at an angle. I came up straight so that when it's pulling, this angle is pulling against a significant amount of soil above it. I'm just going to hook that together. Now, I don't want to do that to this one until I've secured. But these pieces, and you guys can see the preparation I've done. I've drilled the rim, and then I've drilled these holes so that I can tie these pieces together and have a very seamless container that I've created. So let me tie those together real quick. Grant wants to know how long a tree can survive without phloem traffic if roots don't form. That is a super interesting question. How long do you think? How long do you think? And why? How long do you think and why? And then if someone uses rooting hormone, can it hurt the air layers, or? I don't think rooting hormone can hurt. There are trees that will root so aggressively with rooting hormone that you create an almost unsightly flaw in the tree. I'm trying to think what that species was in Japan. They would use rooting hormone on, and it would create literally like a Medusa head of roots, and you could never untangle them. They would grow so profusely that it would actually destroy the quality of the air layer. But for most trees, I think rooting hormone's not going to hurt at all, and in fact, probably gives you a higher likelihood of root production. I always tend to shy away from recommending the use of products. Because there is one fundamental thing about bonsai that will never ever change, and that is if your technique is impeccable, then you don't need additional things to make these pieces of horticulture work. And so I always feel like a good clean cut, a well thought out space between the cuts, and then a good execution of all of these conditions, favorable water and oxygen, good health in the root system to keep this canopy photosynthetic. Photosynthesizing at a maximum pace. These are all the things in my mind that you should focus on before you start thinking about rooting hormones and all of the other stuff. Because I would almost guarantee you guys, the number one failure for air layers in the United States, and potentially in Europe and other parts of the world, is improper watering. Improper watering. I think we keep air layers too wet. We feel like, oh my gosh, I've just taken all of this tissue off of this tree. Now I've got to keep it so incredibly wet. Incredibly wet and watered, because I've exposed it. I've exposed the tissue. I've got to keep that tissue moist. But I can tell you in Japan, we would take that layer, that ring off of trees that were in the growing field, and we would walk away for three days and leave that area to dry out. And that actually gives an even higher success rate. And when I tell you guys that, I bet a lot of you are like, absolutely not. You're crazy. There's no way that works. You couldn't bring yourself to do it, because you're worried it would dry out. You're worried it would die. But that is very real. That's how Mr. Kimura would do air layers in the field. And by letting them dry, he got a much higher success rate, because the cambial layer, if it was attached, was allowed to dehydrate. Joe from Alabama says, what if I want to do an air layering several feet up from a tall maple? Would I need a very tall container? Or is there another technique? I'm going to show you the next technique, Joe. I got one drummed up just for you, just for that question. I'm going to show you how to do that. So hold on to that thought. We're not done with air layering. And this is just the first of the rodeo. I'm going at that diagonal. I might be running into root bays, though. Come on, baby. OK. If you get it to be nice and flat, you're good. All right. It's not even tight like that. You know it's going to hold really well. So it's not. It's worth the effort. OK. All right. So now, when I look at this, this is extremely sturdy. It's not going to move. If you guys need to do it in more areas to get a really, really nice lock, that's fine. But I mean, this feels a little suspect, huh? Let me do one more right there. And I like this diagonal with a little bit of a thicker aluminum. All right. So you can make this as complex as you want to make it, and you can also make it as simple as you want to make it. The major technique was the cut that we made on the trunk. All of this other stuff is secondary. But I will say this. If you perform a successful air layer, and you're fighting having the container continually rising up, losing soil, or if you recognize that the container lifted up and your soil level dropped and that cut site dehydrated, you'll never forgive yourself. So this is where it's worth it. To put in the time to get all these things really nicely dialed in. OK. That feels pretty good. Ryan, Douglas is wondering, how do you decide when to separate the layer? OK, we'll come back to that. We'll come back to that. Let me get through this piece of it here, which now where I'm at is I've got these spaces underneath this. Where I have low spots, I've got these spaces. I want to fill those from the inside. And I'm just going to use some of my sphagnum moss. Right? This is wet New Zealand sphagnum moss that's been soaking. It doesn't matter how long you soak it, as long as it's not bone dry. That's all that matters. And I want it to be as long as possible, long fibered. So I'm going to go on the inside, and you're just going to kind of see it poke out of this lower area. And this is a great stop gap that still allows water and oxygen movement to occur in the area, but keeps those soil particles from flushing out of the bottom of that container. So this is something that I use. I mean, we use New Zealand sphagnum moss for literally everything at Mirai. I mean, we'll use it to build walls and stone plantings. We'll use it to hold soil around the base of trees. We'll use it to stop holes that we have in air layering or root grafting containers. It's a very big resource for us, because it is such a quality component that's organic and has so many good features for water and oxygen exchange. OK. So I'm just going to fill those areas. Those seem like the two. OK. And now that I'm here, I'm going to go ahead, and I'm going to fill this up with soil. Now the one thing that I want you guys to focus on here, and I'm going to tilt this towards Ricardo. Can you see into that, Ricardo? Yeah? OK. So notice how deep in the container the cut site is. It's 50% of the way down the container. So it's not like my cut site is sitting right here in the container. My cut site is right here. Now when you guys think about water oxygen content in a full soil column, your optimal moisture content is always right in the core of the container, not at the bottom where it's wet, not at the top where it's dry, right here in the middle. So you want that middle portion of that container to be where that cut site is placed. OK. I'm going to use solid Akadama, because it gives me a really good balance of water and oxygen that deciduous trees like a hornbeam really like. And I'm just going to fill this up. And I'm going to fill it up all the way to the top. And below the soil she goes. OK. This is why they make bigger scoops. Kendall, we got any questions? Yeah, we got a lot of questions. Fire. John asks, similar to air layering, do you think collected material is often overwatered? I think the reason that we're talking about watering is because I think watering is over-or-underdone in a gross number or quantity or, you know, of the time. I think watering is a mispractice technique. Hey, Lyme, can you go grab me some more Akadama? Is that possible? I just need, like, meh, I need another, like, 30% in the bucket. Cool, man. I think that watering is a mispractice technique in general. Too wet, too dry. And that changes on a daily basis, you know, whether a tree is too wet or too dry. It changes daily. Changes by the condition, changes by the state of the tree, changes by the time of the year, changes by the size of the container. And that's why when we start talking about watering, I didn't start off by saying when the soil is dry, water it. You know, we started off talking about watering by how water moves through the tree and what water does for the tree. And then we started talking about, you know, establishing that balance of water and oxygen so that we facilitate the correct environment for roots to grow. And then we talked about what do we look at that would stimulate our notion that it is time to water. And that is the order with which we think about water at Mirai. And it's a lot of the key and secret to our success. With very severe work and very severe repottings and continual recovery of sick trees, because no matter how good you are, you're going to have sick trees, watering is the key. What else you got? Joe was wondering, would using a wire just under the top cut, even if it's not needed, be good practice for helping roots to grow more horizontal versus vertical, making them more desirable? I think so. I think so. I mean, I didn't used to use a wire. And in not using a wire, it was not a bad operation. But you definitely ended up wrestling a lot of roots that were growing straight down from that cut site. And the wire tend to push them laterally. And I like that. I like the product of the wire. And so I would say, you know, there is the opportunity to create a more improved success rate. Thanks, Lyme. OK. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to... What's the particle size of this Akadama? So this is my standard Akadama mix that I use on the interior, which means this is between one quarter inch and one sixteenth inch. And you know, when you're talking about creating the balance of water and oxygen that's going to stimulate root growth on this tree, for the most part, it's going to be the same particle size that you use inside the container. Now, if we were taking cuttings and trying to stimulate root growth from cuttings, you would need a much smaller particle size to have a lot of success with cuttings. But when we're talking about an air layer where you're still getting water and resources from the parent tree's roots, this particle size is going to give us the best root system to build this tree on moving forward. Sujata is wondering how many air layers on several branches on a single tree. What could you do? You could air layer every single branch on the tree. There's no limit. Because think about this. You could air layer every single branch on a deciduous tree. Actually, let me go back. Let me go back. On a deciduous tree. This is a deciduous tree. I just created an air layer below every single branch. That means that not a single amount of sugar or carbohydrate is going to feed these roots moving forward. Think about that. No longer do these trees... These trees' roots. No longer do these roots get fed. They're done. I cut that right at the base of the tree. So that's the same as air layering every branch on this tree. No sugars and carbohydrates get to the roots. The reason I can do that with a deciduous tree is because they move more water. If you move more water, you create more sugar. If you create more sugar, you create callus more rapidly. If you create callus more rapidly, you create roots more rapidly. And before these roots starve to death, we'll have new root regeneration. The question was, how long does it take? How long does it take for a tree to die from this operation, to starve to death? Generally, 90 days, 3 months. If this tree isn't producing roots in 3 months, it's a dead tree. And that is consistent. Now, with a conifer, like a pine, that does not root very readily and very easily, this is the biggest problem. And this is why we always have to leave a branch or a photosynthetic mass below the point of an air layer on a conifer. OK? We always have to have something feeding the root system below where we apply the air layering technique on a conifer because they don't move water as fast. Consequently, you have to continue feeding the roots or it will die. Right? Because those roots are what's feeding the water. Water create or keep the leaves turgid, leaves photosynthesize, and create that sugar and carbohydrate that generates those roots. If those roots aren't fed and can't continue moving water, done. Done-sies. This is like hardcore science, isn't it? Super hardcore. This is... I'm geeking out on you guys here. We're at 2 hours? We are 5 minutes to 8 o'clock. Yeah. OK. Almost at 2 hours. All right. Well, look. I'm going to do some air layers on a juniper and show you guys one more technique. If you guys are tired on the East Coast, if this is a little too science-y, I hear you, I feel you. That's all good. I'm going to keep rocking. Because after this, I'm going to be... I'm going to be driving for 40-some hours. So, this is a better option for me. Backcountry Dan asked... He says, Harold often taught watering by submersion, and several members of our club have held tight to that practice. They don't adhere to that technique. But what are your thoughts on submersion watering? So, when we talked about having poor water quality and where that can potentially become a very big issue, we said, if you're watering last year, you're going to have to water if you're watering lightly and allowing the toxins or the ionic accumulation to increase. Right? So, you give a little bit of water, it evaporates. A little bit of water, it evaporates. You get this massive accumulation of calcium, of salt, of anything. Right? And so, the submersion technique is the epitome of that because you submerge it. All of that stays right where it's at. Right? You lift it up. Some of it runs out. But you just have this recycling of all of this accumulated content. Right? This accumulated content in the container. And that is very, very dangerous. And that was why I was saying, you can combat a lot of poor water quality just by copiously watering every time you decide to apply water to a tree. The tree starts to get dry. You water thoroughly until it runs out the bottom. You allow the tree to start to get dry. You water thoroughly until it runs out the bottom. And that is the exchange of not only water and oxygen but also ionic content in the container that you need to prevent massive buildup. Okay. So, I've applied a very thin layer. Now, when you guys start to apply sphagnum moss to the soil of a tree, we have to remember that oxygen has got to be able to move through this. So, when I'm applying this, I have a very, I have a single layer of sphagnum. I mean, I can see the soil in between the particles here or in between the moss, branchlets of moss because I don't want this to be super thick. I don't want it to cut off oxygen flow through my soil. But I do want to maintain more of an even concentration of water through this soil column. And this sphagnum prevents excessive evaporation from the surface layer so that I do have a more just evenly distributed amount of water in here. Now, my air layer, the actual cut site, is right about here where my chopstick is. So, I've got this much soil on top of it, this much soil below it. And that is almost perfect, right, for what I'm trying to do to get it into the core of where water-oxygen balance is. Where the soil is going to be peaking. Okay? From this point forward, I could take this outside and water it. I could leave this just as it is for two or three days and then start watering it. It doesn't matter, because that cut site is going to need time to accumulate any kind of sugar carbohydrate. The tree is going to respond. Watering right now, I can. I don't need to. It's not a big deal. Right? And this is what I'm saying Mr. Camaro would walk away for two or three days. Okay? U.S. Tree Error Layering Fundamentals 101. There it is. I got kind of something really interesting for you guys. I was thinking, how do I show them error layering on a conifer? And I had this root grafted Rocky Mountain juniper that I was kind of chomping at the bit to separate. Okay, and this is a super duper tree. P.S., like, first off, whoa. I just cut this today. It's had the root grafts, which are these Itoiagawa whips. It's had the root grafts on this tree for two years. This has been two years. And this container, although it seems small for this foliage mass, all of the resources from this foliage mass are feeding the growth of these roots. When I cut it, it was virtually not active below the root grafts. And so that made me feel very good because it's kind of a big commitment. When you dive into cutting a root graft like this. Okay, but now that I'm here, these are still attached to the roots that are feeding this tree. I could just cut those off right now. I could just cut them off and be done. But look at how beautiful these are for grafting stock or for future error layers to propagate more of the material that I can graft with. So what I'm going to do, because they're so close together, and if you guys can see from where Ricardo's at, they're kind of stacked one on top of each other. What I'm going to do is I'm going to space these out with a wood block. Okay, I'm going to clean them up a little bit and create a graft site. And also I want you guys to be able to, or not a graft site, an air layer site. And also I want you guys to be able to see what I'm doing. So I'm going to clean these up a little bit, space them out. And then I'm going to air layer both of these so that you guys can see how we can treat a juniper like this. And I don't know how many of you saw Mr. Kimura's demonstration at the World Bonesite Convention. in Japan recently. But he was using a bunch of juniper material that was created in this very way, and he said, you know, the thing that he hoped everybody took home from that demonstration was that they could create the same material and create those rock plantings. And I've had a lot of questions about those rock plantings since that demonstration. So it's kind of cool to be able to come back and show you guys, actually, this is exactly how you create that material to be able to build a rock planting a lot like Mr. Kimura, okay? So. I have a follow-up question just about the hornbeam. What do you got? You didn't, Greg says you didn't tell us when we know it's safe to separate. Ah, when we know it's safe to separate. When that container is overflowing with roots, it is safe to separate. And what will happen is that Akadama on the surface will become, quite solid, right? We'll see roots growing through the bottom. We'll see those signs that we've got root production. That is when it's time to separate. And typically, when we start to look at the fall season, all of those sugars moving south in the fall are going to give us the most robust formation of roots. We'll typically start to separate that in early spring, prior to bud push the following year, okay? On a tree that big. All right. So on this juniper, it'll be different, but I'll talk about that. Okay. So the last one, we made an incision with a razor blade. Watch how I'm going to do this. So I want a very sharp pair of scissors. I'm going to take my scissors. I'm going to bite into it until I get to that heartwood and watch closely what I'm going to do. And then watch closely. I'm going to pull those tips together. Boom. Okay. So I'm going to do that. And I'm going to use the same general concept of spacing to create sort of the thickness of that branch as the spacing that I'm going to be using. I'm going to bite in. I'm going to rotate that blade, and I'm going to pull out, okay? Now, watch closely how I separate these. I'm going to put one tip in here, one tip in here. I'm going to cut across that, and in doing so, at this time of year, because junipers are moving so many resources, notice how this just very easily and effortlessly comes off. Look at that. Look at how beautiful that is. It's crazy. Right? That is a perfect, a perfect cut, right? It is perfect, okay? Now, before I go ahead and do all of the things that I need to do around that, I'm going to do this one below it as well. I just figured you guys would be able to see this one on top a little bit easier. So let me think about this here, because I'm going to back myself into a bit of a corner if I go there, and I'm going to have that there. So I'm going to move this one forward a little bit, which means shifting this guy slightly. It means taking this off. You'll see why I'm kind of meditating about this in just a minute. I'm going to do this one right here, okay? Get that ring. Get that ring. Now, I know on the backside, I wasn't able to do a full rotation. So I'm just going to come back here to the backside, and I'm just going to draw my scissors closed to make sure that I get a good clean separation. separation there. And then I'm going to come back to the front side and I'm going to go tip to tip. I'm going to cut that center point. Just take a little bit of a gouge. Nice. And if you get any hang-ups, just come back with your scissors and just drag your scissors through that a little bit. And that'll just take that hang-up right off. You got two clean cut sites right there. Really, really beautiful. Now, you want to have as much foliage mass as you possibly can on these trees when you come back to air layer because all of the sugars and carbohydrates that are produced in the needles is what comes back and forms that callus. Okay? Adam's wondering how those were first attached. How they were attached as the root grafts? Yeah. We'll have to come back to root grafting some other day. That's a horse of a different color. Okay. So what I've got here is I've got a very heavy-duty plastic from Akadama. You guys can use any kind of plastic. Construction plastic will work. But you want it to be heavy-duty so that it doesn't deteriorate too rapidly in the sun. Okay? Now, what I'm going to do is I'm going to cut the bottom off of this very, very cleanly and easily. Just cut this bottom clean so that I can open up this bag. And then I'm going to come in on the inside here and I'm going to cut this whole thing so that I now have a nice open piece of plastic. And typically when I'm doing this, I want to use the colored side as opposed to a totally clear side because roots do tend to, although this is not a mandatory thing, roots do tend to grow a little bit better in a darker environment. And so that color on the outside of the bag is going to be a little bit better. So the bag can give the roots a little bit of an advantage. And then what I'll do is I'll just come in here and I'll just make these lines super clean so that I get a really beautiful, nice strip. Now, I want to cut myself a width that allows me to create a nice little bundle of moss. So we're talking about, what would you say that is? An inch and a half? Two inches maybe? Somewhere around there. And when I'm thinking about this, I'm going to cut this off. And then I'm going to cut this off. And then I'm going to I'm thinking about, okay, I'm going to be using this in this space. I've got to be able to tie this here, have moss here, and tie it here. Okay? So if I don't have the ability to do that, then I'm going to be shorting myself in terms of what I'm capable of accomplishing. All right? Once I've got that dialed, I need to get my wire prepared. Okay, and I want to get myself a fairly healthy piece of wire so that I can secure the end of this bag. And I've got enough space to be able to wrap this really well. Now, watch closely what happens here, because this is kind of, I haven't done this in a long time, actually. This could turn into a total embarrassing moment, but we'll give it a try. Okay, I want to get a portion of moss that allows me to get good coverage of the cut side that the roots are going to form from. Okay? So I'm not worried about this band at all, right? I'm worried about this location right here where the new roots are going to form from. If you guys use too much moss, it starts to become very cumbersome and precarious to get the wrapping on. If you use too little moss, it becomes very difficult once it does start to produce roots to stay hydrated. So I'm going to use a quantity of moss that feels like it gives me a nice padded amount. Okay? But not too much, not too little. And notice, I'm not even really concerned if that's hanging out of this entire system or not. Okay? So once I have that moss kind of evenly distributed around the entire back, bottom, front, and sides, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to place my plastic and tuck that moss in so that I've got a nice single, you can even go double if you want. It doesn't matter how many times you wrap it. It just means you're going to have a more difficult time. Later, cutting through it. And we'll talk about that. Okay? So I've got my, I've got my plastic around that. Now, I'm going to go ahead and cut that. Go, go, gadget scissors. Rennie has a question. Okay, hang on just a sec. Rennie, my scissors have officially stopped working. Okay, go ahead. They said, so after 90 days, it's the new roots that are keeping the tree alive, but they're too delicate to separate the air layer? No, you can separate them after 90 days. What I'm saying is, if there aren't roots that are being fed and cultivated to take over water transport after 90 days, and that doesn't mean that you have to have all the roots, right? But you just need to have enough because you're going to start shutting down, but it's not just like a switch, like 90 days, time's up, I'm out, and the native root system stops. It takes it a little while. So if you don't have roots that are starting to take over that burden, then that's when you'll see the tree starting to lose enough water that it's going to start to have failure. But if you have roots that are starting, and you still have some of that original root mass that's helping, that generally tends to be enough to have success. And so 90 days, if you've got roots forming, that's kind of the wheelhouse for success. Okay? So I just want to make sure that I get a really nice, good, tight, secure, grip on that plastic so that this system is held together. And I'm going to tighten that down. Okay? And then I'm going to pack this back so that I make sure that inside where that junction was, that that first incision where the roots are going to emerge from, I want to make sure that the moss is right in that wheelhouse and that it's evenly distributed. So I can feel all around here, and I've got moss really evenly distributed around that location, Now, watch closely what I do with this wire. I'm going to come around, and this is actually going to support the bottom of this layer here. Okay? So that wire, I didn't cut it off. I'm going to use that to support the bottom of the layer. Make sure I've got my plastic here nice and dialed so that I don't have any openings. And I can literally cut that right there, and that is a really good air layer. But we're not quite done yet because there's no way for water to get into this system, and this is where air layering has always been such a mystery to me throughout the United States is you see people that seal this up, and they have no way to get water into the system. So what we'll do is we'll cut through these layers of plastic, which I said, you'll see why you don't want to wrap too many layers of plastic. We'll cut through these layers of plastic and open up a spot for water to enter the system. Okay, so now I've got my moss. I've got a place for water to enter, and here's the other kicker. I'm going to cut on the bottom side here and leave some incisions for water to escape, and you guys will start to see maybe some excess water pouring out of that system. Chris wants to know, since the air layer is horizontal, will the roots grow down and not radially? For this one, for this type of air layering where we're taking a juniper off like this, this is something we would use for grafting a branch on. This is something we would use for grafting roots on. This is something that we would use for propagation of that nature. I doubt this will become a treat. It could, though. As long as they're radially originating, there's a very strong chance that this could happen. This could become a tree without an issue. So not necessarily a limitation, but the way that we air layered the deciduous plant, the hornbeam, that would be more fundamental towards creating a tree with that stock. So I'm going to use the second portion of this, and I'm going to come in here. This one struggled a little bit. I've got to be honest. I haven't done this in a while, and that kind of looks like crap. So let's try it again. Second time's a charm, huh? It kind of came apart. I was worried about that. Every time I show classes how to air layer, the first one is always so bad. So bad. Tanya is wondering, so is the foliage from the larger tree serving to feed the root mass, since you aren't leaving any branches below the cut? So, yeah, this is, and we said on a conifer, right? Good, Tanya. Good on you. We said on a conifer, you always need to have something below, right? For this, because you're going to have to have something below, right? Because it's grafted onto this, and this foliage is feeding the roots. That's why this works, okay? If this were just a juniper, and it had roots and foliage, and you did this, it would definitively fail. It would definitively fail. And junipers are even a lot more flexible than, say, pines, or like, you know, people have said, have you ever air layered spruce? I've never tried air layering a spruce, but I have a hard time believing that you would have a high level of success air layering a spruce. And, you know, pines in Japan, they air layer pines, but they typically ground layer pines, and it is extremely, again, extremely difficult. John is wondering, how do the new roots get oxygen through the plastic, or do they not need oxygen? No, they do need oxygen, but that's why we cut that hole in the top for water to enter, and why we cut the hole in the bottom for water to leave. So that water moving through is what's actually going to pull and move oxygen through the system. Now, this one's going to be super solid. We got it. We got it. First time, not so good. Second time, come on. Jinx it, Kendall. Okay. I'll just follow that wire around. Mr. Kimura used to always show us every year, you know, we'd have new, there'd be new apprentices, and he would be showing new apprentices how to air layer. And then he would always ask the oldest apprentices to demonstrate, oh, Ryan, you teach them, you know, and that was kind of a test for the older apprentices, like, do you have a solid mastery of this skill? And I used to hate that, because you inevitably were going to fail and do it not well until your fifth or sixth year when you actually had some confidence. And inevitably the air layer, and then wrapping copper wire with paper towels or with rice paper to pad from big bins were the two things that I just struggled with. Raffia was never an issue for me. I got Raffia very, very quickly, but for whatever reason, air layers, and the wrapping of wire were just absolute bears. But once you start working with air layers and you develop the choreography with your hands to do this efficiently and effectively, it starts to become very, very quick. I mean, you can see the second one is already exponentially better than the first. The first one, this is an example of how not to do it. The second one is an example of exactly how to do it. Okay, and I'm just going to make an incision on the bottom here. I'm going to come around to this other side, and I'm just going to make an incision on the bottom here. There we go. Let that water escape. Now, I'm guessing of these two, I'm going to have a significantly greater success rate on this top one just because it's so much better, so much more dialed, and so much more well executed. I think I kind of screwed myself when the plastic got caught up in the wire here. And this just goes to show you guys that no matter how many times you do this, you know, a lot of room for error in a very small space for success. So, I'll actually come back and redo this one. But, inevitably, these will be ready to separate in three months. I have no doubt about that. We'll separate them, we'll put them in a small pot, and we'll start to cultivate them as an individual plant, and we'll probably be using them in a year or two as grafting pieces of material for some root or some branch on some tree that is, you know, not going to grow. This is extremely prized and we'll need this material for. And this is what perpetuates our continual utilization for grafting and all of the other things that we do at Mirai. Do we have any last questions? Yeah, we have quite a few that I haven't gotten to. Lay them on me. I'll do this while I'm answering them. Okay. First, Douglas is wondering, you mentioned some species benefit from the rooting hormone. Could you elaborate which ones benefit the most from using a rooting hormone? I think any tree that is difficult to root. Any tree that benefits from rooting hormone. And so this would be trees that tend to move less water, like a pine, a spruce, hinoki cypress, cryptomeria would benefit very much from rooting hormone. These types of trees that we do have the ability to generate roots in, but it's going to be a little bit more of a challenge, that can stimulate more rapid cellular division at that location and give you a better rooting success. Okay, Cynthia is wondering, this is Cynthia in Chicago with the bald cypress. Okay. They're asking, so could I do this to a bald cypress and a coosa dogwood? And then do I need Akadama? You could do this to a bald cypress, because it's a deciduous conifer that changes things. Like you could do this to a larch without a branch below the air layer, much like a deciduous tree. With a bald cypress, you could also do this because they move so much more water based on their deciduous nature. You could do this with a bald cypress. You could do this with a dogwood. You could use moss. You could use Akadama. You could use, I would say, a soil that gives you a good balance of water and oxygen. So maybe that's not Akadama, but it needs to be something similar or something that gives you that balance. What else you got? Tim was wondering what adds to the success of pine air layers. So pines, yeah, pines are tough, man. I mean, I've seen a lot of attempted air layers on pines, and none of them have gone very well. Now there were people, you know, obviously in Japan, you had a community of people that were working very, very hard to perfect and master these skills. And there was a community of people in Nasu. Nasu is in the Tochigi area of Japan. Past Mr. Kimura's place on the Utsunomiya line. And Nasu white pine have a very fine, small needle and are highly prized. And there were several people out there that did a lot of layering of pines, but they used ground layering as their technique of choice. So they actually would plant them in the field and then mound up the soil. They would ring the bark, mound up the soil, and that's how they would perform the layer. And they had a lot of success with that, but they said, and it was a readily known timeframe, that it would take two to three years before you would ever see roots. So you had to have those branches below that layered area in order for that to work over those two to three years, otherwise the roots would die and then the tree would die. But I think ground layering might be your more effective technique for pine as opposed to air layering. And I'm assuming that has to do with moisture content, microbial content that exists in the field soil. And then to follow up on that, Ben was asking, how about Seca hinoki cypress? How does it respond to air layering? So hinoki will air layer, but again, it is moving less and fewer resources. And so that's one that I think rooting hormone for hinoki is almost a necessity. I don't know that you have success with an air layer on hinoki without rooting hormone. And so I would say try rooting hormone, have a branch below it, because it is going to take hinoki a little bit longer based on the fact that it's a straight conifer, not a deciduous conifer, not a deciduous. But it's doable. Hinoki is totally doable. I've done it. I've seen it done. Brandon was wondering, any special concerns for aftercare once separated? No. I mean, once you separate it, three months where you're receiving all of the sugars and carbohydrates from this foliage mass regenerates a very robust root system. And so after you separate it, unless you separate it too early, like Mr. Kimura sometimes would push his stone planting pieces because he needed to make it for maybe the production value of it or for a demonstration or something, maybe like a Kimbo and photo shoot, he would make them very quickly. And so he would have to push the time, and they wouldn't have as many roots. He would have to treat that much like repotting where you cut off too many roots or a collected tree that has very few roots. Foliar misting for a period of time. Keeping it out of wind and intense sun. Stuff like that. But for us, with these guys, when we separate them, we'll stick them in a container and we'll put them right in full sun. I mean, it's like a standard tree. Grant asked, when air layering maples and such, does the cut's proximity to a node affect root production? No, because you're getting, you're hoping to get roots from the 360 degree radial spread of the cut, right? Around the trunk. So if there's a node and you're going to get a root from a node, that's probably a root you're going to cut off when you separate that from the root base or from the parent plant because it's going to be in a location that you're not necessarily hopeful of and it's also going to be a type of root mass and growth that is different and entirely independent of that callus and the root formation that comes from that, which tends to be very radial and have a really wonderful buttress. So the same reason that we air layered the hornbeam tonight because it had that one gigantic root, that would be something that would happen at a node that you would probably not ideally want. So I wouldn't say it matters and I would actually say it's less desirable. Does layering at a side of branch origin versus between nodes have a better success? At the side of a branch origin? Yeah. Versus between the nodes. I don't think it matters. I don't think it matters. I don't think that matters. I think as long as you have a clean cut, you've separated the cambial layer, you have all of your sugars accumulating, I don't think it matters. Chris wants to know if you're air layering a tree in the wild and it's hard to get to, would you use moss and insulate to cut down on water loss? I don't think that you can air layer a tree in the wild unless you're continually watering it once it forms roots and I think that's a, you know, there's a lot of people that have tried grafting in the wild, have tried layering in the wild, have tried building up soil and root improvement in the wild. Unless you're actively watering that, I don't think any of that is effective. But there are people that actively water it. There are people that have come up with watering mechanisms in the mountains and that does work. It will work. As long as you keep that watering mechanism hydrated. So the second time was a charm, third time is even more beautiful. Here you have two really well done air layers right there. Obviously both of these oriented up so that when the water, the opening's oriented up so that when I water, the water moves into these easily. Now if these branches were here, I would have created an open top, right? So I would have used that wire just kind of as a formative thing to hold that. Here I used it and I closed both sides and cut that open, okay? So some variations. We'll probably do more air layering in the future when the time arises and the opportunity arises. But I think and hope that this gave you guys a really good solid start and fundamental understanding of air layering and how to approach a deciduous in a conifer. Could you ever create a bonsai from an air layer taken from a mature landscape tree? Sure. Oh yeah. Some of the most famous bonsai in the world were taken off of landscape trees. I've created an entire forest off of a landscape tree where I just air layered different branches and used them in the forest. I think landscape material is as good of a resource for bonsai as anything else. And this is why air layering is so special. Because I could take literally any branch off of this tree as long as there was something feeding the live vein that was supplying that branch with the resources. I could take any branch off of this tree and make it an entirely unique and singular tree independent of this, right? So if you go out into the wild and you've got this really interesting movement and you've got these fantastic things, air layer that, separate that in your landscape. Air layer that and separate that. That is a bonsai. You've just made that into a wonderful bonsai and it happens like that. I mean, this took all of what? We were sitting here talking and I did that and these two and, you know, these are all going to be independent trees. It's a really wonderful technique. It's something I think all of you guys should start looking for. Material that is less than ideal that you can improve via this technique. It is a game changer. And a lot of the really fantastic shohin and chuhin or medium-sized trees in Japan are the product of air layering. That's how they get those really massive chunky trunks on those tiny deciduous trees. They'll air layer them off of a bigger tree. Are you going to water the akadama on the hornbeam air layer the same as you would soil in the pot? I'm going to water it less. I'm going to have to water it less. So I'll continue to water the container because it's supplying that foliar mass with the water that it needs. That akadama doesn't have a single root in it yet. So I'll water it thoroughly. And then I'll wait until it starts to dry out. And that might take 10-14 days before I'll ever water it again or even look at it again. And then as those new roots form if I get excited and I start hammering it with water knock them out. They'll be done. Your air layer will fail. So I've got to be very conservative and very disciplined about how I water that as that new root mass forms so that I keep that balance of water and oxygen that generates that new root. Okay, this is a question from a while back after the last video clip in regards to the pest. Would you use nematodes to treat this? Gerald wants to know. Gerald, sharp guy. Actually, we just applied nematodes today. They were in the fridge. Yeah, we had them in the fridge next to all of our yummy food. Yeah, we applied nematodes today garden-wide. Cranefly. And this is true of any pest or any disease. You have a population accumulation and then you reach a critical mass where they start to cause economic damage. Now, economic damage for us is they destroy the surface of the moss and we are seeing some weak trees that have no other indication that should be causing health issues except for an abundance of cranefly. And so we just went ahead and did a nematode treatment. We'll probably do two or three nematode treatments successively because nematodes with populations that are large, nematodes take some time to work. And so if you do successive applications every two to three weeks when you have big populations, you can accumulate enough nematodes to really start knocking down pest populations. And we're also using nematodes to see if we can combat root aphid issues, which, you know, root aphids are a thing that everybody is dealing with whether you know it or not. And are nematodes a solution for that? That is a big question that we're experimenting with now on a few trees that we've identified before. So we're working on that. We're working on that. We're working on the root aphids on. Joe from Alabama wants to know about neem oil. Would it cause problems with both the cuticle as well as blocking the stomata? So neem oil definitely does have a dissolving, does have a dissolving character for the cuticle. And that is a danger of oils and soaps. In addition to that, does it block the stomata? As far as I know, that isn't an issue. Although I look at it and it seems like, well, how could it not? But I don't think the viscosity of neem oil is so incredibly viscous that it holds together around a pore the size of the stomata. And that's where you still get enabled gaseous exchange. But I'm not sure on that. And I'm sure there are species that have a small enough stomata that it does impact gaseous exchange. I'm sure of that. Which is why, which is when you see neem oil, species that are not tolerant, like do not use it on this species, either it's a cuticle issue or probably a gaseous exchange issue. Jim from Phoenix, this is a question from higher above in the chat. He says, we got 105 degrees last Saturday and that's the norm during summer. I water three to four times and most at least once a day on my juniper. Is that misting too much? Again, I think I know a lot of people in the Arizona, Phoenix, Tucson area, doing bonsai that rely heavily on misting because you guys have such a low relative humidity. And I think it's probably at that extreme in the middle of the desert, probably more a necessity than anything else. And so if it works for you and your trees are showing vigorous growth and giving you the indications that they're healthy and that they're thriving because of your care, then I would say, no, that's an indication that irregardless of what I say about misting, it's working for you. And that's where I would also say, I tried to quantify high relative humidity and misting, not a good idea. In drier areas of the United States, I can see foliar misting being a great way to allow the tree to stop losing water and replenish that turgidity and that water content before it starts transpiring again. I see function in that. And then what type of nematodes do we use for the crane fly? So Arbico Organics, A-R-B-I-C-O, Arbico Organics is the company that I source my nematodes from. They're amazing, amazing. They sat, they explained the whole thing to me. I told them the insects I was dealing with. They told me the type of nematodes. I believe I used the S-C and the H-D variety of nematodes. I believe the S-C was for the crane fly and I believe the H-D was for the root aphid. And so I just got a combo pack and we're going to monitor populations of both of those insects and the trees we've identified having issues and see if it works. But as with anything holistic as opposed to chemical, the duration of time that it takes for beneficial organisms to function is far longer than a chemical solution. So it's going to take at least two weeks before we even see populations start to decrease slightly. Which is why we're going to do two or three successive treatments so that we get those multiple generations infected with the nematode. Gary wants to know if the root graft on this juniper was done at the time of collection. No, no, no. In order for, yeah, this is an interesting thing. I've heard people say, you know, I got very few roots on the juniper. Would root grafting, you know, give it the roots that it would need? No way, shape, or form. Because when a tree is collected, it's not moving enough resources to create enough tissue for the cambial layer of the root graft and the regular tree to mesh. It's impossible. It would never, ever, ever work. Right? Maybe some guy somewhere, somehow says it worked and I would still call bullshit on that. Right? Because you have to be creating tissue. Tissue is created by water and resources moving up and sugars and carbohydrates moving down. If you don't have that root system, there's no way you're creating that tissue. You have to have a healthy tree and a healthy scion to be able to graft and have success. All right. I think we should wrap it up. Wrap it? Thank you guys so much for geeking out with us tonight. This was a super horticulture-heavy, hardcore, bonsai geekery. Grow. Design, grow. Understand. Grow heavy. Grow. Grow heavy. Design, grow and understand. But we thank you guys so much for all the support you showed for the web store sale and for being a part of Mirai Live. This has been very special for us. And I also just want to take a moment before we cut out to thank Kendall and to thank Arthur, to thank Lime, to thank Ricardo, you know, and there's also an unsung hero in this whole thing and that is Troy Cardoza, who's really my right-hand man. And then our new addition, Colton. This team of people that you guys don't see every night that we're doing this is behind this making this happen, you know, and I might be standing here talking and Kendall, you know, chimes in and tries to redirect me when I get off on tangents and stuff, but you don't know how hard these people work to bring this to you guys in the form that it comes in. And so I feel really fortunate to be with this team and if it wasn't for them, this wouldn't be here. If it wasn't for you guys, it wouldn't be here. Everybody is making this possible. So thank you very much to our team. Thank you very much to you guys for supporting. We love you guys so much and we're going to continue working hard for you to make more and more content that you guys feed your practice and improves your bonsai abilities. Thank you. And after that, when do you hit the East Coast? Just for Covered Wagon. So I'm blasting off tonight. I'll be in Cheyenne, Wyoming tomorrow. I'll be in St. Louis, Missouri, on Thursday. I'll be in Chicago, Illinois, Friday. And I'll be in New York Saturday night late. So if you guys have trees that you're picking up in New York, Sunday or Monday is probably going to be ideal. And wish me luck because I'm going solo, which I've done before and it's not the coolest thing in the world. Probably why I'm procrastinating with you guys right here. All right, guys. Thank you very much. Happy Tuesday. Good luck. Have a great bonsai week. We'll see you next week. I will be in studio again with you guys. So I'll be back from New York. Flying back and forth. Super excited. What are we working on next week? Deciduous focus. Ah, deciduous. Those of you Maple fans out there, we got you covered. All right, guys. Have a good week. We'll see you. We love you. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. 
