What's going on everybody? Happy Friday morning. This piece of information is one that we get a lot of questions about. How do we handle? When do we prune? What do we do with coastal redwood? And I figured what better way to kind of walk us through the pruning process at least in this period of the year and dialogue about the other pruning processes with coastal redwood while we're working on one of Mirai's most iconic pieces. And this this tree, let me give you the ones around here. This tree is definitively puffed up, really full, and I would dare I say overgrown. And I think it's to a point now where there is some necessity to make some decisions and remove some complete branches, continue moving it forward. But let's just understand that one of the things with redwoods when we're dealing with the pruning of redwoods is that we need to always be thinking about the fact that we're going to take two steps forward and one step back. And we're going to start there. Let's dig into redwood. Okay so again I'm going to give you one more once around and you can see that a lot of the negative space has has been vacated. But you can also see there's just these big long shoots. Everything's kind of overly elongated. When we start looking at this you see all of these pieces that are sticking out. Now this is very very common. This tree was pinched aggressively last year where in the spring season as the soft shoots were elongating we go in and we pinch leaving just a portion of that new branch. And what we get is we get this really tight dense mass in here. But towards the end of the season the tree is still producing so much energy that we get these kind of spurts. We get these elongated pieces that come out of this. And we're going to be going ahead and reducing these back to our tight ramification and improving that ramification today. So if we zoom out wide I just want to walk you through some of the strategy behind pruning redwood and the timings of year before we dig into this spring season. Now spring is a great time to be pruning redwoods before they flush as those buds swell. And as we start to look at this the buds are swelling across all of the growing tips. They have yet to produce foliar mass. Once they produce foliar mass I don't want to do a big prune because now the tree has invested energy in that foliar mass. But right now I have the ability to prune back to a bud or back to a fine lateral branch. So if we just take a look here and talk about where we can prune. Hey Zeus zoom me into the detail. Okay if we're looking at this I see that I have these small lateral branches here. I've got these tiny guys. I can prune this big tip back to one of those lateral branches. I can take it all the way back to the base of that lateral branch and just leave one of these little guys to take over. But the one thing that I cannot do at this time of the year is I cannot shorten these small fronds if I don't have a bud. Okay so let's go back to the wide and basically what we're saying is okay there are times of the year that when we prune redwoods we can cut an elongated frond in half. And I'm going to let me just show you what I'm talking about. Let me let me pull out a piece here. Okay and I'm going to come into the detail cam right here. Okay I've got this elongated piece and I don't have any buds along this. I don't have any secondary or tertiary branches along this. Okay I can't I cannot at this time of the year come back in and cut that. I don't have any secondary or tertiary branches along this. Okay I can't I cannot at this time of the year come back in and cut that. and expect a bud to form at that tip. That cut that I just made will cause the tree to bud back all the way at the base of that growth and replace it. Okay maybe that's okay but if you want to value that finer branch the spring season is not the time to be making that cut. So when we talk about the pruning at this time of the year we have to be pruning back to a bud that already exists. We have to be pruning back to a lateral secondary or tertiary branch that already exists. Because the tree is now in its foyer growth phase it set up its buds over the course of the fall and the winter and it's in a mode where if we prune back and there's no bud it's going to go back to the next natural bud that it's going to create and typically that's at the base of the branch. So we would effectively be stimulating the regrowth of that piece that we pruned if there's no bud or no lateral branch on it. Okay but it's a great time right now the tree all stored energy positive great time to come back in and correctively prune these pieces and really dig in. So let's go ahead and let's focus on what that looks like. Now much like the branches I showed you in the back I've got some of these big long fluffy pieces and I've got these really really wonderful tiny little guys right here. I've got these tiny little pieces of ramification that I have the capacity to cut back to. So I'm always going to be working particularly when we're trying to drive forward this vertical aesthetic. I'm going to be working on this vertical aesthetic. I'm going to be working on this vertical aesthetic. I'm going to be working to shorten these branches as much as I can which really accentuates that vertical height. Now redwood are going to be producing shoots and growth all over the place and you see here there's all these little tiny guys coming off of the bottom of these branches. Typically when we're dealing with redwood they have a lateral layout once you start to calm them down you get them pinched you start to get them in the refinement process and that allows us to come back across the bottom and sort of indiscriminately take off. Those bottom growing pieces and that cleans up that bottom profile now you'll notice any once you start cleaning that bottom profile any bottom pieces that are left behind really start to stick out and one of the big advantages to cleaning this bottom profile in bonsai in general but specifically in the formal upright style is that now that reduces the thickness of that pad and the more thin that that pad is the more capable we are of really accentuating that vertical height. okay now want, when we style formal upright trees, we don't want the branches to be so dense that we don't have any negative space between them. There are three pads that actually exist inside of this branch. You can see this one here, you can see this one here, and you can see this one here. Currently they all blend together as one singular pad. By that, by those three pads blending together as one singular pad, we've lost that sense of proportion that when we start to break these up and create that negative space and have that visibility between them, it makes the tree look a lot bigger in terms of the grander scale and representation of the composition. So coming in and just trying to thin these out and create that negative space, but also coming in and trying to improve structure. So when I drop down, one thing that what we also notice about redwoods is as we pinch, we get this plethora of these tiny little pieces that we pinch on the interior that don't really have any growth capacity, and they all tend to center from one singular growth tip, which means that we'll get a whirl as we pinch of three, four, five, six, seven, sometimes even eight shoots. And that's where we start to say two steps forward, one step back, we build this density, now we have to come back in and clean it up and cut it back to two so that we maintain the integrity of our ramification and really start to build that beautiful fine branching that we see in a super high level, super refined tree that gives us the impression of that larger tree in miniature and that sense of scale we're always striving for in the bonsai pursuit. And so this process of pruning is a continual assessment and a continual management of the density, of the structure, and of the secondary tertiary level. I've got this really nice long tip here. Again, I'm cutting those big strong long pieces back. To some of these finer pieces that exist. But look at all of this vertical growth. Look at how thick, you come back in here, that should help. Okay, look at how thick, there we go, how thick all of this is. These vertical pieces are a product of the pinching process. So just seeing all of these vertically growing upwards, I've got a lot of unnecessary, really long, really significantly coarse pieces in here that are adding to that thickness. And again, at that singular junction, where I only want two branches, I've got three, four, five, six, six branches at that junction. I have to take that back to two pieces at that junction and really start to reduce the density of that piece. So by the time I finish with it, I have these two pieces of ramification, this in my thumb and this in my index finger. I had six pieces at that junction that we're adding to all of that density. Now it's hard to shed that density because you're like, oh it looks so good, finally, all of my efforts with redwoods are being validated by the fact that the tree looks really freaking good. And then here comes Ryan saying, hey, go back in and clean that up and prune it and make sure that you've got all of your, you know, structural back to twos, got all your structural stuff intact and in check, and you're really working towards the final goal of that piece. That is really tough. It's challenging for me because it is rewarding when you do finally start to get density and refinement in a redwood. You don't want to go back in and prune all of that off. However, going back in and cutting that back and really improving the structure of that piece, that is the work on a redwood. That is how we handle a redwood in the spring season to improve it. So all of a sudden now, we start to see that the thickness, look at that, the thickness and the density, that was all the way up here in terms of all of those branches that were growing at those junctions. Now we've thinned that down to a two pieces at this junction, two pieces at this junction, two pieces at this junction, and all of a sudden we're at two, two, two, and we're continuing to work back. Now I am focusing, when I get into these branches here, I am focusing very much on trying to, to the best of my ability, take out the strongest pieces on a tree that is this refined. So I'm going to take out that vertically growing piece because that's going to get strong very, very quickly. Okay, when I get into these areas over here, I've got this really excessively long piece right here. I'm going to take that out because I have finer pieces around it. Okay, and then I start to get into some directional discussions. I'm going to take off the bottom growing piece. Now I've got my two sections, got my two growth tips there, greatly reduced the size of that, and all of a sudden we start to see, when I, when I take that hand away and you see the wildness and the bushiness of this stuff, and you come back into this, this is really well manicured, really well pruned and cleaned up so that we can actually physically see. Okay, Jesus, let's go back to the wide, and I'm just going to kind of, I'm going to kind of rock through a little bit of this so that you can see this piece transform, and you already can see the negative space creeping in above this from the reduction that I, I'm, I've been doing. And you'll notice how puffy this is, you'll notice how puffy this is, and suddenly this stands out again. It stands out as its own occupied space. You see that, that's exactly what we're looking to accomplish. Okay, now while I'm pruning here, because you can't see in the detail cam what I'm doing, I want to walk you through the different timings for pruning redwood, because I think this is where the greatest confusion exists. And I think over the course of time at Mirai, we have gotten some feedback with some of the initial discussions that we had about when to prune redwood, and we've improved that level, we've improved that technique. Okay, so when we start to talk about pruning redwood, redwood is a tree that grows right on the cusp of a Mediterranean environment. And it's a tree that grows right on the cusp of a Mediterranean environment in Northern California. So it's growing, you know, north of the Bay Area, which is a very significant Mediterranean region right on the coast there, has Mediterranean regions occupy roughly 3% of the Earth's surface, yet they hold something like 80% of the Earth's plant material in terms of species diversity. So the Mediterranean region is extremely unique, extremely beautiful, very conducive to plant growth. Redwoods are just north of that in a higher moisture environment, because we do typically see in Mediterranean regions a low level of rainfall. Redwoods are benefiting over the summer season during the dry season, which also is a character of Mediterranean regions and kind of permeates the redwood region of California. We see them having an adaptation in their foyer mass to be able to take in water via capturing the condensation that forms from that coastal fog moving inland. And that's how redwoods very much take in water. And that's how redwoods very high water consumptive species. That's how redwoods tolerate and survive the drier summers in California, is they start to be able to take in and start to be able to absorb the accumulation of that coastal condensation in a special adaptation to their leaf mass. And we see this same thing happening when you start to talk with about how do redwoods raise water against the force of gravity in their vascular system all the way up to the top of the tree. Again, they're taking in that condensation from that coastal fog in the pieces of foyer mass that exist at the very highest points of that apical region. Those foyer pieces that are absorbing that condensation, up to 500 gallons of condensation a day, a single redwood will absorb via that accumulation of moisture on the leaf surface of the coastal fog. 500 gallons of water. This is, I mean, this is phenomenal. And that point occurs at a level in the tree where the tree can no longer raise water through its xylem against the force of gravity. All of a sudden, the leaf morphology or structure changes. Now it's absorbing water through condensation. It's fascinating. This tree does not have any of that leaf structure on it. Anyways, I'm walking you through this seasonal discussion because it plays a role in how we seasonally start to recognize the indications that a redwood is ready to be pruned. Because when we start to talk about the fact that over the course of a year, we're going to start to see a lot of redwoods that are growing. And over the course of the summer, they really are only getting water through the absorption of condensation. What that means is they're not, redwoods are not typically at a point where they're trying to promote the most aggressive growth. But then we see the fall rains come in the Mediterranean regions. And this is when redwoods, almost not existing dormant and not stopping their growth, but definitely over the course of the really peak portion of summer when it's hot and it's dry, slowing down their productivity. of growth and really kind of taking a break. They get that spurt, that's that hit of fall rain. And this catalyzes one of the most major transformations that we need to be aware of in redwoods. And even though we have them in containerized cultivation, this stays consistent with the genetics and the behavior of the tree in the bonsai container. And that is over the fall season, the shoots that have elongated, right, these shoots that have elongated over the course of the year. Okay, these are our photosynthetically efficient pieces that are produced over the course of the year, when we get those fall rains coming in the fall and over the course of the winter. The redwood starts to mount up, buds along these long fronds that it's produced over the course of the year, to be able to produce ramification and expand its foliar mass the following spring. So when we start to see those fall rains, and we see that redwood would become active over the late fall early winter period of time. And we see it Cruise fall early winter period of time and we see it Common Sea Rim, change theätzhabbildungs fortune and expand theạt 플률 parents in period of time and we see buds starting to amass themselves on these fronds that is the indication in the fall of our number one period and number one pruning time to be able to come back in even if we don't have a bud and shorten those fronds to exactly the length that we want and we can pretty much plan on a bud forming at that location where we've pruned this is for for redwoods and anybody who's cultivated redwood as a bonsai this is coastal redwood sequoia sempervirens this is a monumental capacity to be able to reduce or prune that frond back of a redwood to reduce its length not have it start budding back from the base of that of that physical piece of foliage from the base of it but actually get to preserve that length and know that you're going to get a bud where you cut this is something that people didn't think was possible 10 years ago when i started working with redwoods and now we understand the physiology of that fall season we understand the activation of growth by the fall rains in that northern region just north of a mediterranean environment and we understand that that's when the redwood later than most trees which are going through their vascular growth phase from september to november redwoods start in november with the rains and have their vascular growth phase through january february really preparing for what we now see happening in that march april period of time where they get ready to produce that foyer mass so they have that unique timing we look for those buds to start forming and the visible sign of those buds forming tells us that now the tree is putting the buds on for its foyer growth next year we can prune where we want in the green foyer mass and expect a bud to be at that location because the tree is in that timing to be able to set up a bud for its foyer growth next year this is monumental okay so i would say that that is the point where we can most depend on a bud being exactly where we want it to be when we make that pruning decision and we start to shorten some of those elongated pieces of growth to the desired length that we're striving for in the bonsai design but that's not the only time okay and this is this is again is really important to understand we have a number two time to be able to prune redwood and get that bud into the green foyer mass and we're going to do that in the next few years that foyer bud where we want it, shorten that elongated growth, and that number two time is right after the first really big surge of sugars and starches that run through the tree as daylight length is increasing, as temperature is increasing. When all of those sugars and starches are running through it, it pushes that first big flush of growth. We're probably going to be pinching on a refined redwood, but if we're growing out secondary branches, if we're thickening primary developmental branches, we can come back in after that first big surge has pushed through that foyer mass, the foyer mass has hardened off, and the tree's gotten back into that energy positive via photosynthesizing, and we can cut these fronds yet again at the desired length, and we will get a bud most likely where we prune at that time of year to be able to continue developing and working the tree from that length moving forward, okay? So number one, we prune. Once we see buds amassing in the late fall and over the course of the winter, we have our carte blanche to prune where we want as long as we're in green tissue, and we'll get a bud where we prune. We can also come back after the first flush has hardened. We have a relatively similar carte blanche prune where we want. We should get a bud most likely where we pruned. It's not as ideal as the late fall or the winter pruning, but it still has a similar capacity, okay? But now coming back to this spring pruning, the spring pruning is going to be a little bit more difficult. We're going to be able to do a little bit more pruning than is a corrective pruning to be able to clean up some of our junctions, some of this abundance of branching that forms at these sites and improve the structure of the tree two steps forward, one step back, and as we continue, you're starting to watch this branch take on this really, notice how much more slender this is. Notice how much more controlled this is and how much more negative space we've achieved over the top of this, and I haven't even finished this back piece, but notice how much more slender this is. Notice how much more of a sense of scale we're able to achieve by doing this kind of corrective pruning at this period of the year and really kind of getting to absorb the fruits of all of the development that we've achieved over the course of last year and coming back in and adding it to the mix of a really highly refined, highly cleaned up, highly structurally sound prune at the beginning of spring. We're set up to have a super successful spring pruning. We're set up to have a super successful year with this tree. Now, I definitely want to come back in, look at wire, but once we get a redwood to this point and you see how much different that is now than that big, massive, dense cluster, I don't want to try to be managing every single shoot inside of this system at this point. If I can wire this structural piece and I can wire this structural piece and I can just prune a little bit to take some of the elongated pieces out, that on a tree of this scale with a redwood is a really beautiful branch. That is what we're trying to and striving to achieve as we pinch over the spring season. The growth is going to elongate from all these tips. We'll be pinching as it grows outside of this silhouette, and that is going to cause interior buds to be stimulated to grow. That's going to cause density to enhance and accumulate, and I'm going to utilize pinching to really control the shape of this as opposed to overly wiring this whole piece. Now, this tree's been heavily wired multiple times in its life, which is what set up this structure and given us the maturity to be able to manage and accomplish this kind of a dramatic, I would say, level of structural improvement, enhancement, aesthetic, evolution, etc. But at this point, once we get them to this level of refinement, the last thing that we want to be thinking is, I got to go back in and wire every branch on my redwood, because that's not the goal of bonsai necessarily. The goal of bonsai is to get a tree refined enough that we're not going back in. We're not going back in and we're not going to be wiring everything. We have to understand that our efforts, at some point, are going to get paid off by the fact that we don't have to be working as intensely as we always have on that tree to be able to maintain its aesthetic and to be able to continue moving it forward. That justifies our efforts in the beginning with really dedicated, diligent wiring, setting of the structure, etc., to get to that reward point where it's like, hey, because you did all of that, because you worked so hard, now you're going to be able to continue moving it forward. That justifies our efforts in Now, guess what you get? You get a refined tree that, if you understand how to really beautifully go back in and prune at the different times of year to accomplish what you're trying to accomplish, then you don't have to come back in and really do that rewiring very frequently. Periodically, the tree's going to grow out of shape. Periodically, we're going to have to go back in and do a revamping every, I would say, five, six years. But for the most part, we should not have to be doing that on a regular basis. It gives us a break as bonsai practitioners. It establishes almost like a reward setup, right? You're rewarded for your hard work in the beginning by getting to enjoy the tree a little bit more after you get it past that point of all that hard work. And it's pretty monumental. If I had to kind of step back and just take a look at what would be a kind of a burning question for people, do we do multiple prunings? So we're talking about pruning in the spring, but now we can only cut back to a bud that exists or a branch. We talk about pruning. the first flush hardens, we talk about pruning in the late fall, early winter as we see those buds start to form. Do we do all of those? No, no, you don't. You're not going to be pruning three times a year on a redwood, right? Had I done the pruning in the late fall, early winter on this as I saw the buds start to form, I wouldn't need to be doing this pruning now because I would be adjusting structure at that point in addition to going back and shortening and reducing some of those other components of growth, okay? That would negate the necessity to be pruning right now in the spring. Now I'm pruning in the spring, does that mean I'm going to be pruning in the late spring, early summer when the first flush hardens? Absolutely not. I don't need to be pruning at that point in time because I've done everything here. I'll be pinching to manage growth. I'll be pinching to increase density. I'll be pinching to enhance my ramification and refine the tree further. I won't need to come back and prune. in that May-June period of time. And once I have that pinching done in that May-June period of time and I'm not pruning then, I probably legitimately am looking at the fall to come back and clean up all of the abundance of growth that happened or next spring prior to the push of foyer growth depending on what time affords and what I'm trying to accomplish with the pruning. For this tree, I didn't need to prune in late fall, early winter because I'm not cutting really long fronds back and trying to get buds where they're not pruning. I'm trying to get buds where they're not pruning. That cut site exists. I have compact growth. I've been pinching this. As a result of that, I don't need to be pruning back big elongated growth and hoping for buds. I've got more than enough to work with in here. So this tree was a tree collected by Zach Scheiman of Mendocino Coast Bonsai down in Mendocino, California. And in 2012, I had come back from Japan in 2010. 2012, there was a national show in Rochester, New York. I hope a national show happens. I hope a national show happens. And we'll see how that kind of evolves and develops. National show in Rochester, New York. I volunteered to drive a truck of trees across the country. Zach drove up from Northern California because he was vending at the show. We loaded all of his redwoods into the truck to drive to Rochester, New York. And as we were loading all of the redwoods into the truck, he pulled this one out. And it was just a raw singular trunk, a few sprigs of growth on it. And I said, whoa, that one needs to stay here. That one's got to stay here. Anytime you're looking at redwood material and you're talking about, I want to create a natural upright redwood, the buttress of this trunk, the transition into this vertical piece, the straightness of this as a really natural reflection of redwood, there's some deadwood in and along these trunks here that adds almost like a burnt out effect that if you've ever been in the old growth redwoods, you start to see. It had everything. It had everything I could ever want in terms of a piece of material to create a formal upright redwood. And a lot of the redwoods that come out of collection from the old logging roads when they were really heavily logging the redwoods and they would just bulldoze these areas. And you see these trees knocked down, broken off. Their roots, their root bases in the soil form a lot of interest. And when those are pulled out, they're these short, stumpy, really monstrous things. And they don't necessarily conform to a formal upright redwood. So it is quite rare. To actually find this beautiful buttressing trunk and taper that looks like a redwood in miniature. And that's why I grabbed onto this one. It was a spectacular tree. So I styled this initially in 2012, potted it initially in 2013. And believe it or not, it was just repotted for the first time since 2013, this spring, in the elongating species class. My students repotted this tree. And the root system had continued to amass finer and finer and finer and finer and finer and finer and finer roots on the surface. Now, you can actually see the color change here. You can see the line where there's kind of a caramelly, beautiful brown-reddish color here. And there's a lot of lichen and age and bark up above it. So the tree had actually amassed so many roots on the surface of it because it was growing in that confined environment that it had covered a majority of its nabari. And as we were pulling that away, we started kind of looking at it and saying, and we even uncovered a little bit more here. You can go ahead and zoom out, Jesus, and I'll focus on another small section. Okay, but as we were pulling that away, we were like, holy cow, this tree has such a dramatic buttress to its trunk. It visually added a lot more quality. And this kind of highlighted, I think, that bigger idea that as we repot and as we work our trees and as we continue to go back and perform the different maintenance aspects of bonsai that exist, when we're doing that, we always need to be striving to improve our trees. And the root mass is constantly evolving just the same as how the foyer mass and the branching and the aesthetic design in the upper canopy of the tree is evolving. To lose sight of that, to not go deep enough to really explore and continue to improve the root mass when we're repotting, and to think of repotting as a routine action that we take, is to lose an opportunity to continue to enhance the tree. And we're reminded of that. And we're reminded of that. And we're reminded of that. And we're reminded about those things when we practice bonsai. This tree served as a tremendous reminder that, oh yeah, we're still developing every single component of the tree, whether it's above ground or below ground. Now when we look at that now, you get to really see the payoff. Okay, now it looks a little spindly, right? We start to adjust this. We start to put these together. And in the grander scheme of things, go ahead and zoom out now. Okay, in the grander scheme of things, now you start to see the clarity. There's the clarity that we're looking for. Right across the top there, really nice and clean. And when you look at that bigger image, you start to say, oh wow, proportionally now this has become something entirely different. Now you do see, right here, you do see that separation of that next layer that's going to form. And you understand that this branch is quite proportional to the size of the tree. Okay, so as I continue to work through this, my general practice when I'm working redwoods, is to go ahead and prune the entire tree, be able to see the difference. And I'm going to go ahead and prune the entire tree, and I'm going to see the entire silhouette, see the detail of the branches, see the negative space, because if I come back in and I start removing entire structural branches with all of the different pads showing too much density and too much volume, it's very hard to understand design when a tree is this overgrown. So I like to come through, I like to prune, I like to, you know, improve the quality and the structure of each branch and focus on that branch and the quality of that structure, and then I'll zoom out. I'll step back with you all, and I like to then think about the design. So again, obviously I have a tremendous scope of work. I like how that's happening down there. That's really beautiful. That's more what I want. You can see how much density and how oversized, just kind of bloated the branches are. We need a redwood to get to this point, to be able to pull it back a little bit and have that improvement upon what we had prior to this sort of expansion. Spring pruning of redwoods is a structural correction period of time where we take threes, fours, fives, and sixes down to twos at any junction. We can cut back to a lateral, secondary, or tertiary branch. We can cut back to a bud that's been formed over the course of the late fall-winter period of time, and that is the extent of the pruning we can do right now. We could also remove structural branches. It wouldn't hurt the tree right now, wouldn't make an ounce of difference. We're going to be pinching to control the tree, and we're going to be pinching to control the growth if we're refining our redwoods over the spring flush of growth. I'm not going to be fertilizing a redwood aggressively over that spring because it would give it too much strength, too much power. I'm going to let its stored energy propel the foyer growth over the spring, and that's what's going to allow me to be able to utilize pinching to control that growth. If I'm trying to get buds on an elongated branch back in an area where I don't have a branchlet to cut back to or a bud to cut back to, I'm going to wait to make that prune until that pruning is complete. After that period of time when that first flush is hardened off. After that, after that first flush is hardened off and we've been pinching, I will start to apply a lighter fertilizer to a redwood just to perpetuate their ability to add that growth. The more they grow and the more we pinch and manage that foliage, the farther along in a single season they will develop and enhance their aesthetic. And I won't necessarily be doing much else beyond pinching and managing growth and light fertilization until I get to that November, December, December period. So I'm going to start to apply a lighter fertilizer for all that clean Downwood, or more finds over that January, December and January period of time. I'm going to be observing each Redwood as an individual specimen to note and understand when are they starting to complete new buds along their elongated fronds and branches because that creation of that tree at that time is the indicator in that late fall, winter period of time that I can come back and I can prune an elongated piece of growth anywhere along that, as long as there's green needles along that tissue. I will offer a little closer coordination of that and then I'll start re memo for that Featherwood plant project. and I will get buds at that cut site, that is the most major period of time, late fall, winter, most major period of time when the tree gives us that indication that it's producing vegetative or foliar productive buds that I can prune anywhere and the tree has the malleability at that point in time to amass a bud at that location gives me the greatest amount of dictatorial control of branch lake reduction without fearing that the growth is going to come back to the base. Okay, a crash course in redwood pruning, spring management, structural cleanup, refinement, we tapped into fertilization but we talked about that number one late fall, winter, we talked about that number two after the first flush hardens and we talked about that number three to correct and set the tree up for a good year of growth in the spring prior to the flush. These are the only times I'm pruning redwoods. One of those three times in a year, only time I'm going to be pruning redwoods. And I'm going to be pruning to get what I want to get to accomplish what I'm trying to accomplish and then I'm going to be pinching the growth to manage that refinement, distribution of energy and expansion of that ramified growth that really gives us that higher level of redwood bonsai sort of capacity, representation of scale and representation of proportion. It's a great time to be doing bonsai. It's a fantastic season to wrap our minds around this wonderful art form and we will be here with all of your needs. Thank you so much. Have a great weekend, you guys. 
