What is up, everybody? Wednesday, mini stream, 1 p.m. We made it. I actually, I'm going to be giving myself a haircut after this mini stream. I wanted to at least give myself the ability to make some adjustments if it went wrong this morning, so I decided to wait until after the mini stream. This is like a shower, a little bit of rain outside, and putting on my hooded sweatshirt, and I'm just back to a total afro, so it's time. I spent the morning actually hunting down telephone poles because we're changing some of the physical structures at Mirai, and just kind of doing all the garden work and being here to manage all of the trees, coming out of the environments, talk fertilizer, deal with pinching, really being embedded at Mirai for this period of time. I started thinking, man, it would be really great to do a spring wrap-up because there is a very significant transition. In our bonsai practice, from that hunkered-down repotting season, we've got to keep things warm, to moving into, is it okay to move them outside? How do we handle the bonsai shuffle, to now they're growing, it's warm, I'm watering more, fertilizing, oh shit, what now? There's that transitional moment, and I want to dive into that today. Sam should be on the chat from afar, and Josh is producing the mini live stream, but when I started thinking about this, and I like to lecture, I think there's a lot of knowledge. You take in a lot of knowledge. A lot of knowledge when you lecture. Seeing bonsai technique is one thing. Discussing what we do, when we do it, and why we do it is another, and that's really where lecture, I think, can be quite positive. Give us your feedback on how you feel about this mini stream, the lecture style. Was it valuable? Was it boring? Just sort of be honest, because if you like it, we can do more of it, and if not, it's good to know, in terms of this format. A little experimental today as well. There's sort of these. Big pivotal. When we think about how do we assess all of the factors of each season, first and foremost, in a tree-by-tree basis, what are we trying to accomplish? This dictates everything, right? What are we trying to accomplish in terms of are we developing, are we secondary, or are we refining? That impacts your fertilizer decision. It impacts the way that you maintain the foliar mass. It impacts the way that you go about the attention to that tree and the management of that growth to either hands-off, let it develop and grow. Sort of give it a little bit more robust growth for that secondary, or really finely manage tip to interior, the strength, species by species, different technique, different timing. But that development secondary refinement needs to be in consideration. But at this particular period of time, where we are transitioning out of greenhouses, we are nurturing trees after a repot, we are setting trees back up on benches, we are starting to put trees out in that environment where they really thrive, we have several considerations that I wanted to go through. And just kind of organize our thoughts about what we need to be considering, hopefully give you some proactive ways that we can avoid issues. So I've broken it down into environment, into watering, into fertilizing, and into growth. And in particular, that growth management. And we will come back and talk on some species-specific related things that I think there are a lot of questions about, just to shore it up, and in one place you get, boom, everything that we're thinking about, Mariah, as we move into the growing season. Okay? Growth environment. Now, when we talk environment, we're generally talking about what location in our garden is going to be satisfactory. Do we need shade cloth? At what temperature do we need to be worried? Should I be keeping trees in tremendous shade that were repotted, migrating them into partial or out into full? How do I know when they move into the full sun? What are my environmental concerns? Okay? And I would say we're now at that threshold, environmentally, where we're dealing with a lot of things that have been done as a major consideration. And not just a major consideration, but a major consideration of getting growth to occur. Right? And environmentally, when we start to talk about that, we have that process of, from the greenhouse, whether the tree was repotted or was not repotted. It does not change the necessity to have to have that transitional moment in the environment, where that thinner cuticle that's been created by that protective nature of the greenhouse. Light transmission, tree thins its cuticle to get enough light to continue metabolizing because the greenhouse is warmer. All of a sudden, we shift that outside, whether it was repotted or not. We still have to allow that adaptation to occur. So we talk about protected to semi-protected. Okay? And semi-protected, when we say semi-protected, we're talking about semi-protected from wind, semi-protected from really intense sun. And we start to look at that morning sun. And right after we start turning that moment, that 12 to 1 o'clock period of time, and it may differ regionally, north to south, state, hemisphere, okay, but we generally do see those afternoon temperatures really start to warm up at that point. And I am very comfortable, when we think about the environment that a tree needs to go in, we are catering to its biggest concern. Okay? Your environment is always catering to your biggest concern. So we're never optimistically putting a tree in the sun. Okay? We're never optimistically putting a tree out in the sun and saying, I hope it's going to be okay. We are nurturing a tree through the process of recovering from a repot or moving out of that greenhouse environment by saying, it could be okay, but I don't know, and setting it in that shady or that dappled sun or that partial sun and that protection from the wind, we observe the growth of that tree, and we see the tree tell us when it's ready. And the way that it tells us is the production of that tree. Okay? And the way that it tells us is the production of that new soft vegetative growth. When we start to see that, we now understand the roots are underneath the tree. They have enough sugar starch storage to both create the root mass that sustains this foliar mass and generate the quantity of foliar mass on this. Okay? And that is a major insinuation. Now, you could say, look, it's growing, but the growth is very weak. Cool. This is where we probably want to stay in this semi-protected area. It's growing, but the growth is weak. Coming out of a repot. Coming out of a significant root reduction. Dealing with a tree that is not as strong as you would want it to be, and the growth is weak. We need to go ahead and err on the side of caution. Morning sun, potentially up to that one o'clock kind of level, and then we need to be really getting into that dappled shade and giving it protection from that intensity. Because if you think about weaker growth, the weaker the growth, the smaller the growth, the shorter the growth, the less root mass and vascular tissue that tree has created to sustain what exists. It can only exist and add strong growth. It can only add that weak growth. You put it out into a high transpiration, high sun intensity, and all of a sudden it can't hydrate that foyer mass. We see burn. We see the loss of tips. We see branch dieback. We can see attrition. Now, when we get into our more heavily cuticle conifers, like our pines, like some of our junipers, that sun is a catalyst for growth, and we might be looking at that and really talking with a pine, big, thick cuticle. Let's go into sun. Let's go into sun a little bit sooner. Let's go into sun. As long as we see growth beginning, the sun is going to favor a pine. When we talk juniper, juniper are more highly transpirational. When we're looking at a juniper, we really need to see that growth before we start migrating to sun. Elongating species, we're looking for the strength of that growth to know, do we now migrate out of that semi-protected area? When we kind of come full circle to full exposure, we still have considerations in the environment. When we go full exposure, whether it is a pine, whether it is a juniper, whether it is an elongating species, we have to understand that we're continuing to monitor our tree. We're watching. Is that growth advancing? Are we seeing it continue to extend? Is the foliar mass staying hydrated? And then we start to look on that opposite side. Are temperatures going to get too intense? I'll give you an example. We have been in the 60s. We've hit the mid-70s a handful of times. Yesterday was quite nice. Today is quite cool and rainy. Tomorrow is 75. Friday is 80. Saturday and Sunday are 85 degrees apiece. All of my junipers are going to love it. That have been acclimated. The junipers that are at the tail end, I'm just moving out my greenhouse and emptying it before that heat spell. So a lot of trees that were repotted within the past two weeks are going to be coming out. They're going to go into that full shade. Anything coming out of the greenhouse goes into that big protection. Shade, maybe a little morning sun, protection from wind. Really nice and calm. Okay? I've got trees that have been in that that are starting to show that growth. Those are coming out. But moving into 85 degrees, my Douglas firs, my deciduous species, my spruces, my larches, all of the really soft, supple growth, elongating species, and deciduous, 85 degrees can nuke all of that new growth. Completely sunburn everything. Even if you don't have enough sun. Even if I've moved it into full exposure and it was ramping up, this big spike in temperature, I've got to pull it all back into semi-protected again. Okay? So when we make that move to full exposure, there is still bone size shuffle to be happening here. Again, if temperatures drop into the 30s, I'm not concerned unless there's a chance that it's going to drop below 30 degrees. Right? If it's going to drop below 30, if we get below that minus one kind of area, I'm now concerned. Up to that point, I'm not going to be doing the bone size shuffle. And environmentally, again. As we transition in terms of light exposure, heavily protected from wind and from light in the greenhouse, semi-protected both in terms of ideally having a windscreen or a windbreak and having that dappled sunlight. And then full exposure knowing that while we're in this very soft, succulent spring phase of growth, that new growth on some of those more water-loving species, like our elongatings and like our deciduous, might need to move back into semi-protected environments if we have heat spells and heat spikes. Do I want to leave it there? Absolutely not. We drop it back down to 80 or the high 70s, you're coming right back into full sun. I want that sun. I want that driving of growth. I want that perpetuation of strength, whether I'm developing secondary or refining. The sun is the battery that creates that energy. Okay, now when you talk about this, again, be really aware that this also applies environmentally to rotation. So when you start moving your tree through these semi-protected full exposure out of the greenhouse. We're consistently thinking about rotating and trying to utilize the stored sugars and starches moving through this tree at this spring period of time to drive it to every single place on the tree as evenly as possible. We're not super concerned quite yet with making sure that we hold the strongest back unless we're pinching. We're pinching our Japanese maples. We're pinching our elongating. We're going to come back to that. That covers exposure in a nutshell. Gives you some things to think about. Helps you kind of analyze where your tree's at. When is it ready? Is it showing it to you? When you move it, is it continuing to give you? And when do you need to be concerned? I feel like we've kind of nailed that, okay? So I'm going to move on from environment to water because I think water is the toughest. And we know that water and the whole conversation of watering and bonsai, and I'm going to stick with black because I think it's more visible. Okay, when we start to talk about water, understanding something very, very important about root productivity. Okay. How do we kind of form our notion of water? Not just for repotted trees, but I would say especially with repotted trees, we need to be very cognizant of how we go about watering. Okay. And here's the whole gist of this. Let's just be very clear about the two scenarios that we're going to approach. Say for example, and obviously this is a completely out of proportion drawing, but say for example you cut a root right here. Now we know that this root has to compartmentalize with callus. In order to be able to set the vascular system up, if the balance of water and oxygen is right to produce new rootlets into the soil. Okay. And we're saying, listen, balance of H2O and O2 in the soil, which when we talk about that balance, I believe the figure is you need something like 6% to 8% oxygen in the soil in order to have that balance that allows and catalyzes that metabolic and respiration and vascular growth. But let's also understand that the spring season, everything is moving up the tree, right? The water is flowing in through our roots. It is driven by that high concentration of sugar that that tree has stored across every single cell in its vascular tissue and the water moving in from the soil mass, higher concentration of water in the soil, lower concentration of water in the cells mixed with that sugar. The water moves across that and starts moving that with pressure. Up through the tree. Now it can only move as far as when we get into the tree and we'll use water as the center of our canopy. Okay. It can only move as fast as transpiration is taking place where we start to see water evaporating from these regions. That is what allows that movement to occur, but there is significant pressure in the roots trying to even out that concentration gradient. Typically that pressure applies to a roughly three foot, 36 inch height that it can actually actively push that water, but that is also something that is taking place here. Okay. So all that energy being allocated here, we have a very minimal amount of root growth taking place. And if we come back and we start to think about the fact that over the course of winter, whether it's cold, whether it's excessive moisture and a lack of oxygen, which is what we experienced in the Pacific Northwest, maybe it was a heavy reduction of foyer mass last year that started a little bit of an imbalance and continued to perpetuate itself. We can lose root mass over the winter time, and we would never know that that's happening if we can water well in the spring. And this is something that we constantly, in the spring season, trees are growing. It feels good to water them. We love seeing them green up. We love seeing leaves be added. We love seeing a tree in its new bonsai pot and watering that top dressing to try and get that moss as fast as possible. You have to really check yourself in spring. You have to be very careful at this time of year because again, the callus is not forming rapidly, energy moving to foyer growth, not vascular. We're going to get the abundant vascular growth in the fall where the roots really build to support next year's root system. But trees coming out of repotting that maybe have a lesser degree of growth, which we should expect, we cut the roots and adjust the vascular system on a tree, we have a rebuilding phase that we have to go through. The more severe, the more we have to rebuild. This timing to make sure that we don't, with that desire to cultivate health and health to help this tree grow, we have to be sure that we don't overwater. Keeping the soil too wet prevents the callus from forming, prevents new roots from forming and can really slow down the process or even have a detrimental impact. What would this look like? Improper watering in the spring, overwatering, what would this look like? Overwatering would look like a generalized loss of health. You wouldn't see growth taking place. You would see growth that is very weak. I know on a tree that's producing very weak growth. I have to be impeccable with my water. For example, there is an Instagram post where Troy and I are repotting a big dougie, which is an ancient Douglas fir. It's the bottom of the root mass. Troy has it laid down. And that tree has one small pocket of roots. We put it in a smaller container. But I know that I've got to be very, very concise with my watering because as that tree has grown, it's just producing a very small piece of growth. This means that what happened to the roots? The root system reduced the root system's ability to sustain a more substantial piece of growth. If I don't let it dry out between waterings, I will have an issue with that tree and not totally bone dry, but thoroughly oxygen saturated before I go back in and rehydrate. If we take, say, a different tree though, the big spire subalpine fir we repotted, or trees that have a very healthy foliar mass that weren't repotted in the garden, as they start to produce big, strong growth. More foliar mass that doesn't have a cuticle. More foliar mass that's demanding uptake of sugars and starches. More foliar mass that's transpiring at a rapid rate. We should not feel bad handling a tree who is giving us that kind of communication of that substantial, strong addition of unprotected, susceptible growth that it is leaning on us to correctly identify that with the presence of that, it needs water. We should not be bashful in giving that tree water. And this is the dance that we walk. Between underwater. Overwatering. Or overwatering. And trying to strike that balance over the course of time. Now let's come back to the balance. The balance of water and oxygen. How does this happen? How does this happen? This is the way it looks for me. I walk up to a tree and the soil is damp. Now I'm looking at the damp soil, but I don't really care about the damp soil quite yet. I'm actually looking at the tree. When I approach a tree, I don't look at the soil. I look at the canopy. I look at the growth that it's adding. How many needles does it have on it? How good is the color? How lush and how dense is that foyer mass? How mature is that needle type? How healthy and vigorous of the growth is occurring in that canopy of that tree? This is my first indication. Big, lush, dense, green, healthy, strong growth, using lots of water. Already know it. Using lots of water. Okay? Big, dense, not growing, slightly yellow color. Hmm. Interesting. What's happening here? What's happening in the root system that this doesn't have a good color? What's happening in the root system that this tree is not yet growing when all of its neighbors around it are growing? Okay? I need to be careful with water on this one. Already I know. I haven't even looked at the soil moisture yet. Okay? Now I look at the container. How much water is sitting there for this tree to be utilized? Right? Is this a big, lush tree, healthy, strong growth, tiny container? I know I need to look at that a lot. I need to be looking at that tree more than my other trees. Okay? Looking back to that, reservoir is small, utilization in terms of canopy and growth is high. Okay? That's one that I need to check back to. I have two trees in the garden that are my key. If I check them and they are wet, I don't really ... I will take a brief walk around. I will never just assume they will always be the indicator because it can change frequently. But if they are wet, I have a very confident feeling that I can just do a brief walkthrough of my garden. If they are dry, then I know there are going to be a handful of other trees that are dry. And if they are bone dry, I know that I'm going to have to do a garden-wide water. Okay? But those are trees that are healthy, big foyer mass, small reservoir of water, and they are producing a tremendous amount of growth. Okay? So I look at that canopy. I look at that growth. I look at its behavior compared to its neighbors. Right? I think about the actions that have taken place last fall, over the winter, and I look at that reservoir. How much resource does it have before I ever think, am I going to water or am I not? And if we come up to a damp tree that is healthy. That is healthy growing in a small reservoir, we might water it when it's damp that time. The next time we come back and it's damp like that again, we're going to hold back on water. And that's how you strike the balance. Okay? We have an unhealthy tree. Poor color, not growing, little concern, maybe small canopy, big container, maybe the canopy has been receding, heavily disease prone, phomopsis everywhere, needle cast on our pines. How do I handle this? Boom. Automatically, I already recognize. The root system is the source of immunity in a tree. When we start to come back to this model here, and we talk about the roots being the source of immunity. New root grows. That root, if all is going well in terms of sugar productivity, starts off-putting a byproduct called root exudates. On that exudate, mold, fungus, bacteria grow, and all of a sudden, you've basically created a culture of microbial activity that now starts, ideally, if it's the correct microbial activity. And we are establishing that balance of water and oxygen. That does stimulate the ability for that root, with that balance of water and oxygen, to actually grow. Respiration has to take place in that root system for roots to grow. Respiration is when we start to generate new tissue by breaking down the sugars and starches into usable forms of energy for cellular division. It occurs in the evening time. This is a dark cycle. We get that oxygen, which is a big part of respiration. Byproduct is carbon dioxide, right? In the evening cycle, the Krebs cycle of the... The... the plant's metabolic activity. And we get the capacity with that energy transition to cause cellular division at that root tip meristem. That's why the balance is so important. Exudates, sugars are formed. Culture of microbial activity exists. Microbial activity expands water and nutrient uptake for the root. And all of a sudden, we start to say, now our roots are capable of taking in more resources, allocating more resources. And in the root, when there is an infection, an insect, a disease, a damage in the tree, there are enzymatic reactions and hormonal triggers that are created in the roots that allocate resources towards those areas in the same way that our immune system sends, I believe, either white or red blood cells, I don't know, but sends those blood cells to say, no, coronavirus, you can't do that. I'm going to try to, or let's just say, you cut yourself. Oh, we're going to coagulate blood. We're going to have all these cells cause that to heal. Same thing in the tree. So having that root productivity with that correct balance over the course of time, utilizing each watering intentionally, understanding what the tree is telling you, and really striking that balance at this point is the biggest technique that you're executing. Coming out of a greenhouse, you know that tree is immediately going to dry out in that external environment. Two days into being in the external environment, you know that tree is all of a sudden going to stop drying out because it's now adapting. Its cuticle is forming. It's like, oh, geez, gets a little rigid, and then it starts to acclimate. Grow. Give us those indications. Environmentally, we change its input. Now water has to also shift, and we've got to be striking that balance as we move through these changes in the garden. Water, a big one right now. Right now, the xylem in your vascular tissue is so full of water trying to even that concentration of sugar that accumulated over the last fall, gave us winter hardiness, and is now going to be the battery for four-year growth in the spring that there is just a tremendous pressure. And this is really where we back off of and start to reduce the work on the tree. We're going to come back to that. Let's dive into fertilization. So watering, a big one. Obviously, there is so much to talk about with water. And I'm guessing one thing that you might be asking that we can just cover really quickly when we talk about watering in the spring is four-year misting, trees coming out of the greenhouse. Do I miss them in the environment? What about a tree that I'm worried about? Do I missed it? And I will say this. Coming out of the greenhouse, in the greenhouse, I don't put a lot of four-year misting on a tree unless I have had a significant root reduction. And I know, or I fear, that the four-year mass is going to be needing more water than that root system that I've just worked on or has had some setback can provide to that four-year mass. That's the only time that I'm applying a four-year application of moisture. Again, very minimal. It would probably be a tree on the heat bed. And I want to do that for the period of 7, 10, 14 days max, paying attention to moisture in the soil because I need new roots to form to stop the necessity for that mist. I keep that too wet, now balance of water and oxygen. Respiration can't occur. New roots can't grow. So when we see that, coming from the greenhouse to the outdoors, I love to just hose down that four-year mass. You wash off all the dust and the dryness from the greenhouse. You kind of hydrate that four-year mass, water the roots nice and thoroughly when you move it into the outdoor environment. And now you've reset the system. You reset the entire system from the start. And that's really where I like to see that. If I have a tree start to lose hydration as I move it from that greenhouse semi-protected to full exposure environment, I'll pull it back an environment. If it goes to semi-protected and loses moisture, I'll pull it back into the greenhouse. But if it goes into full exposure and it loses moisture, we see kind of the new growth stop. We see the four-year mass kind of start to have a real sandy, dry texture to it. But you put it back in that partial exposure, you miss that four-year mass, and you help that tree with that delivery of water to its system until that root system has recovered. But for the most part, I steer away from that. Fertilization. Now, fertilization strategy, so important. What are we trying to accomplish? Development, secondary, refinement. The stage of development, what we're asking of the tree, has a huge, huge response to this. We're going to come back to that. And let's just head off the discussion of a repotted tree versus a non-re-potted tree. When we start to talk about the repotted tree, and this ties into exactly what I just talked about, where we said, listen, here's this root. Here I've cut it. I need a compartmentalization of that decay, a callus to form. And from that callus, if I have oxygen and I have water present in the correct balance for that cellular division to be stimulated, which I will say, a little higher concentration of oxygen than we typically will maintain over the course of the season, letting it dry out. Between those pottings, or between those waterings, just a bit. If we do all of that correctly, we get these new roots to form. Now again, spring, low vascular productivity. This tree here, it doesn't want to produce a big callus. All the energy is moving to foyer growth. Daylight length is elongating. Temperature is increasing. Please don't make me allocate my resources towards root growth. And consequently, when we start looking at that, it takes longer for the callus to form. It takes longer for these roots to. harden off with being that secondary priority. If we come in and we dump fertilizer onto the surface of the soil, and we've got our nice organics breaking down good and stinky, flies all over the place. There are larvae in here breaking this down and part of that big, messy, organic mishmash that everybody says is so good for your bonsai, which it is. If we pump that on there, the most soluble portion of that fertilizer is nitrogen in. And nitrogen is also the element that engages the most with that soft, fleshy tissue and has the ability to change the concentration of those dissolved solutes, nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, in the soil, raise that condition above what's in the root, and pull water out of those roots. Those new rootlets, those are going to be almost solid water. When you start talking about that, I mean, you're talking. There's no cuticle on that root. There's no root cap even developed to protect it. It is just a soft, open wound, open, fleshy piece of tissue. And we put that nitrogen, we put that salt in that system. That can be a real problem. This is why I say, listen, repotted trees, I'm in no rush. I'm in no rush. Containerized trees do need to be supplementally nutritioned with fertilizer to be able to grow with strength, continue to engage in the bonsai process. It needs to be strategic, quantity and timing, and strategic in terms of referencing what we're trying to accomplish to work with the tree to achieve those goals. But the tree doesn't need it. And to understand how severe the repotting process is in disrupting the microbial activity, really uprooting, quote unquote, uprooting that tree and causing it to reestablish, give it time. Give it time. Now, how would we know it's time when the tree starts to tell us? Because if the tree is just producing the beginning portions of growth, that's also the tree having just produced a small amount of root to facilitate that expansion. But if it starts to ramp up and get stronger and stronger, that root has now matured and is getting stronger, providing that hydration to drive that growth. And now we see the opportunity. Tree telling us we can start to add supplemental nutrition in the form of fertilization, a light application to begin with to inoculate microbial, a light application to begin with to just begin to introduce that other supplemental content into that water system, which can be very disruptive. But we see the impact. We see the indications of the tree telling us it's time. And if we see the tree continue moving forward, we see that system building, we can start to up our quantity, up our timing. But we ease into that. I'm not in any rush to start fertilizing. I typically don't fertilize for the first three months after a repot, just being totally honest with you. Is that too conservative? There are trees that it's too conservative. Is it necessary? I will tell you this. I have never been bit by not fertilizing, but I have been bit by fertilizing too soon. Now, fertilizing, would it help that tree grow faster, recover quicker? If the tree's root system is ready for it, the supplemental nutrition is going to help that tree grow, because it is there to enhance the efficiency of the metabolic activities. Is the tree going to die because you didn't fertilize it? Definitely not. Absolutely not. Might grow a little bit more slowly, might be a little bit more calm, might not have as much productivity this year. OK. If it comes down to the tree being set back five years, because we fertilized too quickly, versus the tree missing a few months of a slightly more rapid metabolic rate, which you might not, by the end of the season, even be able to track, then I'm going to go ahead and hold back on fertilizer and let the tree do its thing, knowing that I am saving myself an exponential amount of time by not trying to fertilize too quickly. OK. Let's go ahead and go to the potted tree now, because I think this is really where we start, too, with an established root system. And again, fertilizer has to be considered. What are we trying to accomplish? Fertilizer also has to consider, though, what is the tree telling us? So when we talk about, and I'm going to call, instead of potted versus un-potted, I'm going to call this established versus a re-potted, which would be, I said, un-established. OK. Now, when we start to talk about an established tree, now all of a sudden, we don't have a cut site that's compartmentalizing. We have roots that are starting to ramify. We have strong tips that are starting to create structural, big structural roots, and those start to ramify. Oxen is being produced in the tip of these established roots that are showing strength, which is suppressing this root growth behind them. But we have these fine pieces developing in here. And when you pull your tree out of a containerized environment, you oftentimes see those big, thick, coarse roots circling the bottom, circling the wall. And as you get inside of those, you literally have a really fine root that suddenly can turn into this big, massive, weird-looking, quasi-phallic kind of thing, right? It's like this weird, I'm a fine root, and all of a sudden, I've got gigantism, and turned into this big, huge, powerful, white-tipped, cellularly-dividing machine of a root. And it can be that dramatic of a transition. This is the nature of the beast. This is the magic of hormones in oxen. It's like a steroid for that tip of that root becoming a dominant piece. OK. We have a tree that's showing us good, strong growth. We know seasonally, based on the species, what we need to be doing. And again, I'm going to come back to that seasonality of action, water, fertilization, and environment here very, very quickly at the very bottom with growth, OK? But when we start to see that, we start off with a light fertilizer if we have cool daytime temps, but we are starting to see metabolic activity occur in the tree. Temperature stimulates microbial activity. Temperature stimulates the metabolic activity in the tree. And temperature also drives root-related activity that will actualize that fertilizer becoming available. Without microbial, without root activity, it doesn't make sense to fertilize. It doesn't get broken down into a form we can utilize. Organic matter gets dumped into our container without things churning it up and making it usable. And it can have a negative impact. Wait until the tree starts to grow. Wait until you see that first piece of foliar mass emerging. The tree has plenty of stored sugars and starches, OK? It absolutely has the ability to push that growth without any fertilizer, OK? We want to prolong that growth. We want to boost that growth. We want to use that growth, depending on heavy if we're in development, moderate if we're in secondary, and light if we're in refinement over the course of the spring. Your first application across all of those is going to be a light quantity just because of that slow metabolic rate. Once you start to ramp things up, temperatures increase. We see that first application broken down because this is an established tree with microbial. Or maybe, in the case of Mirai, we're trying to enhance microbial so we did get a little bit of fertilizer. We did go ahead and fertilize everything with a light application as we saw them start to grow. And then moved into backing off on my long-needle single flush, really applying and putting the pedal to the metal with my multi and my short-needle single flush. We're just now fertilizing. We've been fertilizing our Engelmann spruce now for, we've had two applications of fertilizer on them. We're just now starting to fertilize some of our Colorado spruce because they're just now starting to push. Engelmann have been pinched and hardened off. And Colorado's are just starting to push. Engelmann have been being fertilized for as long as the tree was indicating. Colorado's haven't indicated until just now. There's several trees out there just now, established trees just starting to grow. They only get fertilizer once we start, right? So that shows you that variability. And really, when we start to think about it, outside of our multi-flush pines and outside of our deciduous trees that we're pinching and trying to get pinching in terms of like a fine ramified Japanese maple or some of our really finer desires and ramification in twigging, outside of not fertilizing those deciduous in the highest degree of refinement in our multi-flush, excuse me, sorry, outside of our short-needled single-flush pines that we don't want to push long needles, and outside of our deciduous and high degree of refinement that we don't want coarse twigging, we're pretty much fertilizing everything as we see that growth begin. Now, it might be a light quantity of fertilization, on a juniper that's in refinement. It might be, as we get into that second application, a heavy quantity on a multi-flush pine that we're trying to boost its energy so we can decandle in the summer. But generally, we are fertilizing everything to a degree, quantity as the adjustment, timing being indicated by the presence of growth. We are fertilizing everything to a degree except for those deciduous in refinement and those long-needle single-flush, like our ponderosa, like our Japanese white pine. Okay? So that's the process from fertilization, understanding the move in that spring wrap-up, understanding the acclimation period of a repotted piece, understanding the necessity to really build the microbial momentum before we hammer it with quantity. It brings us to our growth. Okay? And I just wanted to, I was thinking, like, how do we quantify without specifically talking about every species, the behavior of growth? Okay? And I think this is where the video content gives us a little bit more depth into this, but let's just understand growth over the course of spring and talk about a few of those fertilizer nuances. Okay? So I'm going to start with pines, and I'm going to break my pines down into the three categories, which is long-needle, single, and short-needle, single. Okay? And then we have our multi, multi-flush. And I'm going to talk about this in terms of spring. Again, foliar management, the ability for the foliar mass to be a photosynthetic panel, produce sugars and starches and really drive that battery. Fertilizer is not what's doing that. The foliar mass is what's doing that. Fertilizer is supplementing that. If we want development, five developmental goals, elongation of the branch or trunk, thickening of the branch or trunk, reestablishment of the root system, very much a developmental goal, right? Healing of wounds or expansion of the vascular tissue to get back to the root system. If we want back-butting, right, to really expand that needle mass by the presence of back-butting created by vascular tissue, then we know that our general trend is more needles drive that system to occur, and we can add and supplement that production of needles with a heavier dosage in terms of quantity per location with our fertilizer. So even a long-needle, single-flush pine, if it's in development, coming out of the mountains, we're rebuilding the roots. We're trying to expand the needle mass to get that vascular tissue and get the back buds while we can. As tight in as possible. We're going to fertilize them spring through fall, okay? We're not focused on secondary or refinement objectives. We're not focused on needle reduction, okay? So any of our trees that are in development, pine, juniper, elongating species, deciduous, broad-leafed evergreen, if you are trying to achieve developmental goals, we will fertilize a little bit more heavily. I'm going to go ahead and make an asterisk there and say, hey listen, if it was a standard repot on a refined tree, then we're not trying to rebuild a root system with this aggressive fertilization that we would be looking for on our other trees, right? We're going to stay light and really accommodate staying in refinement, okay? I'll just make that side note. Because saying like we're in development, rebuilding roots is development, and now all of a sudden you've got a refined tree that you don't need to rebuild the roots. They're there. You just did a standard repot to improve water percolation. Okay, cool. Don't hammer that with fertilizer, right? Okay? So with our pines though, growth management. Long-needle. Single-flush pine, we don't want to be taking needles away. In development, we don't want to be taking needles away. In secondary, we don't want to be taking needles away, right? So when we're talking long-needle, single-flush pines, we're not pinching, we're not decandling, and we're not reducing needles. We're using that growth to generate interior ramification, continue to drive strength. We will adapt them and adjust their strength with pruning in the long run, okay? Short-needle, single-flush, this is where we get into pinching. Distributing the energy from the tip to the interior, strong to medium, medium to weak, for trees that are in refinement, okay? For trees that are in refinement. Trees that are in secondary, elongating that candle, allowing it to harden off towards the end of spring, early summer, coming back and pruning to the desired length if you've achieved your goals there, that transitions you into refinement. Development, full elongation, we're not controlling that growth, okay? So that kind of breaks it down, but that pinching process that we've been hammering on so much, there's so many videos in the library that deal with pinching. To try and clarify it, it can be rather complex, but we have had quite a bit of repetition, and we're going to continue. We're going to be doing another post-flush hardened pruning on our single-flush pines on some mini streams later in the month, okay? And then our multi-flush, this is really when we get into the nuance, okay? Now, developmentally, if we're in development, we're not thinking decandling. We're feeding aggressively to try and drive development, expand needle mass, thicken, heal, all of those things. Okay, that sits outside of it. But if we are in the refinement process, which means we're going to be decandling, right? And we get into this kind of annual cycle where we start to talk about sort of these milestones, right? Here in the spring, if we've already done the balancing of the needle mass, then we don't have anything to do here. Okay, we're going to be fertilizing over the course of that spring to summer transition. We know we're building to decandle of the candles and a needle reduction in that summertime. In order to do that, we need to know when we're going to be pruning or decandling those shoots, okay? Because with multi-flush pines, we work back from that moment to figure out our calendar and our schedule. And this is the only species that I do this with. Okay, so I typically use June 1st where we are in the Pacific Northwest as a jumping off point. And that's a reference in Japan. It was June 15th at Mr. Kimura's in the southern portions of North America and places closer to the equator. You might be more like end of June or beginning of July, okay? So you've got to figure this out. But one month prior, this is my last application. That's my last application because four weeks for the nitrogen to be gone, the reason I'm decandling shorter needles, shorter internodes, I don't want nitrogen driving elongation and growth. So I have one application here four weeks prior, one application here four weeks prior, one application here. June 1st is when I'm decandling. Four weeks prior was my last application on May 1st. Four weeks prior was my last application on April 1st. And four weeks prior was my first application on March 1st. The March is always the flexible one. I need at least two applications to be able to successfully decandle, okay? I need at least two. If there's a repotted tree, things like that, can I squeeze two in there? Does the tree give me the notions, indications that it's strong enough to handle this? Fertilizer is not going to drive that to happen. The tree needs to have the root system to support that operation. You have that indication. We get that fertilizer on because of that indication, and we get two, cool, decandle. You can't, you get one, pull back, pull back. Tree's not going to have the strength. Unless the candles are so aggressively long, you're going to want to pull back, okay? But this year we got three, March, April, and May. We just put on our last application. I literally was finishing it over the weekend. I've got a few more trees to touch this week to get that last application on, and then I will be done once we decandle in June. I won't be fertilizing again because we want shorter needles, shorter internodes, okay? So we're right in that middle of September. Second flush of growth is hardened off here, okay? We see the needles darken, sharpen. We see the cuticle form. Now we get two applications in the fall, okay? And we'll come back and talk about that, but fertilization in the fall, a big one, and then we get to that fall work, shoot select, needle pluck, right? We've talked about how that can blend into spring work depending on where you are and whether your black pine is going to stay outside. All you need to know right now, your fertilizer needs to be timed and timed impeccably to be able to give you what you want, which is shorter needles, shorter internodes, if you're in refinement. You're in secondary, you're in development, hammer it with fertilization, okay? Totally legitimate, all right? So that's our pines, and we talked a lot about just the universal nature of development, secondary, kind of having that more aggressive, right, secondary moderate, developmental, more heavy application quantity per location, but timing, wise, that secondary and that development really is letting the tree accumulate more meat, more beef, more growth, okay? So in this spring wrap-up right now where we're at, we're not pinching, we're not managing multi-flush pine, you're going to be paying attention to fertilization strategy, okay? Now when we move to junipers, junipers at this time of year, hands off, okay? Hands off. Now I'm going to say hands off and then I'm going to talk to you about how we work on junipers at this time of year, which is going to be really confusing for everybody. But follow me on this in terms of the fact, okay? When we talk junipers, junipers, strength in junipers lies in the foliar mass. Tree has stored energy, very limited vascular tissue to store it in, very thin, fine root system. Even the stored energy exists a lot out in the branching and the foliar mass of the tree, okay? When it produces that new foliar mass, that new foliar mass is what generates the vascular tissue, is what generates the expansion of the root system to perpetuate that growth. That first flush in the spring, we don't want to be following that. We don't want to be pinching, we don't want to be cutting, we don't want to be reducing. We don't want to tamper with the foliar mass of junipers in the spring. You have to let them grow. You have to let them establish and harden off back in energy positive and now we can rock, okay? That's end of spring, early summer. We don't touch our junipers right now. We need that foliar mass. Now we're going to control it. The size of the container is going to control it. The work we've been doing last year dovetails into this year and its response. But the way that we fertilize is the biggie. Okay? Because when we talk juniper, strength comes from the foliage, foliage transpiring, driving water uptake, nutrients hitching a ride on that water molecule. It's a very free system with a juniper, right? And when we see junipers form that heartwood, that red core, that is the juniper taking all of the excessive material that's hitching a ride on water because of the foliar mass driving that water movement, right, less discriminating in what's on the water. Boom, something bad, I'm going to lock it up in resin in the core. I'm going to expand that. I'm going to expand my heartwood. I'm going to expand my central stem. That's my protective mechanism to be able to move water indiscriminately. I have to be able to take the toxicity out of it and store it somewhere. I'm going to lock it up in sap. Preserve my core and dump all of that garbage there. Okay? So that is where when we start to talk about fertilizer having a major impact, if it's a non-discriminating or lowly discriminating in the root system, it's going to take in as much quantity as you give it and that is going to have a very big impact. On that foliar mass and on that quality as well as quantity of growth, if you're in refinement, low quantities, short internodes, tight compact growth, that's what we're looking for. Fertilizer can definitely offset the reductive capacity of the bonsai container. Be very careful with junipers. Okay? So when we talk junipers, obviously if we're going to sit here and talk about them, we do have to talk about the work that we can do in the spring season. Okay? And so we're going to start to talk about this high water mobility. Let's call this, you know, high water mobility. Late winter. And let's call this early summer. Just to give us that timeframe. Late winter, we see the color. We see the color return to the foliar mass. Winter color, the brown, the yellow, the purplish color. Leaves, it greens back up. That's our indication. We have a window here to do structural styling. Once we start to see new fleshy growth, right? Once we see that green tip emerging, automatically, we say boom, no more styling. This is the no touch zone and strategic fertilization for the foliar mass. Okay? But what we do have the ability with that massive movement of water is we do have the ability to do live vein reduction right now. Because we're accumulating foliar mass and we understand in the system of things, that accumulation of that foliar mass is what is going to continue to move water through the central core of xylem. Even when we take the cambial layer and the phloem off, which is when we reduce the living tissue, we reduce the cambium, we reduce the phloem, we leave the xylem, we leave the water conductive tissue intact. It's heavily loaded because of that sugar concentration, water trying to even that out. This system is set up for us to very easily be able to allow the tree to peel as we reduce it. Obviously the tree is not trying to shed its live vein. We're doing this to expand deadwood quantities, reduce the live vein quantities, and improve the interaction. of live and dead the visual quality that exists in junipers okay so we're reducing that the the tree will dictate the pattern that that live vein peels and now we can allow sap flow to create the perfect reduction of the living tissue to enhance that aesthetic okay this is an ideal time of year for that for your mass is going to cause the remaining cambial layer the remaining phloem the remaining living tissue after that reduction it's gonna cause that to grow directionally it's gonna thicken because all that for your mass now we're not touching because we understand this system is funneling into a reduced living tissue causing that living tissue to further grow right and this is the magic of being able to guide that live vein aesthetically over the course of time and change the direction of the tree in the more prolonged approach to bonsai right and I would say 50% reduction is safe 70% starts to get a little bit dangerous right we do start to get a little bit dangerous right we do start to get a little bit dangerous right we do start to get a little bit dangerous right we do start to get a little bit dangerous in terms of getting the roots the dangerous in terms of getting the roots the dangerous in terms of getting the roots the sugar starch content that they need sugar starch content that they need sugar starch content that they need to continue supporting that water uptake to continue supporting that water uptake to continue supporting that water uptake this is junipers okay now when we get this is junipers okay now when we get this is junipers okay now when we get into elongating species elongating into elongating species elongating into elongating species elongating species are magical at this time of year species are magical at this time of year species are magical at this time of year right all of the growth coming out it's right all of the growth coming out it's right all of the growth coming out it's super bright and brilliant because these super bright and brilliant because these high water transpiration. I mean, when you look at the new growth of, say, a long-needle single-flush pine, it's not that exciting. Ponderosa needles aren't so vibrantly green and different, and lodgepole pines aren't so vibrantly green and different. They're just a little bit of a different shade of green. When you look at elongating species, you're like, that's different, right? Like, there's a vitality. There's a softness. There's a brightness to it. It almost glows. And it's awesome. And then it keeps growing. And we're like, oh, that was cool when it looked, when it was like a little light bulb, because that made it look really neat. But now the shape that I had seen in this tree, that light bulb turned into this big, elongating shoot, and I can't see shit. I can't see anything. Like, what happened to my tree? Boom. This is when we come back in, okay? Now, again, development, we're not touching. Secondary, we're elongating, hardening off, post-flush-hardened pruning. We're going to come back and do some more sprouting. I talked about it with the short-needle single-flush pines. We'll do some post-flush-hardened pruning on short-needle single-flush pines. We'll do post-flush-hardened pruning on spruce as well in a mini-stream in another, I think, another couple weeks. Just to have that repetition. We did it on an Engelman. It's in the library. We're going to do it on a Colorado this time and just talk about those nuances, okay? But when we are talking refinement, pinching, okay? And that pinching, understanding this pinching. Again, this has been really tough. We just did the spruce growth management, okay? You have to have... You have to have that shape. And if you have this foyer mass at the tip and you have this elongating shoot, and that's as far as that shoot has elongated, there is nothing to pinch there, okay? I'm looking for this before I start to pinch. I'm looking for a gross, over, gross, over, you know, ridiculously sized, over-proportioned piece of new vegetative growth before I ever pinch. Because if I'm pinching small pieces, they don't have to be that big. They don't have the strength. They're not growing outside of the aesthetic that would trigger the action of the pinch. There's no reason, and in fact, you're setting the tree back by pinching that. But if you don't pinch these strong pieces, strong get stronger, weak get weaker, and we don't develop that interior ramification. We don't enhance that density, and we only get a tree that proportionally is getting bigger and bigger and bigger every year, okay? Now, we could allow it to elongate, post-flush, harden, prune, come back and prune that. But if you don't have the strength, but we still are just controlling the length of that growth, we're pushing that energy into the interior, but it's got to wait till next year to do anything with it. And guess what? That same tip that you post-flush, harden, prune next year, if you're not pinching it, will take over as a strong tip again, and those interiors don't grow. Pinching is what gives us density. It's what gives us ramification. But again, if your tree is not strong enough to be creating disproportionately vigorous growth, there is no pinching. And pinching, when we do pinch, we are only pinching the pieces growing outside of. There may be buds in here that are opening. We don't want to pinch that interior bud. We don't want to pinch that interior bud until it gets outside of that silhouette. Now we pinch it to the silhouette as our guidepost. We've just enhanced, instead of having two branches at the outer edge of that silhouette, we now have three. That's an increase in density. That's an increase in the maturation of our ramification. That is why we pinch, okay? Elongating species big from this perspective. All right. And last but not least, when we start to talk about growth, talking about our broadleafs and our deciduous, and I'm just going to go deciduous. It applies to our broadleaf. And you saw, if you watch the sagebrush, the artemisia stream, here's a broadleaf species that had hardened off earlier than my other broadleafs. I haven't even, my coastal oaks are just starting to open up right now. My Quercus agrifolias and my scrub oaks are also just starting to open up right now. Yet my artemisia needed to be pruned when it needed to be pruned. That initial flush hardens off. We see that cuticle form, color change, rigidity returns to that leaf mass. This is your point where you're now back in an energy positive, okay? For deciduous, we talk about, for our large leaf deciduous varieties, okay? Large leaf. When we're talking about the Chinese quinces, when we're talking about the true Japanese quince, canameles, not chojubai, but the true Japanese quince, canameles. When we're talking about beech, when we're talking about larger varieties of hornbeam, when we're talking about this coarser foliar mass, all of a sudden, we get to this point towards the tail end of spring where we start to talk about post-flush, and post-flush might be four inner nodes that have hardened off, right? Four inner nodes that have hardened off. We still have another four or five inner nodes that are still soft and fleshy, but we say post-flush first, three, four, five inner nodes harden off, post-flush harden prune, okay? And now we come back in, we're pruning back that length to control that from continuing to run, but we also have to combine that plus, plus partial, is that out? Oh, it's still on the screen. Plus partial defoliation, okay? And that's the biggie for our large leaf varieties. Prune plus a partial defoliation. And when we say partial defoliation, 70%. Give me a hefty enough defoliation that we reduce the solar panels producing energy for the tree, which will allow the tree or cause the tree to have to produce more solar panels. Now, think about this, okay? I have a branch, I've got big leaves on this branch, okay? And we come back in and we cut off that tip. Well, if we don't do anything to that leaf mass right there, we've only lost 30% of sugar productivity, and if it's a big leaf, 60%, the tree will never produce another piece of growth. The tree's going to sit there and it's going to say, well, with these big leaves, I'm able to produce enough sugars to sustain myself. I'm not going to go ahead and go through the effort of it. But when we come back in and now we take these down, right? We call them, we call them, we call them, we call them, we call them, and they're going to come back to us right there, and we do this. And now we're going to have a 70% reduction in the photosynthetic mass, and the tree says, I have to grow. Well, guess what? The only place it can grow is branching that will support new leaves, and the only place that branching occurs from are the adventitious buds right in the crotch of those leaves. So by partially defoliating, instead of sitting stagnant, it's forced to produce a twig, which now has leaves. These leaves are smaller, inner nodes are shorter, where there was one, we now have two, and this is the bifurcation of deciduous trees with larger leaf mass and how we get that ramification to occur. Now, when we transition to the smaller leaf mass, Chinese elms, right, some of them are going to be a little bit bigger when they're in development. As we get more twig mass built up and can find the root mass, we start to see smaller leaves. This is inherent. This is the effect of the bonsai container. When we talk about pomegranates, when we talk about some of our better leaf varieties of hornbeams, some of the Korean hornbeams, nice small leaves, nice tight and compact, we don't need to partially defoliate. Just by coming in and adjusting the length of that branch, if you've got three or four internodes that are hardened off and you're taking off four or five internodes that are soft, right, you are effectively reducing the photosynthetic surface area significantly. And as a tree gains momentum in the spring, the initial leaves tend to be a little smaller and they tend to get bigger as that sugar gets pushed into more cellular division. Oftentimes, with smaller leaf varieties, we cut back and that's enough to cause them to produce. With that small leaf, I need more of them out there. I'm going to produce another flush of twigging and we don't have to reduce the mass of the leaves that we leave behind, right? And that's one of the really beautiful things. Trident maples, nuanced, where we might pull the whole leaf off and leave 30% of just leaves on, bigger leaves coming off of the exterior. Japanese maples, we're going to pick one of every two leaves. Partial defoliation, that's only 50%. If we still are with a tree that has a large leaf for the Japanese maple, we might come through and prune the fingers off of that 50% we leave behind. Now we get that 70% reduction and that next flush of ramification. It is nuanced from this perspective. But if we just understand the simple fact that that partial defoliation and pruning after that growth hardens, that is a big moment for deciduous. Now, as they're pushing in the spring, do we want to pinch? Do we want to pinch? Okay. Pinching on deciduous has the same impact. Pinching as a technique, transition energy from the tip to the interior, strong to medium, medium to weak. If we have a species that has a lot of buds mounted, starts to grow, and just the tip of that is growing, you've got to pinch it, okay? Sometimes beech will all open at once with a well-balanced energy distribution. Sometimes beech, only one shoot at the tip will push. You've got to pinch it. That pushes that energy, removes that hormonal suppression. Now we get those buds. That haven't pushed or need that energy transition, we get those to grow, and we get all of those buds producing. That would be why we would pinch. Good even distribution of growth, nothing excessively elongating. All buds are activated. I'm not going to pinch. Leaves will be smaller because of energy distribution already with all buds opening at once, distributing that influx of sugars. We should maintain tight internodes. There's nothing to stimulate by pinching. Better to let it accumulate, get that energy back in its system. Boom, prune and partially defoliate, and you get another flush, and that flush is finer, okay? I generally don't start really fertilizing my deciduous trees until I've done that post-flush hardened pruning and partial defoliation, right? And that's when I'll go in with a lighter application on trees in refinement, a moderate on trees that I'm building secondary that I'm wiring out and needing more thickness, and heavy on a tree that I'm trying to just pump that energy and get big branches, healing roots, all the stuff, okay? That was comprehensive. That was a lot. That was a lot of information. You see where a lecture allows all of that systematic information to come out. It's very succinct. I think about this stuff in my sleep. I dream about it. I think about it as I was driving up to get power poles. I was thinking, how am I going to talk about this period of time and make it really organized, nice, smooth, and transitional, maintain priority on the subject matter, but really help you understand the holistic nature of it? Nature of this time of year, and hopefully I did a good job. Let Sam know if it was functional, if it was confusing, if it was scattered, if you needed more, you needed less, you never want to see this again, or you would like to and benefited from it so that we have a clear indication of how that went. Okay, we talked environment. Just to recap, really having control, reading the tree, using the tree's actions to tell us how we transition through those environments. Okay, we talked about watering, the necessity, feed, excuse me, quench the thirst, a very vigorous trees, really watch trees that are showing you signs, slow, potential issues in the roots. We know we have to handle repotted trees specifically well with the watering to get them reestablished. Fertilization, again, I don't want to degrade or in any way take away the significance of fertilization, but I do want to remove it, and I want to focus on hammering it until nobody thinks that fertilizer is what you have to do, and nobody thinks that fertilizer is how you solve problems. Okay, because it is not, and it is a problem maker if we don't have the system set up with proper watering first, but once we get that system set up, fertilizer is a gas pedal that gives you almost complete control with your foyer management skills being combined together. Okay, and then we talk to growth, different species, different nuances, trying to really understand that action in this. Move towards growth. We have the transition. We have the application of horticulture. We have the understanding of how to accomplish our desires and aesthetics, and that is, comprehensively, the spring wrap-up. I hope you have a good rest of your day. Good luck in your spring transitions. We'll continue to work hard, and wishing everybody health and all the best. Thanks. 
