What's going on, you guys? Happy to be back in the studio. Got home late last night from Belgium and the trophy. It was so uplifting. I mean, like, the positive energy of bonsai in Europe is undeniable. It's exactly why I continue to really value the trophy, the European bonsai community, and all the positivity. I'm just really super grateful. It was very humbling, the response to being there, all of the Mariah Live members that I got to put a face to the name. Some of you I got to talk with in length if you found me at a quiet moment. You know, every year that I, every time I go to the trophy, I'm always, like, trying to find a way to get it all done. I did not get to walk through the vendor or the traders area once. I walked through to talk. I talked to Matias and Nastia and the Slovenian crew when everybody was packing up late Sunday. That was the first time that I even got to see the vendor area and everybody was packing up and leaving and drinking copious quantities of beer, which I willingly partook in. Yeah, and it was quite enjoyable. Me and the fam then went and had some fun in Belgium. We got home late last night, and here I am. Let's do it, right? So, the lecture series. I'm going to keep it pretty concise today because this isn't something that you haven't heard, but taking the knowledge that I provide and then putting it to use, actually creating actionable items of how the knowledge, balance of water and oxygen, nutrition, scopes of work, etc. Putting it to use means having a firm, substantial foundation and anchoring of the decision-making behind these actions that we have in this very pivotal, right now is a pivotal, time of year because for a lot of our trees, primarily our broadleaf deciduous, but even when we start to look at our conifers, we're going to be waiting another four to six months before we can come back and start to do initial stylings, work on those trees, trees and refinement. You know, maybe we need to be repotting them, maybe not. How do I know? What do I do after repotting? How do I feed? What about that balance of water and oxygen? All of these things and today is a more nuts and bolts discussion of how do we take, okay, this balance of water and oxygen, this is a beautiful idea, I still don't totally comprehend it because there's so many things that impact it and how do I put it into action this spring? How do I decide to repot? What about styling? When do I style? Can I style and repot? When's the next time I can touch my tree? How do I feed after, right? This spring decision-making is very important to have the knowledge and then make it actionable, make the knowledge work for you. And let the tree guide the dance in terms of reading the tree, speaking the language of bonsai, and taking action in a positive way that moves this tree forward, right? And the concept that I always like to give people in spring is this is the time to be in the workshop early. This is the time to stay in the workshop late. This is the time to be repotting, you know, regardless of what it takes to get it done because if we don't do it now, whatever we thought we needed to do and didn't get to, we have to wait an entire year. And we've got to deal with the repercussions or implications of not having taken advantage of the timing. Okay, so I just want to start out by saying this is, this should be a discussion of how we take Mirai-level knowledge and we start to use it for our bonsai practice to enhance and improve our trees, to evolve upon what we've done and get better, right? Use this knowledge to get better. And I'll just be really honest with you. It's been warm all I've been gone. It's going to be very warm today. I'm looking at the exact same situation in my garden and I'm starting to prioritize and plan. Okay, I've got to get the larches wired very, very quickly. Any of them that need to be repotted, that's coming up. I've got to get my bald cypresses and my deciduous conifers, dawn redwoods ready to go because if I don't, I'm going to have to wait almost another year to be able to do this again. Do I repot them? Do I style them? Do I repot them and style them? Herein lies spring decision-making. Okay, so I want to start out with water just because this is such a pivotal time of year for water. Coming out of the, you know, cold wet or potentially dormant winter time, we see temperatures start to warm up. We see daylight length expand. I've got a greenhouse which gives me the ability with so many trees to start repotting earlier. A lot of us are waiting without the greenhouse or a place to put our trees to do the repotting process. But how is water starting to work here? And we have to understand, right, that our focus is always on striking a balance of H2O, and O2, right? And what this means in the repotting process is we're considering soil composition, the pumice lava akadama in differing proportions or potentially for broadleaf deciduous or broadleaf trees or deciduous conifers. Maybe we're going with a solid akadama soil composition. And obviously in terms of the balance of water and oxygen, the particle size discussion impacts the behavior of our tree from now over the course of the time, until we repot again, right? And we do have to understand that trees that have been in a bonsai container for a long time that are established have actively scaled that akadama. There's maybe still room, right, in the container for new root growth to occur. Or maybe we're reaching a point where that room and that space has been occupied and that tree needs a major revamping of the soil system to create the space to continue to perpetuate its vigor and grow. But that balance of water and oxygen, soil composition, particle size, and then here's a big one that we don't often talk about is the stage of development, right? Because we may be making repotting decisions. And let me just go back and say in terms of repotting, okay, and this feels like a tangent, we'll come back to this when we talk about repotting specifically in the decision-making process for the spring. Reasons to repot are loss of percolation, where water is not penetrating the system, which either suggests one of two things, right? It suggests that we have an accumulation of organic matter, roots, moss, and broken down akadama on the surface. And if that's the case, our first move whenever we lose percolation is to surface clean with a vacuum, surface clean and see the state of the soil. Now I will tell you this, as the quality of akadama gets slightly less stable, and when I was on stage with Koji Hiramatsu at the trophy, I asked this question, is he seeing akadama decrease in quality in Japan? And it was interesting his response, which was no, akadama is still of a very high quality. But I do know from resources closer to Koji that he has had the conversation with local akadama vendors that he's not able to get the same quality of akadama. Was this a discussion on stage where he didn't want to say Japan is losing its quality soil, or is that how he actually thinks? And then the sources that have told me that bonsai professionals in Japan are also struggling with quality akadama, was that source misunderstanding the nuances of the conversation and the language barrier that existed? Tough to know, but here's what I know. The akadama being imported into Europe, being imported into the United States, being imported into other countries outside of Japan, and the Japanese bonsai community is a lower quality of akadama regardless of what brand you're using. And therefore, when we start to see the loss of percolation, the surface cleaning, and for me, a lot of trees that have lost percolation, I'm vacuum cleaning a lot of trees as I'm cleaning their deadwood, as I'm getting them ready to potentially repot based on what I see in the vacuum cleaning process, that all a lot of the trees that I have need are a cleaning of the surface, adding that aggregate soil back once I get down to a well-structured containerized environment and soil particle composition, and then top dressing it again, and it's done. That's all it needed. And giving it the ability for water to freely move into the sheen and for oxygen to permeate the system to give us that balance of water and oxygen. Again, we're talking about water, but we can't underestimate in the spring season that this is our major time to be able to take out field soil, whether we do a full repot or whether we vacuum clean to revamp the containerized system, whether we choose to repot or not. And all of that has a tremendous impact on how our tree is capable of being cultivated with health, minimizing disease and pest issues as a result of improving the oxygen water system inside of the container based on the actions we perform right now. What you do right now, you will only see the benefit of as this tree moves into vascular growth in the fall. Okay, that is how long it takes. But if we don't do it now, we will not achieve the root growth and the increase in health over the course of the year that leads to better back budding, a healthier system, over the course of the year, and specifically a robust addition of root mass come vascular productivity over the course of the fall. Okay, so with this balance of water and oxygen, soil composition, particle size, the stage of development, how long has it been in the container, right? And when we talk about stage of development, the finer the number of branches, the more needles or leaf mass on the tree, the finer the root system in the containerized environment. This is the mirror reflection. Development in the branching is development in the root system. Secondary in the branching is secondary in the root system. Tertiary in the branching is tertiary in the root system. That scalability in addition of woody mass and leaf mass, whether it's needles or leaves, on the tree definitively impacts our decisions and how we go about watering that tree, right? Because we say, listen, in terms of water, when we're thinking about these things, we're looking at the health and vigor, how much growth is a tree adding, how much foliar mass does it have, and what is the reservoir, container size of this tree with the way that the water is working, how long it's been in the container, how much ramification woody mass and needle mass it has on the tree, proportional to the reservoir of water it is going to have. Is that sustainable for you over the course of this season, knowing the tree is going to add more and you've got to keep up with and maximize, hopefully not on your back foot in a reactive responsive way, but a proactive front foot taking advantage of the opportunity to get the tree into a position where it continues to move forward with health. It is far better to repot a healthy tree proactively than to go in and try to repot a tree that's lost its vigor because we let it go a year too long. This is one of those moments where the repotting operation helps us continue to reconcile the balance of water and oxygen. Now, we have to understand that the oxygen in the system contributes to respiration because when we talk about photosynthesis, right? Water contributes to photosynthesis. Along with carbon dioxide, which is exchanged through the stomata of the leaf mass that generates sugars. Those sugars are moved down into the root system over the course of the daytime growing period, right? In the springtime, a lot of that sugar is pumped out of the roots into the soil system as root exudates, which facilitates the expansion of biology, beneficial fungi that exist and engage in mycorrhizae, the relationship between root and biology, that enhances surface area water and nutritional uptake, as well as bacteria, hopefully beneficial. If we let a tree go too long, it stays too wet. The okadama is broken down. There's not enough oxygen. We see bacteria in a bad form accumulate, start to chew up the soil composition, deplete the carbon content, breakdown of the soil, and now we've got an imbalance of water and oxygen. Good bacteria, just like good fungi, balance of water and oxygen, good bacteria, contributing to the endo-ecto relationship, right? And expanding the tree's ability. And again, I cannot urge you enough to listen to the Karen O'Hanlon podcast from a few years ago, where she breaks down beneficial biology and how we foster that in the containerized environment. Okay, so we're looking at health, bigger, size of the canopy, size of the reservoir, stage of development, taking all of those things into account when we look at how the water and oxygen are existing and engaging in the system. As your tree drying out, quickly, or is it taking a long time to dry out, right? What do we do with each of those systems? Depends on what's causing the problem to occur, which takes us back to the reasons to repot. Loss of percolation, decomposition. Decomposition would suggest that we have had passive breakdown of the okadama, loss of the oxygen spaces. Imbalance of water and oxygen means less oxygen in the system. Again, that oxygen in the root system contributes to respiration. Sugars and starches are moved the photosynthetic mass in the canopy down into the root system. Exudates are expelled from the roots. Okay, but the big one here, in order for respiration to occur in the roots, the tree has to have available oxygen. And when we say respiration, the Krebs cycle or the dark cycle, which occurs at night, now the tree absorbs that oxygen in the root system, uses that oxygen to synthesize the, come on now, NPK, phosphorus. To synthesize the phosphorus available as supplemental nutrition and turn that sugar, that short-term potential energy, into long-term usable stored energy, right? Now, phosphorus is the central molecule of energy in human beings, in plants. In order to be able to use that phosphorus as energy, we have to have oxygen that empowers the Krebs cycle or the dark cycle of respiration to occur. And we need to turn that sugar that's there sitting there, waiting to be turned into energy that propels, grows with that oxygen. We've got to turn that phosphorus into stored usable forms of energy that allows and is usable for the growth. That is where the balance of water and oxygen is so important. Now, a lot of students recently have said, hey, listen, this concept of a balance of water and oxygen is good. I understand, I need water, I need oxygen, right? But how do I achieve that? And this is where you have to pull in all of the systems from Mirai to understand, okay? Because we do recognize, right, this is going to go deep here and I'm going to start to tie in energy and I'm going to start to tie in supplemental nutrition to contribute to this conversation because it's nice to keep them separate and it's neat to keep them separate, but in all reality, they all dovetail together very beautifully. When we look at this system of winter hardiness, where we know that at the peak of winter dormancy, which is January in the Northern Hemisphere, is June in the Southern Hemisphere, okay? So we say January or June, obviously the Southern Hemisphere is in the peak of their summer season, maybe even starting to move into fall. We are at the peak starting to move into spring in the Northern Hemisphere, okay? So we're going to talk about January specifically for this discussion. We are hitting a maximum amount of stored energy, which says, okay, maybe my plant now, with all the stored sugars and starches and ionic content that are held inside of the vacuole of the cell, we are reaching a point where there's so much energy and so much stored dissolved solutes in that cell that that water, freezes at a lower and lower temperature, the antifreeze of the tree, but we recognize as daylight length expands and temperature expands, now the tree starts taking in more water, increasing its water content in the tree, which ultimately is moving those sugars and starches cell to cell up to the growing tips to push that energy into the apical meristems or those growth tips to produce the new leaf mass, needle mass that that tree stored all of that energy for last fall, continued to accumulate over the winter time, and is now going to start to move into the growing tips of your tree. When we see buds start to swell, we should see water utilization start to increase because the tree is using that water to distribute that, it's starting to transpire with more sun and longer daylight length, and the bud swelling suggests that there is more and more sugar being delivered to that tip to allow for that cellular expansion that creates that new leaf and needle mass. So we are just starting to see water utilization start to ramp up, but we also have root growth taking place at this time of year, minimal compared to the fall vascular productive season, but all of our trees roots start to become active, new root growth, white tips start to be present when we're repotting, potentially earlier than now, but definitively starting to see that in the Northern Hemisphere across the majority of our species right now, and with the presence of that new tissue being produced, that root growth taking place, we have to have oxygen in the system while we are also understanding that water is becoming more important, okay? And so when we apply this functional knowledge to actionable items, when I'm in the greenhouse, trees that were staying wet for a week or two between waterings are now drying out every three to four days, right? And we recognize, okay, so I've got to start to pay more attention right now. I don't have new growth on any of my trees yet at Moriah. Although there are deciduous trees that are threatening to start to open, which is a total nightmare for me, but nevertheless, once that starts to open and we start to get the actualization of plant tissue where we're spending the storage sugars and starches, that tissue in its expansion and production lacks the cuticle, lacks the waxy covering that prevents excess transpiration. The water is moving the resources. The water is cooling the plant with greater temperature and sunlight, exposure. The water is continuing to hydrate and contribute to photosynthesis, even without leaf mass, but especially with leaf mass. We have double duty of water to hydrate, to produce, to deliver. We've got to be on point, but we still have root growth, which means we've got to let the tree dry out between waterings at these times of year where we don't have intense leaf mass on the tree, where we don't have tremendously hot temperatures. It's the perfect time of year to be letting the tree dry out between waterings, but be sensitive to the increased water needs of metabolic activity, ramping up in response to environmental conditions, okay? And again, the way that we adjust on a physical level, the ability for water and oxygen to exist in the system is by our soil composition, by our choice of particle sizes for the given tree, as well as considering the stage of development, and how much tissue and needle mass is going to need that resource, the health and vigor of the tree, the size of canopy, the scale of the container or reservoir of water supplying the tree with those resources. We put all of that together. Every time we water, we come to a tree and we say, it's damp, it's not dry, right? What do I do in this situation? If it's wet, it's easy. We don't water. If it's dry, it's easy. We do water. It's damp. That's the moment of actionable knowledge applied to this tree to understand where we're at. It's damp. I'm going to be gone for the rest of the day. I know this tree is entering a stage of more water utilization. Cloudy and overcast, it's going to rain a little later. It's damp. I'm not coming home for six hours. Do I water? No, not on this day, okay? It's damp. I'm going to be gone for six hours. It's going to be sunny and 65 degrees. Do I water? In this instance, I water, okay? I know that water is serving a purpose and function and I'm seeing the behavior of the tree ramping up its water utilization. Dry, sunny, warm, trees starting to expand, buds are swelling, things are happening. I have to water at this time of year, right? And this is really where the actionable item of watering from now over the course of the growing season until fall is all about seizing the moment when you're in your garden with your trees for prolonged periods of time. To be able to say, because I'm striking the balance of water and oxygen, every time that I can let the tree dry out and then be present to rehydrate it, every time that I have the ability to load the system with oxygen, I'm going to take that opportunity. I'm going to take that opportunity to load that system with oxygen so that I can have the oxygen present to engage with respiration that turns the potential energy of sugar into usable stored energy that can propel that tree. That's growth. And if we want to think about this even further, I've never really spoken about this, but it's something that I've played with a lot more, that I considered a lot in Japan, that people have asked me about. But if you said, my tree is damp and it's 6 p.m. in the evening time and it's dark right now, do I want to water? No, no, I don't. Because if I can leave that oxygen in the system over the course of the night time, that is when the oxygen is used by the roots to transition that sugar into usable forms of energy. If I have the capacity to leave the tree without water over the evening time, I'm going to take advantage of that opportunity knowing that's when the oxygen is most functional for our tree. Now, I say that, but that comes with the caveat that I never leave a tree dry. I never leave a tree bone dry saying, okay, well, I need the oxygen in the system. Okay, but water is the most important thing. When you talk about quantity of oxygen, to engage in the respiration process, you're saying 7% to 9% oxygen in the soil system is the ideal range to propel respiration to happen at its max rate. Okay, I'm not talking 50% oxygen. I'm not talking 75% oxygen. That is where we start to get into the stomata closing, no more carbon or gaseous exchange taking place. We can start to actually impair the growth or stunt the growth of our tree. Now, maybe that's what we want. I'm not going to talk about that. You know me. Always keep your tree as strong as possible. It will take care of the rest. I don't want to intentionally weaken a tree through the starving of resources and the starving of water if I can avoid it. But if we are in that situation, again, making a decision of do I water, do I not, a damp tree or even a slightly dry tree, maybe we don't have tremendous wind. Maybe the relative humidity is very high. We're considering all of these things in the decision-making process. It's nighttime. I know I want to seize the opportunity for oxygen in that system to equal root growth as a result of choosing to hold off on water, knowing tomorrow I can come back and water in the morning, rehydrate the tree after it's gone through that vascular period of productivity in the darker hours of our 24-hour cycle, okay? So a lot of things to tuck in there as actionable. We have the activity of watering and the decision-making based on our presence and ability to respond to an increasing, increasing use of water as temperature and daylight length ramps up. We also have this notion of oxygen in the system over the darker periods of the evening and nighttime where we want to be very considerate of do we water, do we not, and when do we water to take advantage of this system. We never leave a tree dry with the notion that we're doing something positive for the tree. But we definitely would choose to not water at certain times knowing that that oxygen in the system over the evening time is what allows us to maximize our energy product activity, okay? So just thinking about this, the evacuation of the cellular structure and we start to recognize, oh my gosh, it's the end of February. We are going to have more frost, freezes, et cetera. I've got 30 deciduous trees that are pushing buds that look like they want to start to turn into leaf mass. One singular cold snap would stop that process from continuing. The tree has not lost its winter hardiness. But I start to look at knowing that my winter tolerance or my temperature tolerance is now starting to be in a state of reduction as we get further and further into the spring season. I look at the severity of the cold and I start to say, okay, my tree was tolerant of, you know, 20 degrees Fahrenheit a month ago. Is my tree still tolerant of 20 degrees Fahrenheit or negative 10 degrees Celsius right now? We're probably moving into a period where when we see trees begin to become active, and again, the bud swelling on broadleaf trees is a definitive demonstration of that. The loss of winter color, the regaining of the green pigmentation in our conifers, is another demonstration. Along with the bud swelling, the bud starting to elongate, seeing the water utilization ramp up, that shift in color suggests that we are now putting that pigment which was stored inside of the vacuole as another dissolved solute to increase winter hardiness. So it's the tree putting those resources, the magnesium, the iron, the nitrogen back into the chlorophyll, the green coloration comes back. It's the same as seeing deciduous bud swell and almost begin to open in terms of talking about that water, evacuating the dissolved solutes and the dissolved content in the cell, reducing the temperature at which that tree can tolerate a freeze. Okay, so just be aware of all of those systems that are kind of converging. But more importantly, be aware of your water practices at this time of year to continue the positive trend of your tree and the balance of water and oxygen over time, adapting to the season to influence the decisions that you make in spring to maintain and maximize that upward progression of your tree into the growth phase, minimizing disease, minimizing insects, and minimizing issues that could impede the ultimate health of your bonsai. All right? So this is water. Here are some of the things. The third thing that we talk about, so decomposition, loss of oxygen, change of style. And whether that's the front, the design, or the container, change of style, three reasons to repot. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to leave that. I'm going to take away this discussion of water, and I'm going to move to nutrition, okay? Get that nice and clean there. Okay, so now from water. I'm going to move to nutrition, okay? Now, in terms of nutrition, we have to be thinking across the stages of development, but we also have to be thinking across the actions that are associated with our tree. For example, let's just be very clear. Next week, if we use a dry pelletized fertilizer, and we are going to decandle multi-flush pines and refinement, we technically have to start our first application of supplemental nutrition next week, right? Because we know we feed in March, we feed in April, we feed in May, and then we're not going to feed for several months because we're going to decandle in June. And the goal of decandling a multi-flush pine is to shorten the needles, shorten the inner nodes, and enhance bifurcation or ramification of our branching tips. Well, if I'm continuing to feed into June, into July, on a decandled multi-flush pine, I'm going to blow out the needles, I'm going to elongate the inner node of that secondary flush of shoots, and I've lost the refinement activity, okay? So, supplemental nutrition for multi-flush pine in refinement means that we work back in the application of supplemental nutrition, and next week is the first week we have the ability. Now, you might be saying, I've got a ton of black pines, or I've got a ton of Japanese red pines, and I'm still frozen solid, do I still fertilize? No, because there's nothing positive that's going to come from nutritioning a tree that is still in solid dormancy. But for most of us, especially if we have a greenhouse, if we're in warmer areas of the globe, you know, in the southern regions of the Northern Hemisphere, et cetera, we know that our trees are probably starting to show activity, taking on the green color, starting to shed their dormant color, which tells us that water's moving and that they're active. And that application of nutrition does have a major implication to the tree gaining strength, okay? For all of our other trees, this is a great time to apply a calcium, it's a great time to apply a phosphorus for that energy molecule, because we know that we're getting that energy happening. We're balancing our water and oxygen to allow the oxygen that allows the tree to synthesize that phosphorus into long-term stored usable energy, right? So that phosphorus has got to be present. We know that a tree is detoxing over the winter period of time and has probably consumed a lot of its carbon, and that ties up toxicity, so we would want to be applying carbon. And we may even, as we see pigmentation and color come back into the foyer mass, we may even want a light application of nitrogen, because the tree is starting to activate its foyer growth phase of the year, right? Calcium, phosphorus, carbon, and nitrogen are almost imperative entering this season, okay? So from that, ultimately, we always say, listen, what are we trying to accomplish is the motivation that justifies supplemental nutrition. If our trees are in dormancy still, then we're starting to look at it and say, the first signs that I start to see of water activation, right, moving through the tree, which we just talked about, I'm going to take advantage of that water mobility. I'm going to take advantage of the time of year. I'm going to use the physiological knowledge that I have, and I'm going to be applying nutrition intentionally to stock the tree with the resources it will need to progress positively and even amass momentum. On top of what it stored last fall in terms of vascular productivity and that vascular tissue expansion being stocked full of the resources that dictate and determine foyer growth this spring, but I'm also going to add to that because I want this tree to achieve and succeed what it itself has set itself up for, knowing it's in a confined containerized environment, okay? So even if I'm saying I want my Japanese maples to have really short internodes, okay, then maybe we're going to hold back on the elongation element of the nutrition. Maybe we're going to hold back a little bit of nitrogen. But that tree still needs calcium, phosphorus, and carbon to be able to produce the growth that we get to pinch, to produce the growth that we get to eventually partially defoliate and prune. And yes, the stored sugars and starches will generate the foyer load based on what it accomplished last year. But in doing so, it doesn't mean that that tree has an unlimited supply of calcium, the backbone of those cell walls. It doesn't mean it has an unlimited supply of the phosphorus that creates the energy that allows that tree to grow. And if you get into the spring season and the new growth is covered in aphids, it's almost a direct discussion of a lack of calcium creating a formidable well-formed cell wall that creates a much harder system for insects to suck and feed on that stored nutrition and the allocation of sugars and starches in that system to positive nutrition. Right? Here again, we see insects being an indicator. So our nutrition at this time of year is a proactive application to be helping the tree balance its nutrition across all of the macro and micro levels. And it is also proactively trying to supply the tree in this confined environment that has very little storage capacity, that has a constant flushing system of the water required to cultivate a tree in this aggregate slightly hydroponic system. We know we've got to consistently be adding the resources that empower our tree to grow with health. This is when supplemental nutrition begins. When we see dormancy shed and the movement of resources begin. And again, nitrogen becomes this thing that is this vehicle of growth and elongation and nitrogen itself starts to become a gas pedal. And you're saying, well, but when I use the pelletized fertilizer, I can't control the nitrogen. This is why the apical system is important to me because I have control of every resource that goes into the tree. If I don't want a lot of nitrogen in my Japanese maples because I don't want the internode to elongate, then I don't have to add that nitrogen in a copious quantity and I can control each of the systems that empower and regulate the growth of our tree. You decide what works best for you, right? But at least having the knowledge allows you to be able to adjust and adapt and decision-make for functional knowledge in your trees with your supplemental nutrition at a time in the year where we want to stay on the front foot. We want to be proactive. We're not dumping a tremendous amount of nutrition on our tree, but we are starting to pepper in supplementation so that that tree just continues to moderately grow with health and continue to move forward positively over the course of this spring season. And we are just at that point. Okay, now that talks to the energy system of the tree, right? Okay, so we've talked about this quite a bit. And I'm going to come back to this in the disease and pest discussion here. But energy, we are at peak stored energy within the tree's internal system at that sort of cold or close to the coldest shortest day of the year, right? That is our peak stored energy that the plant could produce through photosynthesis with the nutrition that was available from the way that we treated that tree over the fall season through the early winter, right? We go pretty much nutrition-free over the winter season unless you are detoxing a tree with specific recommendations based on sap testing. Otherwise, applying high nitrogen pelletized fertilizer in December, in January is not productive and in fact could be counterproductive for your trees, right? So we're saying, listen, the energy system is the native state of photosynthetically produced vascular growth from last fall, stored vascular growth from the end of fall and the beginning of winter. Now we're at this point where we see energy in our tree kind of at this reference high point. Okay, this is energy. And this is time, right? Now, we know as the buds start to swell energy is moving into the system, but the energy has not been spent to generate new photosynthetic mass, new photosynthetic stems on the shoots, internodes, new photosynthetic leaf mass or needle mass in terms of the presence of foliage. But the moment that that bud starts to open, starts to form a physical leaf or needle and starts to elongate in terms of that stem, understand that we are spending that energy and we are spending that energy fairly consistently over the course of that production of growth. Now that is a green system. That is a photosynthetic system. Even while it's elongating, it is taking in energy. We're utilizing water to hydrate as well as to move resources and we will also be using water for the photosynthetic productivity of the older needles with a cuticle and the newer needles without a cuticle, right? So that's where we see the heavy water load utilization in the spring still having to. Keep oxygen in the system to give us that root growth, that small amount of vascular productivity over the spring, right? But we do start to hit a point here where even though it's spending energy, the photosynthesis of the newly produced leaf mass starts to regain that energy, right? When we see formation of the cuticle here, so we're talking about sort of that late spring, early summer period of time with the formation of that cuticle. Now all of a sudden the water utilization and needs of our tree changes because excess of transpiration is no longer taking place. The water going in to hydrate that cuticle-less growth now has a cuticle. So it's reducing the amount of just lost void water, right? There's no longer water being contributed to the metabolic processes of new tissue creation in the foyer mass itself. But this is where we see energy to start to really ramp up on a beautiful curve right here and hopefully exceed what we started as, especially if we're in development or secondary phases of development, right? So we have that primary branch, elongation, girth, healing of wounds, regeneration of root mass. We have secondary scaffolding, thickening, length, healing, transition of taper, and all of the things that occur when we move from primary to secondary focuses. In these moments, we hope that that exceeds the energy that we started with in the year. But when we start to talk about refining, refinement at this slightly depleted stage, less than what we have here, this is when we start to talk about decandling. This is when we start to talk about pruning and partial defoliation, right? To be able to take a tree with maybe long internodes from a lot of stored energy and vascular productivity last fall and to reduce the tree's photosynthetic mass, which the tree says, oh my gosh, I don't have enough solar panel to keep up with my sugar, starch needs over the rest of the year. I have to push another flush of growth. Now we've increased the strength or the energy system of the tree beyond depletion. We never, this is the no touch zone when we see that growth taking place, which is why working a tree too late into the spring, whether it's repotting, styling and pruning, or whether it's starting too early on a tree whose growth has not regained the energy. This is the no touch zone that we have to be very careful of. Now, obviously we might be pinching Japanese maples. To distribute that stored energy across more and more tips before that leaf ever becomes fully formed, while it's still consumed very limited amounts of energy. That's a different discussion altogether, right? That is a completely different discussion because we haven't spent the energy when we pinch that central bud on our Japanese maples. It is just beginning the process of spending the energy. We take that hormone away, which distributes that energy stored in the system to finer and finer branches and more and more growth tips across the tree to get a more even, universal distribution of foliar mass, activate as many buds as possible, and reduce the inner node length of the successive growth that occurs. Okay, so that's just understand, right? Because people say, well, you're going to be pinching. So isn't that counterproductive to the no touch zone? No, not if we are managing that correctly in pinching while it is still underdeveloped and hasn't consumed a lot of energy. But getting back to this point of pruning and partial defoliation, we're prepping for this point with the addition of supplemental nutrition. To try and perpetuate, right? Because we're talking about where does this energy depletion occur on the system? If the energy depletion occurs back here, that's very limited growth that we will be creating in our tree over the spring season. But if we're supplementally nutritioning our tree, we take the energy stored from last fall, plus the supplemental nutrition and the creation of immediate energy, enhancing the efficiency of metabolic processes over the course of the spring, and we elongate the amount of foliar mass that that tree can produce if just left on its own in that containerized environment by the supplemental nutrition that we're providing. So we extend the growth phase, which allows us to expand the foliar mass, right? Which allows us to therefore have a lot more control of the energy system as we start to get that ramping up of resource reaccumulation over the spring season. Okay? So understanding, how to manipulate this energy system and understanding the energy output of our watering practices, of our supplemental nutrition, allows us to really gauge and dissect the physiological system of the tree to maximize its ability to evolve. So what does this mean in terms of when would we be feeding, et cetera? It means that as we start to see trees shed their winter color and buds swell, we might start with a light or moderate application, to start to supplement. As we see those start to open and expand, now we're going to move from a moderate to a heavy or from a light to a moderate application of fertilizer to start to ramp up the needs of the tree based on its growth state and the presence of its new growth and the condition of its new growth, right? And when we get to this post-hardened pruning and partial defoliation phase, we start to think, what's the desirable outcome of this action and how am I going to adjust my supplemental nutrition to facilitate and foster the desired energy response to the loss of the hormone at the tip and the potential for more pieces to grow with a finer growth response as a result of how I've manipulated the energy system, okay? And you might be saying, well, that's no more clear than saying, you know, a balance of water and oxygen, but it should be clear, right? It should be clear because we understand that nutrition is elongating our foyer production phase, supplemental nutrition, and we understand that trees in refinement need to have more energy directed over more growth tips, which requires us to remove that terminal tip. And we do so at a time where our energy is slightly below what we started with so that we get shorter internodes and smaller leaves or shorter internodes and smaller needles as a result of that action. But the tree has got to be moved through primary and secondary phases of development and we have to have focused the tree's energy on that multitude of tips, that we've built over the course of time. We cannot jump from primary trunk and branch development into refinement in a single season. That will never work because we don't have the significant number of tips to transition the energy over to start to be working on refinement. We have to work through the secondary. And from the secondary, now we can move to the tertiary, okay? So the energy systems of the tree correlate directly to water utilization, right? We said stages of development and reasons to repot. It directs... correlates directly to the supplemental nutrition that we're applying to the tree, which is going to perpetuate and propel or potentially reduce the length of foliar production that occurs in the year depending on how we handle the tree. And all of that dictates the energy system of our tree and what we have to work with to be applying our techniques at energy positive periods of the year to elicit a desired response dependent on the stage of development of our tree, okay? All right, so that's energy. Now, disease and pest, okay? And I come back to disease and pest because we say, listen, our tree, when it starts spending its energy, right? When we see this energy spent on foliar growth, that growth, right? The energy exists inside of the tree to be generating new tissue. That does not mean, right? That's stored sugars and starches, stored ATP, stored energy, stored resources, okay? That does not mean that the tree in that stored energy has stored calcium. Doesn't mean it has stored phosphorus. It doesn't mean it has carbon supplies that allow the soil to maintain its structure, lock up toxicity, provide an organic binding location for nutrition to be held for the tree to access, okay? That's not what that means. It means it has sugars and starches. We need to be supplying that tree with the building block of the cell wall, the calcium, with the phosphorus molecule that allows for energy to be created, with the carbon that locks up toxicity, maintains balance, and provides the organic sites for anionic and cationic bonding of nutrition inside of the soil system, okay? So when we start to think about this, when we see a tree losing foliage in the spring season, it means that the roots are not able to sustain what we have and add, and in fact, the roots cannot even sustain what we have. This is a direct discussion of root quantity in decline. Now, is the root quantity in decline because we have a broken down surface layer of soil and we don't have the oxygen in the system to turn the sugars into usable energy that sustains that tissue? Potentially, right? We say, okay, it's staying too wet, so the roots are rotting because it's too wet and that's why it's losing foliage. Yes, and let's just be very clear, in order for those roots to continue growing, we have to be synthesizing the phosphorus molecule with the presence of oxygen during the nighttime in order for those roots to even continue to exist. So in some ways, you could say, yes, it's anaerobic or lacking oxygen and the roots are suffocating, right? But let's be really clear, the roots aren't suffocating, the roots are starving, right? That is what causes the decline. And so all of a sudden, we start to say, okay, I need to have phosphorus in the system, which we may or may not have, but more importantly, I have to have oxygen in the system. Coming back to the notion of why do we repot, decomposition, lack of oxygen, we need oxygen in the system, may be a reason to go back in, remove field soil or remove broken down soil to create the air and oxygen quantity that allows our tree to recover and we won't see that till the fall. I need to vacuum clean the surface to get rid of the decomposed organic matter, the moss, the potential root mass that exists there that's impeding oxygen from moving through the system, but most importantly, the decomposed okadama that's closing down the oxygen spaces that allows our oxygen concentration to increase through the soil column of our bonsai container, right? But what we see, right, because the loss of foliar mass as a result of the roots, you know, suffocating or starving, whichever you choose to look at it as, is an abiotic issue. That is a horticultural issue where we are not delivering what the tree needs. But when we start to see disease, right, disease, disease is an inevitable discussion that we have a lack of, right, and this could come from a lack of oxygen in the system causing us a lack of phosphorus or it could come from a lack of phosphorus and we've got plenty of oxygen in the system and the tree is simply deficient of the energy system that allows it to resist disease. Right? And so we say, okay, I've got disease. What is that telling me? It's telling me I have a hungry tree. Okay, and a hungry tree is working with the biology or it's acting on the soil system itself and it is seeking the phosphorus. It is seeking the calcium. It is seeking the carbon. It is seeking the resources that it needs and those resources are not held on that soil surface because we haven't fertilized in a long time because the tree's been inactive. But more importantly, the tree is continued to be flushed whether through watering, through the freeze-thaw cycle and the nutrients being scrubbed off of the soil surface or from the tree utilizing whatever resources were sitting on the cation exchange sites over the winter season because it's been producing vascular tissue and continuing to grow no matter how frozen it is. It's still using resources and those resources simply don't exist. And so the tree is taking whatever it can, right? And what it's taking up that causes disease, is a high metal content. Now we're working with volcanic soils. Volcanic soils have a lot of boron. Volcanic soils have a lot of magnesium. Volcanic soils have a lot of manganese. Volcanic soils have a lot of aluminum. All of those things in excess cause high disease susceptibility. So the moment that I see disease on my trees, I'm looking at that and I'm not saying I got to go find the greatest latest fungicide to dump on this tree to stop the disease. Instead, I'm thinking, okay, I need to increase oxygen content in the soil system to make sure that phosphorus can be synthesized. I need to go ahead and add supplemental nutrition that gives the tree what it needs to fortify its growth knowing that what it is taking in is a result of having a depletion of the resources that it needs to grow with health, right? So I'm looking at this and I'm making these two decisions. Now sometimes that requires a repot when I see a heavily diseased tree. It's not ideal, but that might be the only way to get oxygen into a system where we've got a ton of field soil in this in the containerized environment and that is starving the tree of oxygen, which prevents the synthesis of phosphorus and no matter how much phosphorus we give the tree, if it doesn't have that seven to nine percent oxygen over the dark period of the evening time, it cannot turn that phosphorus into usable energy. It cannot turn the product of photosynthesis into stored energy and long-term held energy that equals growth, right? So any way we go about it, balance of water and oxygen still reigns supreme in every single part of this, and that's why we have this discussion for the nutrition to be synthesized and usable, for the tree to be able to thrive and survive, and to be able to suppress or prevent the onset of these things that are a byproduct of the presence of oxygen and the presence or lack thereof of the supplemental nutrition, okay? Now I'm not saying don't use fungicides. Maybe you use a fungicide and here's the thing about fungicides. When you read the label of a fungicide, typically it'll say treat initially, come back and treat two weeks later, three weeks later or on a weekly basis, until conditions do not subsist, right? Until the conditions that foster and facilitate disease do not exist. Now typically these conditions that create disease are wet conditions, right? And so they're saying spray with fungicide because it's wet outside and that's going to help the tree. I can tell you in a bonsai container, if you have not improved the oxygen uptake and the oxygen permeability of your soil, and you have not provided the resources that allow that plant to produce fortified growth and stop taking in the pieces of toxicity that create the susceptibility to disease, you can treat with fungicide every week for the rest of the year and that tree will not stop the presence of disease. It will not become fortified and resistant to disease, right? So that fungicide hopefully is stopping the spread of the spores one or max two applications of fungicide. Is all that we will ever apply in a growing season, regardless of what the label says, because the action that prevents disease has nothing to do with the fungicide. All that's doing is suppressing the spread of that disease for a moment while we're fixing the other pieces of the puzzle that truly allow us to create a less susceptible tree, okay? So if you have a tree that's out in wet conditions that's struggling from disease, naturally, I need to move it out of the wet conditions. Is that a greenhouse? Is that a sheltered area under a roof? Is that a makeshift sort of rain facility? Yes, all of those things to stop the perpetuation of that inability to either synthesize those molecules the tree needs and allow the oxygen into the system or to deliver the resources that the tree needs to start to fortify the growth and prevent further disease infection and downward decline. All right? Okay. Now, pests. When we start to talk about pests, okay? Pests are typically feeding, much the same as disease, are feeding on imbalances in the energy system. But here's what we know about pests. Pests are feeding on high concentrations of salt. All right? So we're saying, listen, aphids are feeding on a high concentration of magnesium without the presence of calcium. Magnesium is a macronutrient. It is a macroelement. It is very important for the chlorophyll molecule, for the green, for the ability to synthesize and utilize nitrogen for growth. I don't want to demonize magnesium. Magnesium in volcanic soils is abundant. It is freely available. Calcium is not. Calcium is something that we have to continue to apply so that the tree has the calcium to balance with the magnesium, create fortified cell walls that can hold that magnesium-based chlorophyll pigmentation and empower the photosynthesis. Okay? So when we say salt, we're saying magnesium, potassium, sodium, and chlorine. Okay? Those are your four salts. And basically, when you have an insect problem, what the tree is telling you is, I need more calcium, I need more phosphorus, and I need more carbon. Carbon buffers the quantity of salt that's taken in and locks it up in unusable forms in the soil system. It does the same with metals. Calcium creates the cell wall. And what the plant is actually trying to take in when it's taking in all that salt, it's trying to take in calcium and it's trying to take in phosphorus. And they're either not capable of being taken in because the oxygen is not present for root growth to occur or they're depleted in the soil system. But inevitably, when we see an insect issue, yes, we can use an insecticide and kill that insect. Absolutely, we can, especially if it's causing tremendous economic problems in our tree. Economic is a function. It's a very rocky way of saying we're losing branches, we're losing foyer mass, we're losing health in the tree, right? We've got to stop the downward decline. We can absolutely eradicate that insect. But that insect will come back once that chemical is no longer effective if we don't solve the bigger issue of, number one, increasing oxygen concentration, which allows root growth and facilitates a good biology inside of the containerized environment, and number two, providing the resources that take the place of the salt and start to create growth that is more fortified with resources that insects are not feeding on, right? Insects are not trying to get calcium. Insects are not trying to get phosphorus. Insects are trying to get salts and metals. Diseases are feeding on salts and metals. Anytime that we look at disease and pest issues, which generally happen as new growth emerges and it's depleted of the balance of nutrition or generally occurs in disease when the new growth occurs and we have a high metal content based on an imbalance of water and oxygen and a depleted nutritional system, right? We have to have a two-pronged approach of suppressing the damaging organism, disease or insects, and adding the resources that the plant is trying to take in to develop its own immunity or resistance to these things, okay? So you've got to think on a more evolved approach. The industrial farming complex has created less and less healthy plants with lower and lower quantities of nutrition and a higher and higher demand for fungicides and insecticides as a result of our failure to recognize that the way we actually solve this problem is increasing quality nutrition inside of the soil system to replace the draw of these imbalances that cause toxicities and lead to susceptibility, alright? So that's our disease and insect system that we need to understand, right? And that's working with the energy, which the energy is going to produce foliar mass, but it doesn't replace it. It doesn't replace the things that that foliar mass is built from. We've got aggregate soils, which allow us to maintain a balance of water and oxygen in the shallow, confined environment. And those aggregate volcanic soils have a lot of toxicities that if we're not continually supplying the resources the plant needs for healthy vegetative growth, we will see problems as a result of that system sort of winding down the good stuff and starting to take in the bad stuff, alright? Now I'm going to give you one more side line on this insect and disease portion here. When we are growing a tree in a bonsai container overly aggressively, right? Almost in a developmental phase, but we're in a bonsai container, right? There is a reason why I say, listen, if you're growing developmentally, put it into a box for a conifer, 70-80% aggregate pumice, maybe 15-20% organic for the most moisture-loving conifers. Maybe we go 100% pumice because we've got the field soil on a collected tree and we don't need that organic component because we've got it in the native field soil of the tree. But that bigger box with the ability to hold nutrition, when we're talking about development, it's not happening inside of a bonsai container. I have found at Mirai, the trees that are growing the strongest and the healthiest in a bonsai container, use the most resources the fastest. And if I don't check that growth and slow down that consumption of this primary stage in a bonsai container, it will lead to disease and insect issues no matter what. Because I can't keep up with nutritional delivery in the volcanic aggregate environment of the shallow confined space of a bonsai container when I get a tree too strong and healthy. It is saying, feed, feed, feed, feed, feed, and the bonsai container is saying, I don't have enough of the food. I don't have enough cation exchange sites because most of this is aggregate pumice and lava. And I've only got 30% Akadama on a conifer at most. And Akadama doesn't really hold that much supplemental nutrition. It just holds supplemental nutrition without passively decomposing and screwing up our balance of water and oxygen. So we use Akadama and it's a very special substrate, but honestly it doesn't hold enough nutrition to facilitate primary stages of development. So I've got a lot of trees in the garden that are super vigorous and they might have the biggest insect and disease issue because they're starved of the resources that fortify them and I can't keep up with the bonsai container. What is the outcome of that? Not letting your trees in a bonsai container get overly vigorous. Not letting them grow to a point where it's not sustainable to exist in that small space. Or feeding every time you're watering to be able to keep up with that, which ultimately kind of defeats the purpose of the bonsai container in general. So that developmental production of vigorous growth does take place in a system that can keep up with the nutritional delivery, the holding of resources on the soil surface through a higher cation exchange capacity, to be able to build the branches, the girth and heel and the roots, etc. that we eventually move into a bonsai container when we want to control, balance, and reduce the proportions of our tree. If you understand that, it will start to spell out a lot of the things that you see that nobody's been able to put a finger on. This tree was so healthy. Look at how much it's growing. And now I've got a problem. What happened? What happened? And it's growing, growing, growing, growing. And then something starts to get funky. The tree consumed more nutrition than you could supply in that confined environment with that soil system under those conditions and pressure of that growth and that consumption model. That, to me, in 2024, was the most revolutionary realization, scientifically proven through our testing. Even David came up and I'm saying, dude, I cannot keep this tree from having insects and disease issues and it's the most robust tree in the garden. And he says, well, look at the growth on that tree and look at the container. Dude, you'd have to be feeding every day to keep up with that. That plant is functioning at max RPM and it doesn't even have the gas tank to keep up with moderate RPM, right? In terms of the reservoir that holds the nutrition. Right? Once again, a new realization. Something to tuck into your hat. Okay. I want to go to repotting. Okay. We talked about repotting from stages of development. One of the biggest things that happens at this time of year is we start to say, okay, what needs repotting and what can wait, right? I would like to encourage all of you to get to a point where you're not asking what can wait, but you're saying, what needs repotting to continue the process of getting where I want to go? That's the actual question that you need to answer. Now, maybe you're repotting because the soil system is broken down from crappy Akadama. I got a particularly bad batch of Akadama four years ago. It was basically not the tubular structure that we value in Akadama. It was a plate-like structure. It's passively broken down. All of those trees have disease. All of those trees have insects. I've been working the trees out of that. The root systems are abysmal. The soil system is broken down. I've never seen anything like it. I knew it when I got the Akadama. This is not a good Akadama. I didn't have anything else at the time. I hoped it would work out. It has not. Okay. We're working our trees out of that. That's decomposition. I have a lot of trees that have been in bonsai containers for six, eight, ten years. Last year, that same tree I said, can I get another year out of it? I don't know if I can get to this. I'm going to prioritize the ones that absolutely need it, and I'll come back to that one next year. Well, now here I am this year, and I'm saying, can it go another year? I don't want to be in that position anymore. I want to get on the front foot and say, I'm going to repot these trees while they're healthy, while they're ramped up, and showing that they have lost percolation because they're not because they're completely occupied by roots. I want to be there this year, right? I'm changing a lot of styles, a lot of design, a lot of pots. Trees are improving at Mirai, so there's a lot of necessities for repotting. Okay. But the main focus of decision-making in the spring on repotting is to try and shift your relationship with repotting to how much can I not do and get away with to how much can I do to get these trees where I want them to go being healthy, evolving, advancing, and improving. That mental shift is going to demand that you put in more time on the repotting bench. It's going to demand that you spend some weekends that you otherwise would like to allocate to other things. It's going to demand late nights, early mornings. It's going to demand the bonsai shuffle. It's going to demand doing a little bit more work to keep those trees healthy over the spring season from the rain, from the cold, from the sun, from the wind, and all of the things. Yes, if you started bonsai thinking this was going to be easy, we've talked about it before. You didn't get the memo. Get on the front foot of repotting in terms of your decision-making. You have a healthy tree. You clean the surface of the soil. It does not improve percolation. You do not hit solid intact particles. It's completely occupied. We have to repot. There's no other choice. Tree's healthy. Can it go another year? Probably. Are you going to be with the same tree in the same state of health next year? Probably not, right? Something's got to give at some point. I've got a tree that's decomposing. Can I get away with it? Just not water it? Tuck it into a more healthy tree? More sheltered location? Maybe. Clean the surface. You have intact soil particles. You're probably still good. You vacuum clean the field soil out from the surface. That'll go a long ways towards buying you another year. Get that tree into a state and a position where you are feeling good about its continued perpetuation of existing inside of a bonsai container this year, and you will be doing yourself a tremendous favor in terms of decision-making about the repotting process. All right? Now, repotting. I repotted a tree. It's got insect and disease issues. Now I need nutrition, and I've repotted. Do I nutrition the tree? No. Cannot, right? By adjusting the soil, by adjusting the balance of water and oxygen and enhancing the oxygen spaces, you've already gone part of the way towards reconciling the issue. When you repot, it weakens the tree. A tree suffering from disease or insects is going to get worse before it gets better. Is it going to improve if you do not repot? No, it will not get better, right? We could suppress the issues. We could work on the horticulture and delivery of water, balance of water and oxygen. We can work on supplying the nutrition. If the tree categorically does not have oxygen in its system and it is difficult for the oxygen to get in its system, it's going to be very difficult to get that tree to a stage of significant health. Now, we can get a tree slightly recovered. We can work on it over the course of this year, but we know it's never going to get a lot, lot better until we address the root cause of the issue. You make the decision about how to handle that tree, but understand that this is where surface cleaning and vacuum cleaning can be your very best friend because now you're not taking the tree out, exposing all of its roots, having to re-anchor it, re-secure it, repot it without doing damage to the limited roots that you have for a tree that's suffering. The vacuum cleaning process is one of the best solutions to a tree that is losing its strength based on imbalance of water and oxygen without having to put it through the stress and pressure of the open heart surgery of repotting, okay? And that can be a solution that allows our spring decisions to give rise to a tree that recovers and maybe it buys us one year and the tree gains strength and we're able to manage the disease or the insects and we get to next spring where we can go through the whole process but we have a much more favorable root system to respond positively to that process. Don't delay. Don't procrastinate on those trees. Give those trees the ability to recover and you'll thank yourself for it, okay? And when we repot a tree, we have to let new root growth both occur in the four to six weeks after the repot as well as to harden off before we come back and we start fertilizing. And this is where we say it needs phosphorus. It needs calcium. Cool. Honest. Awesome. I love that you're identifying that. You don't get to give it to it now. Don't let a tree get to that stage is the proactive thought. Doesn't matter because the tree is in that stage. We let the tree get to that stage. I've got trees in that stage. I'm not above this by any stretch. So I'm going to prioritize the balance of water and oxygen because that's the root of all positive growth. I'm going to understand that I'm going to lose some more foliar mass on this tree because the things that it needs to stop that cycle, I've got to condition the new roots to be able to tolerate that. And I'm going to come back when I see the tree showing positive signs of growth which it will through the repotting process and the presence of oxygen even if it's continuing to show signs of growth of stress and lack of health. And I'm going to start supplementally nutritioning that tree specifically with a focus on helping it regain what it needs to move into that rebuild process. And I know that that process is going to take 18 to 24 months. It's what it is. Once we get a tree into a state of lack of health, we have a rebuild process that's going to take a couple years. Okay? All right. So just some functional considerations to help you make decisions about the trees that you're dealing with. But the biggest one is get on the phone with the front foot of repotting. Repot trees when they're healthy and ready. Don't let them decline. Don't think about what you can get away with. Think about what you want to achieve and proactively execute the repots that get you to that position. Okay? That's repotting. For decision-making, I'm not going to talk about tie-down strategy or process. Styling. Okay. If we do not wire our tree, okay, for a broadleaf deciduous or a deciduous conifer, if we don't wire our tree, if we don't wire prior to the onset of growth, we don't wire for the rest of the year. Now, I know in native range for bald cypress, people will do crazy things in the summertime and fully defoliate them and wire them and prune them and the tree responds. Right? But if that were a functional process for a bald cypress or a dawn redwood, we would see a lot more highly-evolved dawn redwoods and bald cypresses. And we don't see those. Right? We don't see highly-ramified, super-healthy, established dawn redwoods and bald cypress. So people say, well, you can do that. Well, you could. You could also pluck off all of the old needles on a black pine every year and watch it decline. But we don't do that because we know it doesn't work. Well, if that worked for deciduous conifers, then we would do that a lot more. But where are all the highly-refined deciduous conifers if that technique is broadly applied and effective? And the answer is, we don't really have that many highly-refined trees of that nature. Okay, cool. So we recognize styling for our deciduous varieties, whether conifer or broadleaf, has to happen right now, or we have to hold our patience and peace until they drop their leaves in the fall. That means you lost a whole year. A whole year of branch shaping, a whole year of thickening and structural setting, a whole year of refinement and allocation of resources, a whole year of sustainable design, a whole year of balancing energy, a whole year of developing on those shapes that you create. Now is the time, right? And you're saying, but you told me this with repotting too. I know the spring is stressful, isn't it? Okay. If we don't see a healthy tree, if we didn't see a tree blow out growth, if we don't see a tree back-butting on old wood, we're not styling that tree right now. Maybe we're not repotting that tree right now. Maybe it was repotted and it never got to a state of health last year. Cool. Well, guess what? Until it gets to that state of health that shows the indications that that tree is ready, we hold off on styling. But here's the thing. I just talked about how an overly-aggressive tree in a bonsai container is not sustainable. If your tree has recovered its strength, guess what? You're not working late night, weekends. You're working on your trees until all of the work is done that you have the capacity and the tree needs done so that you set it up for the most positive productivity this year. Okay? Get on the front foot with styling. Just the same as repotting, move your trees forward. Otherwise, you're watching them stagnate. And we say, okay, well, I can grow more branches. I can thicken more things. I can heal more wounds. Okay, cool. But we could be doing that while we're advancing the design. That is a weak expectation of what we want to accomplish this year. Now, I say this, and I'm not going to get all my trees wired and styled that need to be wired and styled this spring, but I can tell you I'm putting in early mornings and late nights and all of my weekends that I'm present and home at Mirai to try and accomplish as much as I can possibly get done before they start to grow too much. And the warming of the temperatures is really impeding my ability to do so. Okay. Last is pruning. Okay. People always say, when is the best time to prune our trees? Let's just understand something. Our broadleaf deciduous at leaf drop in the fall, beyond a shadow of a doubt, if we're building branching in any way, shape, or form, that was your moment. Okay. The moment that you come here, you can prune. Stronger going to get stronger. Weaker going to get weaker. We can balance some of that with partial defoliation and pruning in the post-hardened phase, but you are going to throw off the energy of the system, energy system of the tree and imbalance the system by pruning some branches and not others and the tree not being able to balance out those hormones and those stored energy and the setup of the buds at this time of year on your broadleaf trees. Okay. So, be careful with that. Yes, it's possible if we missed it. I'm going to be doing some of it myself even though I'm saying not ideal. I still have to do some of it. I didn't nail it. Right? So, it's not like I have judgment towards you for not having gotten to it. I've got 900 trees. I didn't get to all of them last fall. For our conifers, primary and secondary phases of development, an initial styling on a piece of Yamadori or field grown piece of material, wedge cuts, big bins, trunk bins, hollowing, wire, raffia, everything on our junipers. If that is the scope of work, this is an awesome time. Is it the best time? No. Early fall is the best time for coniferous initial styling and big time pruning and foliar reduction. But the tree has all of the stored energy in its system from last fall over the winter time. The tree will respond. It will repair styling and design. It will respond to the reduction of growth tips by putting a tremendous amount of stored energy from the canopy over the course of the fall into the growth tips that remain if we prune them at this time of year. If we're repotting on a coniferous tree, we do not do a heavy pruning or foliar reduction right now. If we're repotting on a deciduous tree, we can do the heavy pruning and the repot if it's the first repot, where the tree is full of energy. Second repot or a tertiary repot, you get to do one or the other, prune or repot. Heavy branch reduction on a refinement tree right now, it's a no-no. I'm going to tell you you can do it. I'm going to do it on some of my trees in refinement. I have this much stored energy on this many branches. It accumulates it over the fall and gets to the springtime. Now I'm going to cut half of those branches away. I've got this much energy moving into half the branches. Guess what happens? Coarse, vigorous growth in those tips, but I'm in refinement. I don't want coarse, vigorous growth. I want fine, short internodes, small needles. You can completely blow out refinement at this time of year. Do you sacrifice staying ahead of the game on your tree because we missed it and we built an energy system on too big of a foliar mass? Do we sacrifice this whole year for that? No, we don't. But we have to manage it through pinching, through post-flush hardened pruning, and we know that we're catching up to the state of refinement if we choose to go ahead and prune a tree in refinement in the coniferous model at this time of year. So, you make the choice. I would say take advantage of keeping the tree moving forward, but you set yourself up for responses. We're almost to the point in the app where you can add your own activity reminders in my calendar that would be excellent for a tree in refinement that you prune heavily at this time of year to remind yourself to pinch, to remind yourself to revisit in the post-flush hardened pruning, to remind yourself to manage the growth that's going to be a response to reducing the branching on a tree in refinement with a stored energy system that's concentrated into finer and fewer tips. Okay? Josh Sills, what do we got for questions? A couple questions here. Had some, sorry if anybody had issues with the chat. It looks like we had a couple of platforms that were having issues. We'll be able to sort that out. Looks like people on PC were able to interact, but had some issues otherwise and we'll sort that out. Sorry about that, folks. Sorry about that. But Rob was asking on repotting, he has a healthy plant in the urban Yamadori, Wisteria, three years in a nursery container, 100% organic soil. When repotting, let me just double check. Yep. Okay. When repotting, let's see, to Akadama, how far should I go in removing the organic soil? Yeah. So technically, nursery container, urban Yamadori, very aggressive, 100% organic. Could we do a full washing of the organic soil out of the roots in the initial repot in the first year into a bonsai container? Typically, this is when you see the root washing methodology applied, right? Because we could leave some portion and this is a sheen-based flowering, fruiting tree, which I never like to bear root a sheen-based flowering, fruiting tree. I would tend to err on the side of caution and leave some portion untouched in the sheen of the tree and not fully wash it. But if the tree is excessively vigorous, if it is just crushing, then I think you can go in and do a full removal, wash it out and fully replace over with Akadama because you've built the tree to the vigor that supports and facilitates that action, okay? At any other time, once it goes into a bonsai container, we do not get to come back and do the washing of a sheen-based broadleaf tree. We never do the washing of a conifer, right? Always leave some portion untouched, never bear root. But when we go to the broadleaf model, in the deciduous form, when they're built up and they're raging with strength, unchecked growth, and they're crushing in a primary container, we do have the ability to go ahead and go full bore to transition it over to Akadama and not deal with the vestiges of that organic still in the sheen of the tree. That is how I would repot that. That's how I would handle that. Cool. And Backcountry Dan asks, could you dive a bit deeper on the dynamics of how a tree is outgrowing its, quote, gas tank? My understanding is that the pot is key to how we manage that growth along with fertilization, so I'm a bit fuzzy on how the tree is outgrowing both of those things so much that it is facing insect issues because we're not able to fertilize enough. Yeah, cool, cool. Okay, so this is a little bit more complicated if we're going to dive into it, but I'm happy to do this for you, Dan. Okay, so I'm producing vigorous growth from all of these branches. I've got this confined environment. In this case of a conifer, 30% of this is Akadama. Akadama has a relatively low cation exchange capacity. So we're saying, listen, calcium's being held here and phosphorus is being held here and carbon is providing some velcro to bind nutrition, right? But that's only on 30% of the particles in the container. And the more growth that you generate, the more calcium, the more phosphorus, the more carbon, the more nitrogen, and then all of your micros, right? Your iron, your cobalt, your nitrogen, your boron, your copper, all of the micros that are needed, right? So the more that this starts to suck all of this stuff up, if we're not constantly replacing this, right, then all of the resources become depleted and the roots and the biology start mining this aggregate surface. And on that, inside of the aggregate content, you have magnesium, aluminum, manganese, especially in the form of Akadama, which is the softest and the most highly mined by the biology, which you'll see. Akadama break down from being over-mined with an aggressive tree. Could still be productively scaled, but still. The productive scaling of Akadama releases more manganese and causes a more rapid breakdown in an aggressively growing tree, right? If this is growing that aggressively, this is growing that aggressively. It's a mirror reflection, okay? So, but here's the other thing that's happening here. When you allow elongated shoots to grow in development, that also says that you're allowing big, thick, elongated roots to grow in the containerized environment. Oxen is created at the growth tip here. Oxen is created at the growth tip here, okay? If I sever this growth tip, the oxen from here is moving through the system in an oxen exchange pathway that is telling big roots to continue growing bigger to support big branches that are growing that are continuing to grow bigger. So, when we sever that by pruning an aggressively growing tree, first and foremost, right, we shut down or we slow down the vacuum of calcium, phosphorus, carbon, and all the valuable things being pulled in from this confined environment with a very low amount of nutrition held in the soil system. But we also stop this vigorous root from continuing to grow and consume. And we cause bifurcation when we change the oxygen exchange from big roots to big tip, okay? Now, in the repotting process, we know we come back in and we prune coarse roots and we start to incite ramification. That reduction here impacts that. This reduction here impacts that. So, when we allow this tree to grow and grow and grow, we suppress its ability to ramify and scale. We have a massive sucking up of limited resources inside of the containerized environment. And we're causing coarseness across both fields that become unsustainable in this confined situation where we have a limited capacity to continue to supply the things that the tree needs in a sustainable proportion without causing that toxicity and deficiency that gives rise to insects and disease. And there is a tipping point, and the tipping point typically occurs in the mid to late summer when we're watering the most, when temperatures are high enough that we're a little bit, you know, suspect of fertilization and maybe our tree's gone into a slight degree of summer dormancy or something like that. That is the recipe for insect and disease issues on an overly vigorous tree whose nutritional system is not sustainable, whose auxin system is set up to create a big tree, even though we're trying to create a small tree inside of the containerized environment. And all of those things, that auxin communication system and that ramification and that consumption of resources combine to create a lack of sustainability. Cool. And that's all we got today. Okay. Thank you guys for tuning in. I know this was short and sweet, but I just wanted to get the concepts out there. Get on the front foot. Put in the time at this time of year. This is what sets your bonsai practice up for success. Leave yourself with pieces in the early fall to do major structural work and handle initial design. To be dedicating yourself to the activities now that demand you seize the moment and opportunity. All right? I'm going to go get busy. Josh has got to get out of here. Miguel's going to be helping me today. I've got students in the house this week. I've got a student here for the weekend and over the course of the first two days. And we are going to be repotting, wiring, pruning. We're going to be going crazy, but I've got to tell you, 65 degrees, my first action today when I leave this room, supplementally nutritioning the trees. It's go time. I wish you guys the best. Take advantage of things and I'll see you on the flip side. 
