What's happening with Mariah, what's happening with Ryan, and the things that he's able to do and the knowledge that he's openly sharing with all of us tonight and with the world with this series is just incredible. So I'm really looking forward to tonight and I'd like to introduce to you Ryan Neal. Alright. Hey, hey, hey. Come on. Thanks, Scott. Appreciate it. Hey, BSOP! Yes! So little do you guys know that the world is tuning in right now, or maybe you do know. This is happening actively, which is all the pomp and circumstance. So if on the count of three we could all just give the world a very friendly Portland hello. One, two, three. Hello! Yes, alright. Welcome you guys on the live stream joining us from abroad and afar. Welcome you guys. Thank you for coming tonight. It's a tremendous opportunity everywhere I go. In this country and everywhere I go in the world, BSOP is the reference point for what a quality club should be. Let's dive in. You ready? Okay. Thematically, when we start talking about spring, one of the very biggest times to be talking about bonsai. Now, what is happening right now? What's happening with our trees right now? You can see it happening here. You probably can't see it as much there. You can start to see it happening here. What's happening? Okay. Sugars are going up into the trees. Buds are opening. Now, tell me about this mechanism. Okay. And the theme for tonight, energy generation. Alright. Tell me about this mechanism. How do sugars go into the growing tips of the tree? First of all, where are the sugars stored? Sugars. Where are they stored? The roots? The trunk? The branches? The leaves? Yeah. All of the plants. All of the plants. All of the plants. All of the plants. All of the plants. Over and above. Yeah. So let's just think about this really quick. On a cellular level, we've got this device in here called a vacuole. Okay. Vacuole. Inside of that vacuole, the tree, over the fall season, is loading all of its sugars and carbohydrates. Now, how are sugars and carbohydrates produced? Photosynthesis. Very good. Alright. So all of the photosynthesis that takes place across the fall is being loaded in here. So we've got water. We're pumping in sugars and carbohydrates. Okay. Now, over the course of winter those sugars and carbohydrates are what keep that tree from freezing right that's what protects that tree from cold damage because with dissolved sugars and carbohydrates excuse me you lower the temperature at which that water freezes okay then in spring season because we've got this loading of sugars and carbohydrates if you look at this as the tip of the root out here in the soil mass you have a whole bunch of water well water wants to even out that concentration of sugars and carbohydrates osmotic pressure we generate osmotic pressure very interesting okay now what's triggering the tree to start allowing that movement of water to move from cell to cell to cell at this time of year what are our two triggers for growth all right so we got daylight length and we got temperature very good excellent daylight length and temperature so now all of a sudden with increasing daylight length with increasing temperature the tree is saying I don't need to be as concerned about freezing I'm going to allow more water into the system that water is saying I don't like the fact that there's so many sugars and carbohydrates in such a low concentration of water I want to even out this concentration so when we look at our tree as a fundamental structure and that chain of water moving through that tree we start to see this major movement you okay this is interesting because how did those sugars and carbohydrates get there again photosynthesis photosynthesis so what does that mean if we waste those sugars and carbohydrates weakens the tree all of a sudden you guys have just identified how important it is for us to manage the growth in the beginning of this trees life this season because if we handle it correctly we generate energy if we mishandle it we remove all the energy that the tree has 袂 gift ok so keep that in mind as we start progressing through the evening because as we start talking about all of the operations that were performing we're gonna focus back on that one fundamental concept that defining concept that is to say right now all of the stored energy that this tree across its life every single year has been able to accumulate is moving to the tip of the tree right now if we diawac力 If we do it right, we generate energy. If we do it wrong, we reduce energy. And if we reduce energy, we weaken the tree. Got it? All right, let's keep moving. Now, let me ask you something. If this energy is moving up to the tips of this tree, is it different? Is it different for a conifer versus a deciduous? Is that a different process? First of all, let me just ask you guys something. Is there a species of tree that if you handle it inappropriately in the spring, it will definitively tell you, you screwed up? Yeah? Is there a tree that if you prune it inappropriately in the spring, it will tell you, you screwed up? Such as? Such as? Apple tree. Great. What about a Japanese maple? You guys wrestle with that idea, do we prune our Japanese maple in the spring? Do we not prune our Japanese maple in the spring? Have you guys heard about this idea of, oh, don't prune it in the spring? Oh, no, you can prune it in the spring. No, you shouldn't prune it in the spring, but do prune it in the spring. What happens if you prune a Japanese maple in the spring? Bleeds. It bleeds. What does it bleed? Okay, all right. Yes, yes. Sugar, water, energy, fluid, yes, right? So when we prune a Japanese maple, all of a sudden at that cut site right now, where all of that water is moving cell to cell, carrying all of those sugars to that growing tip, if we cut that growing tip off, all of that energy starts bleeding out of that tree. And we see it, literally as a liquid, literally as water, bleeding out of the tree. If you do that one year, does the tree die? No. If you do it two years, does it die? If you do it three, four, five years, does that tree? Yeah, exactly, because you're bleeding out all of that tree. So we look at a tree like a business. The bank account starts to run dry, okay? That's a deciduous tree, moving water way more abundantly and efficiently than a conifer, okay? When you prune a conifer, does a conifer bleed water? No, absolutely not. Does a conifer need to move as much water as a deciduous tree? Why not? Because it's got a waxier coating, they're harder, they're smaller, less surface area, they're thicker, more resistant to loss of moisture, more resistant to loss of transpiration, okay? Keep those two things in mind as we move forward. Alright. And what happens if a tree pushes? Does a spring push and then it freezes again? It's a problem, right? Yeah. So what happens if a tree pushes and then it freezes? What happens? Lose all the new growth. Now, does the tree come back? Possibly. Possibly. So think about this. If you prune that Japanese maple for two years and it got weaker, and weaker, and then that third year, that growth freezes, that tree might not come back. If that Japanese maple is handled correctly, that larch is handled correctly, that spruce is handled correctly, and you prune it, or excuse me, and it freezes, that tree probably comes back. So trees, you've got to think about this, particularly in a bonsai container where your accumulation of energy is limited by this space right here. How much water and how much nutrition can you accumulate here to foster the growth here, to photosynthesize and store here, right? When you have a limited resource to do that, you've constantly got to be building, building, building, building, building, generating, generating, generating, generating, okay? All right. All right. Let's move into fundamental operations. So with that, what's the biggest operation we typically perform in the spring? Repotting. Okay. So if repotting is what we're focused on this year, then we got to talk about why we repot. Because. How many of us repot on a schedule, on a calendar? Way to be brave. Way to be brave. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. There we go. All right. So why do we repot? Why do we repot? There's got to be, in anything that we do in bonsai, there has to be a reason. Otherwise, we're doing it for ourselves, right? But this isn't about us. Bonsai is not about us. Bonsai is about the tree. Why do we repot? Loss of percolation. Rejuvenate the tree. All right. So number one, let's start with loss of percolation. Love that marker. How do you lose percolation? What does that mean? Loss of percolation? So that's interesting. If the soil breaks down, are we losing percolation or are we increasing the amount of water that's held in the system? Let's talk about, let's talk about decomposition. Let's talk about decomposition as another factor. Okay? Loss of percolation. This is when we get so many roots growing in this container, there's no more space. There's no more space. Now, luckily tonight, we've got a situation here where we've lost percolation. Now, if we lose percolation, do we immediately dive into a repot? If I'm asking you that, the answer's got to be no, right? Just because we lose percolation does not mean we're going to go back in and repot this tree. I've got to have more information. So we're going to see tonight, we're going to dig into this and see what happens. Let's move to the other one. So we talked about decomposition. Soil particles breaking down. What happens when a soil particle breaks down? Okay, you got one particle this big, you break that in half. Okay, so we lose oxygen spaces. Lose O2. Okay? What else happens? Gary says increasing water. Increasing water what, Gary? Tim says soil breaking down. Soil breakdown. We got that. Gary says oxygen reduction. Oxygen reduction. We got that. I think I spelled lose wrong. What happens when you start to shrink the particle size? Lose oxygen. Got it? Oh, very good. Increased surface area. Increased surface area holds more water. So you lose oxygen, you hold more water. Ooh. How do we create health in a tree's root system? Balance. Balance. We're looking for balance. Let me come here. Balance. H2O and O2. This is how we get health. This is the fundamental pillar of health. Balance of water and oxygen. When a soil particle breaks down, you lose oxygen spaces, you increase water retention, and you start to lose that balance. Okay? So when we start to experience decomposition, too much water, not enough oxygen, we start to lose health. That would be a reason we would need to go in and re-pop. Right? We start to accumulate too much root mass. Now, we've got too much oxygen, not enough water, because we've lost percolation. This is a reason to re-pop. What's the third? Change of style. Change of style? Container, front, tree, angle. This is an aesthetic art form. We're looking for beauty. Right? We've always got to be adjusting and adapting. Make sense? Got it? Now, when I ask you guys, do you guys re-pot on a calendar, what are you going to say? You're going to say, you're going to say, you're going to say, you're going to say, you're going to say, you're going to say, you're going to say, you're going to say, you're going to say, you're going to say, you're going to say, you're going to say, I don't know. That's not good enough. What are you going to say? One more time, when I ask you if you're going to re-pot on a calendar, you say... No. Alright. There you go. Okay. Okay. So, I've got a tree here that has a little bit of an issue because you can see all of the soil is starting to accumulate. Troy, you want to join me? All of the soil... What kind of tree is this? So, this is a log. This is a log. Let's go to the tree. All right. So, I've got a tree here that has a little bit of an issue, because you can see all of the soil is starting to accumulate. that has a little bit of an issue because you can see all of the soil is starting to accumulate. Troy, you want to join me? What kind of tree is this? So this is a larch. Okay, so we have this accumulation of kind of mass. And this is what happens when we start to fertilize correctly. So if we're fertilizing, we're adding a lot of content to the top of this. Organic matter, root growth, higher moisture retention, moss, particularly in the Pacific Northwest. We start to get this amassing of content on the surface of the soil. And you can see the nebari is virtually starting to become buried in this soil. Okay, now I don't want to immediately dive in and repot this tree. Yes, we've lost percolation. But we also said when we lose percolation, our first move is not to go ahead and repot. Now, why would we not want to go ahead and repot? Okay, could be other things going on. Why do we not want to repot? Okay, the rest of the system might still be working. When we start to look at, look at the refinement that we're getting. In the, in the branches of this. Okay, we're going to come back and we're going to prune this. This tree is starting to show a super high level of refinement. If we take this out of the container because we've lost percolation, right? But haven't yet understood whether we've lost percolation because of accumulation. Or we've lost percolation because it actually needs the repot. We may be pulling it out of this pot too soon. And if we did that, all of these tips would immediately start to elongate way more than they're going to elongate this year. They get thicker. They get coarser. The internodes will be longer. The way that we refine a tree is bonsai-ing a tree, growing it in a confined environment. You want to max out what this container does to this tree. You want it to stunt the tree. You want the tree to fill this container entirely, fully, 100% before you go about a repot. So when we lose percolation, our first move is not to pull this tree out of the container. Our first move is to remove this surface layer and see if we can get down to soil that's not yet occupied by roots. So Troy and I are going to go through this process and give you guys just a minute to ask some questions, get caught up. Maybe the hurricane can die down a little bit. Gary has a question. What do you got? He wants to know how much do we have to consider moss growth in the repotting process? How much do we have to consider moss growth? So one of the big questions that's always asked of me as I'm traveling is do you encourage moss growth? Do you encourage moss growth? Yes. Is moss growth a good thing? No. Yes. Can be. So Mr. Kimura used to always equate moss growth to the entire symbiotic system. And he said a tree without moss is a tree that's not maximizing its potential. Because when we start to think about, if you guys think about this container as 100%, okay, from bottom to top, 100%, if we aren't cultivating roots on the very surface of this container, we're immediately taking 30% out of this container that we could be using to develop roots and cultivate a healthier tree, right? So even just by the simple process of stabilizing the soil on the surface of the tree, we automatically make it a lot more tangible for fine roots to occupy that space in the pot, increasing by 30% the functionality of our container, right? But it goes beyond that. Because the moss is the first layer of filtration for anything entering this system. Moss is one of the great filtration systems of the forest floor. So when you start to talk about hard water, when you start to talk about different pHs, when you start to talk about accumulation of salts and fertilizers, that moss takes a lot of that brunt of that initial force and blow of those really hard caustic chemicals, accumulation of materials, salts, etc. And when you guys see that hard water, uh, located on the rim of your container, where are you noticing that hard water is located? At the tip of actively growing moss. Very interesting, that you get a line of hard water at the tip of where the moss is growing. That's automatically telling you something about that mechanism. Okay? So one, we're top dressing and cultivating moss to try and stabilize the soil surface so that we maximize the top 30% of this container, right? We're also using moss as an ability to maintain moisture, maintain nutrition, maintain all of the things at the surface layer that facilitate healthy growth throughout the container. So when people say, do you cultivate moss or do you encourage moss growth? Absolutely, it's a fundamental part of bonsai. Okay, now as I'm working through this, do you guys see all of this black stuff that's coming off? You see that? This is accumulation of all of the organic fertilizer over the past three years that I've been putting on this. Right? Now I'm getting past this black layer and I'm starting to get down into this Akadama. And you can see the color shifting in the soil that I'm working with here. So when I'm cleaning off this surface layer, I wanna be getting down past this decomposing roots, this moss accumulation, I wanna be getting down past all of that organic material down to what we call friable soil. What is friable soil? Any ideas? Workable, workable. Soil that's still intact. That's maintaining its soil structure, its shape. Okay, so I know that I've gone far enough. When I start breaking into Akadama, that's still in the form of an Akadama particle. Does moss cut down into the air going to the roots? Depends on how you use moss, whether or not moss cuts down on air going to the roots. So have you guys ever heard the discussion that when you prepare a tree for show, you put the moss on, when you pull it out of the show, you take the moss? Off, right? So there's a big difference between taking a big slab of moss on a tree that's been growing in a pot for several years, placing moss over the top of it and expecting oxygen to continue moving through that system. There's a big difference between doing that and then taking this tree when you first repot it and it's first readapting to the containerized situation, top dressing the surface of that soil with a mix that allows moss to eventually occupy that and the tree and the moss grow together. And that's how we want to encourage moss establishment in the container. And we're going to show you guys that tonight. Ryan, you mentioned from the start that this tree had a loss of percolation. Yet we often have trees that are mounded with moss that the percolation is just fine. Was there another symptom like watering in last fall or something like that that told you that it had lost percolation? No, no. The only thing, loss of percolation for me, where did those scissors go? Loss of percolation. Loss of percolation. There we go. Loss of percolation is loss of percolation for me. So when I was watering over the course of last year, what I started to notice is as I watered, not as much water was going in, more of it was going off of the edge of the container. And if you guys notice, we're starting to get down to friable soil, and all of a sudden, we're starting to establish this quarter to eighth inch of space right at the rim of the container. Well. When we repot, one of the biggest things that we always talk about is never carrying your soil out to the edge so that the water has the capacity to run out of the container. One of the biggest aspects of repotting to finalize a repot is leaving that lip so that you have a place where water catches and goes down into the container. And that's a very big aspect of finalizing a repot when you contour that final layer of soil on the top of your surface. So it was just that singular thing that I was seeing and saying, OK. I'm going to be proactive about getting this tree percolation so that we can maintain the health that it already has. Because if you guys fail to address this issue, the tree is going to go downhill before you start to fix the problem. It would be better to fix the problem before it starts to go downhill. And this is just interacting with your trees very closely. I got a question from the stream before we get to your question. Douglas wants to know, how do you balance the benefits of moss on the top of the pot versus moss decaying? The flaky bark at the base of the tree. So ideally, moss on the surface of the soil versus moss on the bark of the tree are two very different things. Now, we want to keep that moss from growing on the bark of the tree. Because what it does is hold moisture around. When you guys look at bark, is bark alive or dead? Alive, dead, alive, dead. I got a mixture. I got like a 50-50 mixture. Bark is dead. Bark is dead plant tissue. It's actually produced by a cambial layer that, generates bark, and it's never alive. The produced cell is always dead. So when we start to look at bark, it has no ability to handle consistent moisture, constantly, constantly moist. And that's what happens when you get moss growing on the bark, is you just maintain so much moisture around the bark that it starts to decay. Because it's already a dead, organic piece of the tree. So keeping it off of this trunk is imperative. Cultivating on the top of the roots that are living is also imperative. Is there a question out in the crowd? Roger's question was answered by the live stream. But Ryan from the live stream has a question. He says he always has trouble growing moss. Not a problem we really have in Portland. But he said- We have the opposite problem, Ryan. He wants to know how he can help cultivate moss in a warmer, drier climate. Yeah, yeah. So when you guys start to, and this is even, true here, you know, Young Cho, if you guys didn't catch the stream last week, Young Cho was out at Mariah, she did an amazing live stream. Kusumono creation, maintenance, et cetera. And she was putting moss on the surface of the tree, or on the surface of her kusumono. And she was saying, for whatever reason, the moss I used last time when I was out here died. And I said, well, yeah, it died, because you're using moss that you're picking up from, that we collected from an aggregate surface. And her soil mix for her kusumono is very organic. So moss that's adapted to an aggregate surface growing on a very organic surface is going to stay too wet. So when you live in hot areas, trying to grow moss that's adapted to growing in cool areas is never going to work. When you're growing on a pumice lava-acadama mix, and you're growing moss that is organic in nature from a dirt, from a bark, from something like that, it's never going to mix. So collecting moss on surfaces that are similar to what your soil component is going to be from the region that you live in, even if it's a gas station, or a car wash, or a parking lot, it doesn't matter. That moss is growing in that heat. There's obviously moisture there, which we happen to have in a Bonsai container. That's your very best bet. That's interesting, right? Yeah. What's a good example of a tree that would benefit from the weakening of repotting? What is a tree that would benefit from the weakening of repotting? So this is, yeah, that's a good question. Who asked that question? Yeah, nice question. So there's, you know, doing this stream is a little bit dangerous because you have a little bit, you have a very significant outreach with what we say. And one of the things that I'm always wrestling with myself is, do you talk about misinformation that's being supplied to the Bonsai world? Openly or diplomatically, or how do you address that situation? And I'm going to stay diplomatic tonight, but I know that this won't hold up for the duration of my streaming career, OK? But when you start to talk about trying to weaken a tree, if there is ever an attempt, if you guys are ever attempting to try and weaken a tree via operation, somebody told you the wrong thing. Somebody told you the wrong thing. You know, and this comes back to the way that people suggest we handle ponderosa pine. Yeah. You know, they say ponderosa pine have long needles. So what you do is starve them for water, strip off the terminal bud, rip off 3 quarters of the needles in the fall, and then hope that that tree survives while it produces a bunch of back buds because you've basically plucked it with an inch of its life. If that's how somebody has to go about achieving short needles in a ponderosa pine, they shouldn't be doing Bonsai. The way that you go about getting a tree to function and work for you is make it as healthy as it possible. It can be make it as healthy as it possibly can be. That is the way that we cultivate Bonsai and have success. So there's never a time that I would be trying to weaken a tree by repotting it. Just never. Not once. There's never that time. Guys, see how much the soil surface is coming down? Crazy. Now, when I'm doing this, what's hard for you guys to see, but Ricardo can get it on the detail camera, is we're starting to get intact particles of Akadama intermixed with these really fine roots. Now, when you guys come back and watch this archive stream a little bit later on, you're going to be able to see how much more intact this soil is. And even as you guys are looking at it there, you can see the soil is starting to become very intact. Yes, there are fine roots intertwined in there. Yes, there are definitely a significant amount of decomposing organic pieces. But this is exactly what you're looking for as an indicator to say, as long as that Akadama is intact, I've got oxygen re-established. I've got the ability for water to move through that system. And now I'm going to be able to continue growing with health moving forward. And notice that I'm not really fearing the removal of surface roots in this system. This is a part of it, too, because as you get decomposing organic matter, you get roots. And then you get decomposing organic matter, and you get roots. You've got to take those roots down as you take that soil mass down in order to keep that water inside the container as well. OK, question. What do you got? You used the word stunt when you said keep the tree in the pot for a long period of time. Reduce. I used the word reduce, I do believe. Well, I heard the word. If you heard stunt, you're probably right. OK, I just keep that in the back of my mind. That's one of the things we fought against for years is to tell people in the regular world that we don't stunt our trees. We've got to keep them absolutely healthy. That's it. The next question, so you're going to be doing this process of rejuvenating the surface of the soil. Uh-huh. The soil, the bonsai, on a frequent basis. You're not going to be leaving that moss there for seven or eight years or something like that, correct? Depends. Depends. Depends on are you still getting, where's that question? Right here. Depends on if you're getting percolation or not. It's not a matter of because you got moss, you take it off. Are you getting percolation? Are you not? No percolation? Well, then we need to take it off. We're getting percolation? I'll leave the moss for as long as we're getting percolation. So it could be every year if it stops percolating? Depends on, yeah. So for trees that produce a rapid, massive abundance of roots, a very young larch would be a tree that was, or a species that would do this. We may have to do this once a year. Redwoods, without a doubt, we have to do this once a year in our redwoods or we will not be able to get water into the system. Thank you. Uh-huh. But I will say, look, let's not deny the fact, you know, when people say, ah, you're stunting your trees. Yes, bonsai is the process of reducing the rate and reducing the proportion with which a tree, at which a tree, goes. OK. So we are stunting the tree because we're limiting the space it has to grow. And if we don't want to do that, plant it in the ground, find another hobby. This is a part of it. This is a part of the system is understanding and being OK with the fact that you are reducing the strength of this tree by putting it in a shallow environment. You are. You are. You just are, right? But what are you gaining by doing that? What does bonsai give you? What does bonsai give people? What does bonsai open the opportunity to do? Enjoy. OK, satisfaction. What about awareness? You know, when I started bonsai, my parents were not gardeners. They didn't really have a particular green thumb or anything like that. And all of a sudden, I found bonsai. And the next thing I found myself doing was looking out the window on every car trip for any cool-looking tree. Have we all been there? Yeah, we're like, oh my gosh, did you see that tree? What? And everybody's like, whoa. Calm it down. You know, my dad used to get super upset because whenever I was like 16 learning to drive, I got into bonsai when I was 12. And I would be like driving slash like looking at trees in the landscape. And he was like, hey, look. This isn't the way this is going to go down. I'm not comfortable with this at all. You know, I think it opens the ability to be aware and care about what happens in the greater environment. And that was one of the things about the Japanese garden exhibition that I experienced, is people saying, I had no idea trees were this cool. We had no idea. And you guys, as a club, probably experienced this a lot as well, OK? So if that's the case, you're automatically increasing people's awareness of an environment that otherwise. Have you guys ever heard of the, this is actually a mental condition. It's called plant blindness. You ever heard of plant blindness? Yeah. Have you ever heard of plant blindness? Self-doubt. You could go out into public and diagnose every single individual that walks by a plant and bumps it, steps on it, grabs it, rips it, pulls it, tears it, touches it inappropriately. This is plant blindness. This plagues our culture, plant blindness. You guys aren't plant blind. That's directly attributed to bonsai. Your awareness is incredibly enhanced of the natural environment. And that's the whole thing. We may be reducing the rate at which these grow. We may be stunting these trees. But what they can do for people as a vehicle to raise awareness is probably more significant than the reduction of growth in this tree that's also living quite fat and happy in this tiny little pot. So Ryan. Yes. Also offers people to experiment. To express themselves. Sure. Self-expression. Sure. Artistically, you mean? Artistically, yeah. Artistically? Yeah. Go farther with it. What else? Self-expression, express what? What do we express with bonsai? What does bonsai have to do with the forest? It can be expressing our love for nature. For the tree itself. For our love of mankind. OK. The world. We're sharing ourselves in a way very special with the world. Cool. Cool. I like that. What about sharing your memories as a human being? I mean, what forms our idea of what trees look like? You guys realize there's a study out right now. And you can find this if you Googled it on the internet. 80-some percent of the most fundamental memories that people have are related to trees in their childhood. 85% of people's first memory. That's what it was. First memory. Or related to trees. 85%. What? It's crazy. OK. You guys see what's happening here? I've got some bonsai nerdy questions to ask. OK. Hang on. Just one second. We'll come back. So notice what's happened. Notice how this has dropped, how we've cleaned that off. We've gotten down to a friable soil. I've cleaned off all of these roots. I'm going to let Troy continue to work on this location on the tree. And I'm going to start to move to a little bit of a different region of the tree as Kendall starts to ask questions. Now, because all of these sugars are moving up into the canopy of the tree, and we see this happening with these new buds starting to open up, right? Sugars are moving, water's moving, water's being delivered, and sugars are being delivered here, right to that point where all of that meristematic tissue and growth is taking place. And we get foliage as a result. OK? Now, as this foliage is elongating, are we exhausting energy or adding energy? OK. OK. Exhausting. So those sugars and carbohydrates are what are being, or what are forming this foliar mass, correct? OK. So if this tree starts to open like it is now, and I come back in and I prune, am I adding energy or am I taking energy? Very good. I'm taking energy. So ideally, this pruning would have been done two days ago, three days ago, right? Before these really started to open up. I wanted to use this tree for this discussion, so I allowed it to go. These haven't started to elongate. They haven't fully opened. I'm still OK because this tree has a massive accumulation of energy. OK? So I want to show you guys and kind of talk you through now the pruning process in that early spring season that we start to apply to these trees in different stages of development. And this tree is a tree that we're starting to refine the tips of the branch. OK? So Ricardo is going to bring us in close here, and I'm going to start. Right in here, and I'm just going to talk you guys through the pruning process and the decisions that I'm utilizing to make these pruning decisions. OK? Now, any time we start to talk about refinement, we want to be bringing this tip back to the shortest, closest possible inner nodes and the finest possible branches. This is how we get that transition from thick to medium to thin, thinner, thinnest. OK? And the closer that we get to the tip, when we start to talk about really wonderful and beautiful, beautiful execution of ramification, we should be seeing a long branch get shorter, get shorter, get shorter, and then finally get very short. OK? Now, each one of these lines is a prune. These are where we're pruning that tree. And where there was one, we get two or three. Why does that happen? Why does that happen? Why, when we prune where we have one elongating shoot, do we get two or three in exchange? Hormones. What about hormones? That's good. Thank you. Yeah, that's good. That's good. Hormones do stuff. There's like hormones present. Always wanting more. Always wanting more. That's good. That's good. Thank you very much. And sit back down. No. Not at all. I was just kidding. You guys ever heard of auxin? What is auxin? It's a hormone. Good. OK. We established that. I like that. OK, it goes to the tips. Auxin accumulates in the strongest tip. And what does auxin do? Suppresses the growth of buds below it. So if I have a growing tip here and I cut that, where the energy was being applied to one bud that had accumulated auxin and was suppressing the growth of these buds behind it, simply by the removal process, I've now allowed two buds or multiple buds to grow in exchange for that one bud. OK? So every time I prune, where you see a prune turn from one to two to four to eight, this is the reduction of auxin to stimulate growth of buds behind that apical bud. OK? So as I'm working here, I'm taking back any shoots that have long internodes, that have extremely coarse growth. OK? And I'm cutting back to finer growth, shorter internodes, and trying to improve as much as I can that transition from thick to medium to thin to thin to thin to thinner. Does that make sense? So this entire time that I'm sitting here, if you guys can see here, I've got this big long internode. Can you see that? Probably tough to see. You guys can probably see the line though. This is not the tip of a refined bonsai tree. This is the tip of an extremely coarse tree. OK? I'm going to take that out, and I'm going to use one of these pieces to take over that fineness in the tip. Now, can you see how fine this one is? This feels a lot better. This feels a lot more refinable in terms of its size, thickness, internode length, etc. I'm going to leave that one. OK? Again here, we've got an extremely long internode and a very coarse tip. I'm going to take that off. Again here, we've got an extremely long internode and a very coarse tip. I'm going to take that off. Again here, we've got the exact same thing. I'm going to take that off, that off, and I'm going to continue this process throughout the entirety of this tree. Now what you're going to happen, or what you're going to see happen, is we're going to lose ramification. But where we had one, bear in mind, once this thing starts to elongate, we're going to get two. So this is a short-term loss for a long-term gain. We'll come back to you. What do you got on the chat, Kendall? Well, first I just wanted to mention for those of you that are having trouble seeing these fine, detailed things Ryan's pointing out, I can see it really well on the video. So you can sign up and watch it on the archive video. Anyways, bonsai question. So going back to your repotting process, deciding when's a good time to repot, which tree, when, what, repot or no repot, Thomas had a question. Does no repotting include very small, deciduous trees in development? Ah. So when we start talking about the younger the tree, then the shorter the period of time it can exist in a pot, Thomas. So the younger the tree, the more vigorous, the younger the tree, the shorter the period of time between repotting. But still, when I say that, you guys have to understand and adhere to the concept that we have a reason why we're repotting. Why are we repotting? What are the three reasons? Loss of percolation? Decomposition? Change of style. Change of style. Very good. So any time that we have those things happening, that's a reason to repot. Anything outside of that, any calendar related, schedule related, past practice of bonsai that we're applying, we need to do away with. We need to evolve past that. That's a thing of the past. That's an approach to bonsai that no longer exists. Douglas, to follow up on that, Douglas mentioned, so if you're getting good percolation and leaving moss on, should you clear a perimeter around, say, a JBP? Around a Japanese black pine? Okay. Yeah. I'm not up on my, like, bonsai acronyms. Bonsai lingo. I need to study. Kindle's the bridge. Kindle's the bridge. I need to study. Between us bonsai geeks and the real world, or normal world, whatever you choose to call it. The real world and the bonsai world? So he's asking... Okay. So Douglas is asking... Would you clear a perimeter? Would you clear a perimeter, yeah, to keep the moss off? And he also said, thoughts on vinegar sprayed to kill trunk moss. I wouldn't clear a perimeter. I would use vinegar. Okay. Vinegar is an extremely effective way. Like right along here, if you just took a paintbrush with full strength vinegar and painted that, all of that moss would die almost immediately. It's almost immediate. What kind of vinegar? Just regular, like, rice vinegar or apple cider vinegar. And the reason that it does it is because of the caustic pH, right? Vinegar having a very low pH. Moss loves low pH. Can't tolerate that kind of low pH. Okay. Now, as I'm moving through this and I'm pruning, I'm also making decisions about some of the coarser growth, okay, because we're talking about a tree in refinement. Now, interesting, as I've traveled the country and worked as a professional, one of the things that I never see people lecture on or talk about is the pruning process. And it's interesting because the pruning process is probably where the majority of great trees are created, you know, and people talk about Mr. Kimura and how he bends things, and he manipulates things, and he's so innovative, and he's this and he's that. Mr. Kimura's biggest strength in bonsai was pruning. Hands down, single-handedly, the biggest way that he controlled shape, growth, style, design was pruning, branch selection. From fine ramification to structural pieces, he was able to pull out more character and age via the pruning process than any other technique he executed on a tree. So when you guys have a chance to come back in and look at this, seeing all of these very, very fine decisions that are being made. For example, I have a section here where I've got three pieces of growth in one location. What happens when you have three pieces of growth in one location? Why does it thicken? Why does it thicken when you have three pieces of growth in one location? Very good. The junction is holding or having too much energy moving through it, and so it excessively thickens. I'm going to take out one of those three pieces so that I come back to two. Again, notice. One cut. Two. Two cuts. Give four. Et cetera, et cetera. Never more than two pieces of ramification in any one location, and always pruning back to give myself the opportunity to generate that finer and finer ramification. Okay, now take a look at this. Notice, and I'm going to rotate here. Notice how long this branch in the front is compared to this branch down here. You guys see that? Is this a necessary branch on the tree? No. Why do you say yes? Because it's a void. Why do you say yes? Because it's a void. If you took it out, would you see this rapid transition from thick to thin? It would be much more abrupt, yeah? Okay? If this is an important branch, now when I'm looking at pruning, I'm sitting here and I'm saying, gosh, I've built all this beautiful ramification. This is such a wonderful part of the tree. I don't want to cut it off. But if I get to that point and I stop thinking about what's happening here, I'm going to lose an even more significant branch. Yeah? So I'm going to come back in here and I'm going to make pruning decisions that reduce the length of this branch so that I can preserve that portion of the tree. Yes, sir. Okay, now let's take a look. Now all of a sudden, that becomes much more capable of capturing that sunlight and that exposure. And with that, this is going to elongate and once this elongates, then I can come back to building that branch. Once this establishes itself, then I can come back to building, right? So I'm just going to go through this entire tree and I'm going to make these kinds of shifts and adjustments in the ramification. My final product, let me get rid of this guy because it's staring me in the eyes. My final product should look something like this as a finely pruned larch that's ready to start growing this season. No areas where there's more than two branches in any one location. All of the long internodes have been pruned out. Any areas where we've got large coarse pieces have been pruned out. And the transition from thick to medium to fine, fine, finer, finest has been established in that branch. This is a branch that's ready to grow. Any questions about that? Yes, sir. Yeah, so my question was about pruning. So when you do the pruning and the tape and ramification happens in the, you know, every tree at the tip of the branch, how do you encourage back budding more towards the trunk of the long branch? Yeah, yeah, interesting question. How do you encourage back budding? So one of the biggest things that people think with back budding, and this depends on whether we're dealing with deciduous or conifer, okay? It's a deciduous. So if you're dealing with a deciduous, right, and this is true across the board. If you don't have health, getting the tree to push buds back on the interior is not going to happen, okay? So one of the biggest things about getting a tree to back bud is first establishing strength in that tip. Now strength is happening because we've got foliage out here. This foliage is losing water, which means it's using water. With that water comes nutrition, okay? Now as that's using water and losing water, we got Mr. Sunshine up here driving that loss of water. Photosynthesis is occurring in sugars. Okay? And carbohydrates are moving back down to the roots, okay? We call this traffic in the branch. So when we get water and nutrition moving to the foliage, feeding the foliage mass, and we get sunlight causing photosynthesis generating sugars and carbohydrates, that simple traffic of those resources moving is what catalyzes back bud formation. So we're always talking about how do we force back buds? How do we cause back buds? How do we get back buds? Get back buds by generating growth. Get back buds by generating health. With that, all of a sudden, the system takes care of itself. And then when you're ready and you've got these buds formed, right now prior to it leafing out when all those sugars and carbohydrates, unless it's a Japanese maple, we can cut right there and stimulate the growth of those lateral back buds, okay? That's a hard cut. That's a hard cut. Well, depending on the size of the branch, right? Depending on the size of the branch. Okay? Okay. When would you have wired this larch? Right now. Right now. Right now. Gary mentioned that it looked like the wires are cutting in. The wires are cutting in. I actually, when I brought this today, I was like, there's no wires cutting in. So that means when they go to the detail camera, nobody's going to be saying the wires are cutting in. Gary, just with that fine eye. Gary, get out of here. So close. Get out of here. Get out of here. Okay. So Troy's kind of nearing the end of this cleanup. And you guys can see how much more Nibari. Did you have any idea that there is this big, massive, thick, powerful root here? Did you have any idea that this was so interesting and established here? So all of this stuff gets buried over time and moss and fertilizer and roots and moss and fertilizer and roots. When we come back and we pull this back, always opening up this quarter to eighth inch along the rim, now we've got to come back and we've got to make this a condition that's favorable for surface roots to grow again. Okay? So what we're going to do is we're going to come back. Okay. With a little bit of our interior soil that we used throughout this tree's mix, okay, and I'm going to come back in and I'm going to fill in some of these low points. Anywhere where Troy might have gotten a little aggressive, anywhere where there was just a little bit more soil accumulation. My area is perfect. Yeah. Definitely. No mistake. Yeah. No. So. You were removing the moss. What roots were you choosing to leave or take out or what do you look for? So I'm looking for thick structural roots that I'm leaving and I'm looking for thin dispensable roots that I'm taking off. Okay? So I'm just filling in some of these low spots. Now I don't want to bring this back to that condition where all of a sudden this quarter to eighth is filled up. Right? I want to make sure that water hits the edge of this and goes into the container. So I'm just going to come back in here. A little bit of a low spot here and there. Okay. But all in all that looks pretty darn good. Okay? And then this is what we're going to do. Remember how I said you don't want to put moss on the surface but you want to treat it with something that facilitates the growth of moss? This is a mixture, 50-50, of ground green moss that we've collected from areas growing on aggregate surfaces and ground up sphagnum moss that we've dyed to be gray so that it's not as ugly white and attention grabbing on the soil surface. And we mix this 50-50. So what this does is the sphagnum moss locks together and forms an area of stability so the soil doesn't move. And the green moss sits around that moist sphagnum moss and starts to occupy the surface layer of soil so that it can turn into the next mat of roots that's going to protect and facilitate the continued growth of this ecosystem. And this is why we can encourage the growth of moss. Okay? So we're just cutting down on that oxygen exchange that everybody seems to be so concerned with. Okay? So we're just going to give this a nice light surface treatment uniformly across the tree. Matt says he has excessive weeds growing in his moss. How should he deal with that? Pick them out. Pull them out? Pick them out. So if you think about the fact that you've got a tiny tree in a tiny pot that has weeds growing in it that are going to be competing for water uptake. What do you expect tree growth to look like? There doesn't seem to be a good data to show that molding the top Croatia for burning up partis. When you look at someames or some date trees. Each tree provides almost a Recline net, but the tiny number's done. Okay? maintaining their health, proactively addressing situations, continuing to encourage percolation, making sure water moves through and oxygen move through the system. This is actually more accurate to what we do than any demonstration I could come up here and show you guys. Because half of the trees at Moriah, and we've got 800 trees, half of the trees this year we'll come in and do this exact operation on. Have you guys ever seen anybody teach you how to do this before? Why you would do it, how you would do it, how far down you know to go to do it, what you can remove that's safe, what you're not going to remove that you don't want, how you treat it afterwards so that you regenerate that surface layer and continue to facilitate healthy root growth, why you leave it in the container, how we get refinement in a tree, what the goal of this containerized environment is. These are all little nuggets that I'm just dropping on you guys tonight that are part of the more fundamental scope of knowledge you've got to have to do bonsai well. Styling is like the last thing we should focus on. That's the that's the final product after you can do all of this right. This is really where we need to focus this year to get you guys that full cycle of knowledge in your trees to that level okay. Alright so I'm going to move the larch off to the side. We've done a really beautiful sample branch for pruning. You guys understand a little bit more about the refinement process. Groups of threes, abnormally coarse pieces at the tip, pruning back to eliminate that auxin and stimulate bud growth behind it. We good? Surface layer removed. Water water percolation now available again. Longer time in the container perpetuating that refinement. We okay? Awesome. Yeah a question on the moss you just did. I don't understand what it was you did with the moss there. Uh-huh. Excuse me. Is that just a dried out moss that you're you're putting on there? So it's a ground-up collected moss mixed with a ground-up sphagnum moss. So it's when you say you collected the moss, it's obviously dry right? Yeah. I mean it doesn't have to be. You could go collect the moss when it's wet, grind it up over a sifting screen and all of a sudden you've got it broken down into smaller particles. What is the screen William on the livestream? Yeah. What is the screen? Very good. Okay so think about this. Thank you Troy. Can we get a big round of applause for Troy? Troy. Troy. Our right-hand man. Okay. Alright. So think about this. If you start to grind up moss to a finer size than your smallest soil particle, you're opening the door for all of those fines to percolate straight into that container in that system. Okay? So when we start to talk about what size, the top screen that we're gonna grind that moss through is gonna be the screen that forms the largest particle size of that sort of spectrum that we use inside the container. And for us that's quarter inch. Okay? Now this the soil sifting screen that we catch that moss on that we're grinding up. That's gonna be the screen that we sift out all of the fines and save anything that's above it. And for us that's either 1 16 inch or 1 8 inch depending on if we're repotting for a pine or repotting for a spruce or a juniper or deciduous tree. Okay? So when we grind it over the quarter, anything that falls down onto the 16th, we then sift out all the fines and sprinkle that across the surface. Okay? But say for example, oh 1 16th feels like it's a little too small, it retains too much water, not enough oxygen. We take the 16th out, now this screen becomes 1 8th. Okay? Does that make sense? So we're grinding it over a coarser one, we're sifting out the fines on the finer one, and what's left is what we're putting on the surface. Okay? And we're talking about 50 50 sphagnum. Collected moss. What do you dye the sphagnum with? Dye the sphagnum with charcoal ink. Charcoal ink. You guys ever heard of Sumi painting? Yeah, the ink that they use derived from charcoal stains the moss so it'll never come off. If you use India ink, the India ink is continually water soluble, continually washes away. Sumi ink stains the moss and it'll never go away. Okay? Alright, let's change gears and kind of come back to the video. Back to this whole concept of pruning as it applies to a deciduous tree. Now the larch is in refinement. So you guys have to draw that differentiation of how do we handle a tree in refinement in terms of pruning. I'm no longer cutting back to these interior pieces and starting to regrow branches when I'm in refinement. I did that long ago. This is the ramification I'm establishing and I'm working on that transition from thick to medium to thin to thin, thinner, thinnest. Okay? This tree is kind of in that intermediate stage. You can see I've got an abnormal balance of strength. Notice on the larch all of the kind of elongated growth even in the weakest branches is fairly similar in uniform throughout the tree, right? That uniform distribution of strength is an indicator of refinement. Look at how non-uniform the distribution of strength is in this linden, okay? So now I've got to be pruning this linden to be thinking about that ramification that's going to be coming. Because Because what I've got here is not representative strength or shape of what I'm eventually striving for. So this is coming back to your question, right? And we're going to zoom in here and we're going to take a look at where these buds are occurring. And I'm going to use the rest of the canopy kind of as my indicator for how far back I'm going to be pruning. And typically, if you just wanted to talk about a general reference for where you'd want to be pruning, you'd want to be leaving the two closest buds to the origin of that branch as the ramification that's going to be built. Now why would you leave two? In case you lose one? Didn't we talk about from one to two to four to eight? So if you cut one branch back from this elongating piece to one bud, what do you get in its place? One branch. That's not ramification. So when you cut this back to two buds where there was one, you get two. Those elongate. You cut those back from where there was one, you get two. And consequently, you get four. So you guys understand the mechanism? Sujata has a question related to branching and kind of planning out your design. What do you do when you have a thinner but important branch in the lower part of the tree while one of the upper branches is thicker due to aggressive growth in the top part of the tree? A thinner but what? So a thinner but more important branch in the lower part. But a thicker branch in the upper part of the tree. So you would want to reduce the growth on the thicker branch in the upper part and increase the growth on the thinner branch in the lower part, right? Right. I think that's what. Okay. Mr. Kimura used to give us these little puzzles, right? He would say, I have a tree that has a branch that's abnormally thick, thicker than the rest of the tree. It's out of proportion. How do I thin that branch? How do I reduce the thickness of that branch? Slice it in half, cut it off and regrow it. Make everything else thicker. So you know, in my apprentice mind at that point in time, I was like, see, we're talking about Mr. Kimura here. This guy is magic. He's going to hollow it out. He's going to condense the vascular tissue. He's going to crumple it up and it's going to survive. And I told him that and he looked at me. And it was like the most ridiculous moment of my apprenticeship because I was just like, dang it. Yeah, that's stupid. You know? Make the rest of the tree thicker, right? Now what dictates how fast something in a tree thickens? So we say fertilizer, we say growth, but really what's accumulating all of the resources that cause thickening? Foliage mass. Foliage mass. The more leaves, the more needles, the thicker something gets. Okay. If you want to stop something from thickening, reduce the number of leaves that it has. If you want to increase something to thicken, increase the number of leaves that it has. So we think that elongating growth, it's the length that's causing the thickening. That's not true. It's not the length, it's the leaves that are accumulating on that length that are causing the thickening to happen, right? This is a very interesting thing, particularly when you come back to like redwoods as a species because redwoods, if you allow them to elongate, oftentimes won't thicken. And quite the opposite, you can actually get some redwoods to thicken much more quickly by pinching and reducing the elongation of the growth because it causes a denser branch that accumulates more resources. Now that's not all the time, but it's an example of how the mechanism works. Okay. So what I'm doing on this linden is I'm going through and I'm pruning back very thick, coarse branches to finer interior pieces, always leaving two buds so that anywhere, where I had one, I'm getting two. And what this is going to do is this is going to transition that lopsided strength where you've got this guy that's so strong and nothing else around it. All right, let's come back in here and go back to two. Okay. This one right here. Let's come back in here and go back to two. And let's take this one back to two. Okay. Let's take this one back to two. Let's take this one back to two, and back to two, and back to two, and back to two. And all of a sudden, you start to see the difference. You start to see that ramification tighten up. You start to evenly distribute that. You remove auxin from those stronger growing tips, and where there was one, now we get two. Okay. So for deciduous trees, at this time of year, we need to be looking at the silhouette, yes, but we need to be looking beyond the silhouette and saying, how do I prune this to continue driving the mechanism forward to turning one to two to four to eight? That is your goal moving forward. Okay. Any questions about deciduous pruning? So Ryan. Yes. On this particular tree, you're saying to leave two buds. This has an alternating branch structure. Is that correct? That's right. So the two buds are not opposite each other. They're on different parts of the branch. That's right. So they would be stacked. So what Scott's saying is we've got our branch here. So opposite buds would be directly opposite of each other on the branch, right? This is a very common situation where you would get growth like this and have a junction of three. The linden grows in an alternating pattern. So they're actually staggered. When I come back here and I prune and I take this piece away, now what I get is I get a branch here and a branch here. Now what's going to happen over the course of the growing season is this is going to accumulate buds as well. And I'm going to come back and I'm going to prune back to two and I'm going to get a branch here and a branch here. I'm going to prune back to two. I'm going to get a branch here and I'm going to get a branch there. And we're going to continue to build the ramification on the tree. Yeah? Pretty simple. Yeah? Okay. All right. Ryan, Christian. Yes. What if your trees already have leaves? You kind of touched on that, but... Yeah. If your trees have leaves. What do you do? You tell me. With the information that you've been given tonight, what do you do? I'm thinking to wait. No. No. This is a really good question. What do you do? I'm thinking to wait. What do you do? I'm thinking to wait. I'm thinking to wait. I'm thinking to wait. I'm thinking to wait. I'm thinking to wait. What do you do if your trees already have leaves? What do you do? You missed it. You missed it. Crap. Oh, no. What do we do now? Wait till they harden. Wait till they harden. Now, hang on just a second. What is hardening and why do we wait till they harden? This is a major idea that you just touched on. Water energy is not moving through the branch so fast. Okay. Energy is not moving through the branch so fast. What is hardening? What is hardening? Water is not moving through the branch. Okay. That's great. You guys are still in the clouds. Break it down. What is hardening? At its basement level, what is hardening? Hardening. Establishment of the cuticle. Establishment of the cuticle. What is the cuticle? Establishment. I'm going to put this so that it's online and we never have to talk about this again. Establishment of cuticle. What is the cuticle? Waxy covering. Waxy covering. Waxy covering. Waxy covering. Waxy covering. Waxy covering. Waxy covering. Waxy covering. That reduces transpiration. So this tree, while it's producing new growth, it's very soft and fleshy like this. We say, we know it's hardened off cause it gets firmer, darker and sharper, but what causes that firmer, darker, sharper is that waxy covering that the leaf no longer needs to expand and it covers it to protect rapid loss as daylight length is going up and temperature is going up, okay? So once we've gotten that waxy cuticle established, as that leaf is emerging, we're in an energy deficit, energy deficit, energy deficit, energy deficit. When it's open without that cuticle, we're in the maximum energy deficit that that plant could possibly be in. It rolled the dice, all its cards are on the table. When that cuticle starts to form, starts to get a return on its investment. And now it's getting a lot more return on its investment and a lot more return on its investment. And when that cuticle is finally fully hardened, that tree is back in an energy positive. This is the next time that we can come back in and prune. Because now if we prune and we eliminate the auxin that's formed in the tip of that branch, that's when we get a second flush of growth by eliminating that back to two buds in an energy positive. We get that second flush. Does that make sense? Okay? If anywhere in the course of that you remove that growth and that tree is in an energy deficit, this is where we see bonsai start to go downhill, right? And this is why we're talking about energy generation. That's a very, very important thing to understand in the management of growth. For the time being, you know, bonsai knowledge is so underdeveloped. Do you guys realize how little horticultural knowledge is applied to bonsai? Professionals around the United States are spitting the most insufficient horticulturally deficient knowledge at you guys right now. And it's frustrating. It's a bummer. It's devastating. Because just in knowing that when a tree is pushing growth, it's in an energy deficit, don't touch it. When it reaccumulates that energy via the indicator of hardening off, which is the establishment of the cuticle that prevents transpiration. You can prune it again because that's an indicator of it being an energy positive. You are light years ahead of where you were when you came here tonight. That single piece of information could change your bonsai approach entirely. And I doubt anybody's ever told you that in that way. Right? Mirai Live is full of those moments in every video. Times 25. Times 25. With a lot of coffee. Brian. A lot of coffee. Brian. I have a question. Oh, yeah. Question. Um. Yeah. So how do you encourage or how do you change the longer internode? I'm talking about Japanese maple at this time of the year. Sure. And they're kind of, you know, surging with the growth burst. Yeah. And if you allow that, the nodes tend to be very long. Uh-huh. How do you make it shorter node and control that? That's great. Yeah. Okay. So once we establish that basic fundamental platform, which is to say when this tree's elongating and the growth is not hardened, we're in an energy deficit. If you build up a tree with strength and that first flush is coming out and you want those tips to stay fine, you want that internode to stay short, going in and pinching that new piece of growth, stopping that elongation, removing to some degree some of that strength is a way that that next push, because the tree is slightly in an energy deficit, we get a finer flush of growth with shorter internodes. Okay? But we've got to be careful. Okay? We've got to enter the gray area of is it strong enough to tolerate that? How much can it tolerate? What are the indicators I need to back off? Right? And that would be the tree's response to that operation. Is it coming out with strong growth? Yes, it is. Let's hold that back. Is it coming out with weak growth? Yes, it is. We need to take our hands off. Right? And understanding those indicators is speaking bonsai. So when a tree starts to grow, what is it telling you guys? If it could speak with that growth, what would it be telling you? When a tree starts to grow. Yeah. Spring. No, tell me, speak bonsai to me for a minute. Let's go back to a different dialect here. Speak bonsai to me. Tree starts to grow. What is it saying? Believe me, I'm in an energy deficit. Don't touch me. It's been a bad day. Roger. When a tree starts to grow, what does it tell you? Ok. All right. So when a tree starts to grow, this is what it's telling you. I have enough to sustain and add. That's what it's telling you. I have enough to sustain and I have enough to add. So if a tree is growing weak, what it's telling you is, I have enough to sustain but not much to add. So don't touch me. When a tree is growing strong, it says, I have enough to add. enough to sustain and I got more than enough to add that's an indicator that we can start to work on redirecting that energy fooling with that oxen restart restructuring those branches and dealing with the tree in a different way so as you guys are working with your trees you need to be consistently working on your bonsai language skills as well how are you speaking with the tree with what it's giving you as a as a visual cue in the conversation that you're having okay you make a club announcement Ryan what you got not me somebody else ah what do they got lime um I think the club needs to take a break that's what I was informed you guys want to take a break no nice thank you if everybody was like yes and that would be pretty devastating lime we need to cut the raffle and the silent auction so we're gonna give everyone a couple minutes to go the raffle so everybody can go do that and we're gonna take Ryan out of the main mix but he'll be recording on the livestream lots of really really interesting questions that were coming at us during the break that I want to come back to first and foremost how are you making the decisions on where we're pruning for this tree right now with all that we know about how it's going to respond how it's going to behave my decisions in this pruning process are I want the silhouette of the tree to look like, and number two, how do I preserve ramification and branch hierarchy in the interior? And that is to say, when we start talking about that, and we've got a branch here, you've got branches that contribute to the exterior portion that generate what this branch looks like in terms of its silhouette. But also, if we take that bird's eye view and we look at it here, you have branches that occur on the interior in terms of ramification that contribute to that body of that branch. So I don't want all of the interior branches to be elongating to the point where all of my branches are contributing to the silhouette. I want to be preserving those interior pieces of ramification for the body. However, I also want to be very cognizant. Okay? I want to be very cognizant of this exterior silhouette and working to consistently and continually replace coarse branches with finer and finer ramification to continue to improve the quality and the structure of these branches. And those are the ways that I'm making my decisions. Always taking thicker pieces back to finer pieces. Always preserving interiors so they continue to feed the body of the branch. And always continuing to work that silhouette into a shape that is representative of this species. Most species don't have a perfectly fan-shaped branch. Like when we talk about a larch, one of the fundamental characteristics of larch, and I don't know if you guys have ever thought about this, larch actually have pointy branches. Almost like a triangular shape. So a larch doesn't look like this. That's not a larch branch. A larch actually looks like that. That's a larch branch. Okay? And this is where we start to be able to adapt the way that we approach styling, pruning, and design to accommodate the characteristics of those individual species. Okay? This tree is still very, very young in its development. I mean, the ramification that we're striving for versus what we have now are two totally different conversations. But this is just that next step to transition the strength from the tips, remove that auxin and that suppression, push it back to two buds on the interior, get that next flush of ramification, and continue that building process. Okay? Any questions about the deciduous piece? We do talk about the taper from the trunk to the branches. I know you say it's young. Does this have potential to have a linden like the sinuous, majestic, beautiful tapering? Does it have that potential with time? Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. Those small branches are going to actually enlarge under four years or? Yeah, great question. Great question. Okay. So the small branches will enlarge. Okay. So we're going to take the bigger branches back to the smaller branches and grow the smaller branches out as the next natural segment and transition. So Ricardo, if you can kind of zoom in right here and give me a little bit of a detailed shot. When you come back, because this video is free for you guys to come back and sample the archive. When you come back, come back to this moment and you'll see this very thick to a medium and then you'll see where I pruned off the very coarse piece and went to a slightly finer, more finer, and really fine piece of growth. So the oversized trunk is actually going to look in proportion to those branches when they thicken. Oh, you mean you're talking about these. I'm talking about. In terms of thickening these up. The trunk. The trunk. Yeah, I know. But you're saying, I can't make this any thinner, so the only thing I can do is make these thicker. Correct. Right. So if I wanted to do that, proportionally if I said I want thicker branches, then what I would need to do is to allow these to accumulate more force. Okay. To accumulate more foliage mass to photosynthesize sugars and carbohydrates and to thicken. But the problem with that is you're also thickening the trunk at that point in time too. So it's a much slower process the more mature that this tree gets and the more foliage mass it accumulates to accomplish that exact same thing. Probably what I would need to do is let these branches run and become incredibly long to accomplish that. Now I have one more question I wanted to ask you on the black pine. The larch? I beg your pardon. On the larch. Yeah. Okay. And that is we went through the process of raking the fibrous roots and moss off to try to correct a problem that could have been one of three things. Right. Were you able to verify that it wasn't clogged with small roots and that you've achieved the percolation you were looking for? Yeah. Yeah. And that's why it's hard for you guys to see. But again, if you look at this in the detail camera shot. And this is exactly why people don't teach this kind of stuff in demonstrations. How do you see the fact that we've got really good friable intact particles of soil that are coming out of that and we've effectively removed any broken down organic matter that accumulated on the soil surface? From where you're at you can't see it. But that's the real beauty of this new tool that we have, the stream, because we can show you as well as I can see physically myself doing the work that that's happening. And I would encourage you guys to come back. And see what friable soil is. That intact particle that shows you that it isn't decomposed, right? And that's what we're with that. So you can see those intact particles. You can still see all of the okadama still intact. Now it's surrounded by fine roots, which is deceptive because the fine roots also have a lot of organic matter in them. Roots below the surface are not clogging it. You know this because? If the roots below the surface were clogging it. I wouldn't see intact soil. I would just have roots and that would be the indication if I clean that off and I'm not getting down to that friable intact okadama. That's my clue. All right. This is time to repot. That's what I would. That would be my indicator. I've lost percolation because it's full. Right. Awesome. Nice. Nice question. Thank you. Bishop has one more question about the this linden. Okay. He read that their zone for zone seven. But can it handle the hundred degree heat that you're talking about? That he gets there? Where? Where is he at? He's in zone seven he says. Who is this? Bishop. Bishop? And zone seven where? I don't know. I don't know where Bishop. He's watching. Where are you, Bishop? Where are you, Bishop? Where's your hundred degree heat? Where's Bishop? I'm going to shift to another style of pruning. Okay. And you guys are probably like, well, I didn't realize that I was going to be studying pruning. Well, that's good because that means that we're actually accomplishing something and helping you guys grow. This was the very last thing that Mr. Kimura taught me. How to do. That's not to say he wasn't teaching me the entire time that I was his apprentice. But this was the last thing that he gave me as a scope of work he believed I was good enough to do. And that is to say how significant, how difficult pruning is. Okay. Because there's so many factors to take into account. You've got strength. You've got length. You've got ramification. You've got the potential for massive structural issues if you don't prune correctly. You can dramatically set back a tree. And each one of these is a different style of pruning that we're doing in the spring season. The larch to improve the ramification. The linden to transition strength from the tip to the interior. Now we're on to the Engelmann spruce which this tree's been wired once, allowed to grow. And now we need to come back in and make some adjustments to the ramification to get it ready to wire this second time. Okay. And so I'm going to focus on this branch here because I feel like you guys can probably see this a little bit better. Is that fairly visible for you guys? Okay. Bishop's from Mississippi. Mississippi. I think you'd be tough to grow a linden in Mississippi, but there's only one way to find out, Bishop, and that is get a really inexpensive linden. And why is it tough for a zone seven tree to grow in warmer conditions? Do you guys know? Okay. It doesn't get dormancy. Now what does that mean for a tree to not get dormancy? Doesn't rest. It stops consuming its carbohydrate supply. So when we start talking intelligently, and this is again, we're going to be together for nine months. You guys are going to hear me say a lot of the same stuff. Speak bonsai to me, right? Dormancy is an idea that's out here in the clouds. Carbohydrate storage is an idea that's pointed discussion about what the tree is physically doing. So you can send a ponderosa pine to Florida and for three years it'll grow great, but then it'll start to... It'll start to produce weaker growth. It'll start to suffer from disease. It'll start to lose a branch or two here. And year after year, it'll decline until it dies. That decline is exhaustion of carbohydrates because it never has the chance to shut down, right? So when we talk about that, a linden may go to Mississippi and for a year or two may produce multiple flushes in a year, which lindens don't typically do, and it may just thrive. And then all of a sudden you start to see it just didn't come out as well and it's suffering from disease. And I don't know. Maybe I need to repot it. So you repot it and it gets even worse, and this is the decline of carbohydrate storage. That's what's happening. Potentially, you could put it in cold storage. Okay. So let's take a look at this. This is now developmental pruning. Developmental pruning to start to dictate design. Developmental pruning to start to set the layout for this branch to be wired, okay? And I want Ricardo to come in close here so that you guys can refer back to this and I'm going to show you all of the pitfalls. Okay. That happen in this kind of a situation where you have a tree that has yet to be wired before. So just immediately to start speaking to this and I'm going to rotate this so you guys can get... I'm going to take that off too because we didn't need it, trust me. Okay. When I'm looking on the interior here, remember how we said we've got interior pieces that contribute to the body? We've got exterior pieces that contribute to the silhouette, okay? So when I'm looking in here and I see these interior pieces and I've got all of these beautiful buds. Okay. These really short, nice pieces of growth. This is where I want to be eliminating and removing these long pieces that are starting to push this branch into the exterior silhouette. So one of the things that you've got to continue to differentiate for yourselves is are we using this for body or are we using this for silhouette, okay? So as I'm working through this, any of these really long shoots that are starting to get to the exterior portion of the tree. I'm coming in and I'm cutting back to strong. Secondary or tertiary shoots that exist on the interior portion of the tree. And every single junction that I reach where I've got three branches, I've got this center one, I've got this smaller one, and I've got this longer one, all coming from the same junction, I'm going to take off the branch that does not belong. So if it's a body branch, I'm going to take off the longer piece. If it's a silhouette branch, unless I'm trying to shorten it, I'm going to take off the shorter of the pieces. Okay? So I'm going to work my way from the base of this branch out to the tip, just identifying and continuing to work on that theory of how do I reduce and continue to maintain my branching hierarchy so that by the time I'm done, I've got a branch length and body that are ready to be wired. Okay? Does that make sense? So at every single one of these junctions, I'm coming in and I'm making these decisions. Now, if I take this branch, for example. Okay? And I just pruned off a really long, coarse piece right here. My next pruning decision on this next junction has to be based on where that branch was and where this branch is, which is to say, if this is going to contribute to the silhouette of the branch, I'm going to remove the growth on this side, so I have a branch here and a branch here and then a branch there as my alternating pattern. Let me draw that for you guys real quick. Okay? Okay. Pruning. Pruning. Pruning. Pruning. Pruning. Pruning. Pruning. Pruning. Such a toughie. All right. Here we go. Okay. So you've got a branch. It's very common for a spruce to have a structure that looks like this. Very common for a spruce. Now, we're saying, listen, is this branch contributing as a piece of body or is this branch contributing as a piece of the silhouette? Well, let's just say they're all contributing to silhouette, and let's take a look at what that means. So if this is contributing to the silhouette, I probably want to keep this central stem, which is longer. Right? If I wanted to shorten the branch, I may choose to shorten that entire central stem and keep these two at that junction. Very, very possible. Okay? But say, for example, I want length. Okay. I'm going to keep this guy. I'm going to keep this guy. I'm going to remove this one. Okay? So now that I've got this branch here, when I come to my next junction, I've got three options. I could remove this one, I could remove this one, or I could remove this one. Well, if I still want length, I'm going to keep this central one. But I would never want to keep a branch on the same side as this one that I pruned to, because then that would start to mess up my alternating pattern, which gives me good foliar distribution for that fan-shaped pad. So now I'm going to take that one. And when I look at this next junction, if I still want length, I'll keep this one. If I don't want length, I can take that central stem out. Okay? If I want length, I keep that, and I eliminate that one. And now we've got boom, boom, boom, boom. This is the alternating structure of a branch. Now what happens when we wire this, say we put a little bit of movement in this, now we have this branch. Now we have this branch. Now we have this branch. And that, whew, there's your fan-shaped pad. Does that make sense? Very, very simple, the mechanics of bonsai, are extremely simple if you just think about what needs to be done. Mr. Kimura told me one time, he said, the biggest skill you can learn as a bonsai artist is not how to wire, is not how to repot, is not how to prune. If you want to truly present beautiful work, learn how to distribute foliage evenly. Because you can have the messiest looking branch, in terms of its structure, and if this branch has the same amount of foliage, and this branch has the same amount of foliage, and this branch has the same amount of foliage, somebody, when you look at that, that tree looks uniform and neat. Right? And foliage management, and the distribution of foliage is something that very few people talk about. It's crazy. Would you approach a western hemlock the same way? Do you approach a western hemlock the same way? You approach, you can approach any tree. In a similar way. The question is, do you want the length, or do you not want the length? That's what you've got to answer for yourself. And that's stylistic decisions now. Okay? So, coming back to this branch that I'm pruning here. Okay, I've shortened this one because I want this to be a body. This branch right here, because I've got so much length out here, and this is a relatively small tree, I'm going to say that I want this branch to be body as well. So, I'm going to take off that long one. I'm going to come back to this junction. Now, notice this central stem at this area of three is super long. I'm going to take that central piece out and save these two finer guys. Okay? I'm going to come out here to the tip, and this is starting to feel a little bit obnoxiously long. So, I'm going to save these two fine guys right in here. I'm going to take that out. I'm going to come back to this junction. Now, this is a perfect indication of what we just talked about. Okay? Let me turn this for you guys. So, I've got this guy back here. Okay? Right there. And I've got a junction where I've got one, two, three. Now, notice how long this one is. And it's on the same side as this one. I would be very hard pressed to ever keep that branch because I've already got a great alternating structure established. That one comes off. Now, I go here. Now, I go here. Now, I go here. And my foliage distribution. Is very proportional and well placed for a beautiful branch creation. Does that make sense? Okay? So, I'm going to do the same thing here. Now, notice I've got this piece right here. You see how these two are growing out of that same node? And I've got this very strong tip. Now, when we start to talk about this, which one do we keep? Do we keep this one on the inside? Or do we keep this one on the outside? How do I make that decision? Well, look what's happening here. Look where this piece of ramification is. So, if we're going to follow that same fundamental process, I'm actually going to take the inside one off to make space for the foliage mass here. Which is devastating because we just pruned it and we fell really in love with that branch. It was so beautiful. It was my favorite branch I've ever seen. Okay? So, now I've got this branch. Now, I come to this next junction. You see this guy over here. You see this guy over here. Obviously, this one sitting over that's going to go. Now, I come to my next junction. I've got these guys that are both very long. These guys that are very short. I've got four out of one junction. I'm going to take it back to those two. And now, when you look at this, all of a sudden, we've got that ability to create that fan-shaped pad. It's already built into the system. It's already there. And this is where Mr. Kimura would take a tree like this. In 20 minutes, he would come through and he would prune it. He would hand it to me and he would say, okay, wire it. I didn't know what I was doing, but he made it so I couldn't mess up. Could not mess that tree up because it was pruned to execute as a beautiful branch bonsai. Right? And this is where I say, strongest thing about Mr. Kimura was his pruning. That was above and beyond everything else that he did. Okay? Any questions? Okay, I don't want to burn up all of our time on this because I've got something even more important to talk to you guys about. So, if you're cool, I'm going to take you back to the chalkboard. Let's go to fertilizer. Fertilization. So, we talked about this theme of this class as strength generation. Yeah? What is fertilizer? To a tree, what is fertilizer? Speak bonsai to me. Food? Food? Fertilizer is food? We feed the tree? No. No. It's the last time we ever call fertilizer food. Fertilizer is not food. What is food to a tree? Food is not sunlight. Food is photosynthesis, which creates sugars and carbohydrates. This is food. This is how a tree feeds itself. Okay? One of the biggest misunderstandings in bonsai is, I have a sick tree. Should I fertilize? No. Absolutely not. Absolutely not. Right? One of the most dangerous things you can do is to fertilize a sick tree. What did we say? What did we say earlier? It was a brief mention. I slid it in there, but I'm going to come back to you. What did I say helps a tree become healthy or dictates the health of the tree? Balance of water and oxygen. Health is dependent on a balance, H2O, O2. That's how we achieve health. Fertilizer is not a part of that equation. Okay? If we have an imbalance of water and oxygen, we're not getting water into the system. We lost percolation. We're not getting water out of the system. We've got decomposition. Those are the two reasons, two of the three, that we would repot, right? Yes. Full cycle of knowledge right there. Dropped it on you. Okay? Two of the reasons we would repot. Loss of percolation or decomposition. Too much oxygen or too much water. Okay? If we reestablish that balance. Tree starts to grow again. Okay? Fertilizer is not a part of it. But if we lose that balance, say for example, we have too much oxygen and not enough water and we start dumping fertilizer. Here's our tree. I'm not feeling good. Okay? I don't have enough water. And we say, all right, well, I'm going to put fertilizer on you. Okay? Already this tree doesn't have enough water down here around its roots. And we're starting to add. Ionic forms, broken down forms of nutrition that are competing with the water that is available to be taken up by the tree. Are we doing the tree any favors? No. Okay? Say for example, I've got too much water, not enough oxygen. When we start to talk about carbohydrates and sugars, how do we create carbohydrates and sugars? Photosynthesis? Yes. What are the three pieces that contribute to the creation of the tree? We've got water, carbon dioxide, very good, water, CO2 and O2. Where does that oxygen come from? Where does it come from? It comes from oxygen taken up in the root system, in the root system. You've got gases exchange in the foliage mass. You've got water and oxygen in the root system. So, when we start talking about the lack of oxygen in the root system, where is the O2 that we're starting to utilize for the creation of C6H12O6, fundamental form of carbohydrate. And now we understand, oh my goodness, this is very important. The balance of water and oxygen, this must be achieved. So when we have too much water and not enough oxygen, and we start hammering this thing with fertilizer, are we further increasing the functionality of the roots, or further decreasing the functionality of the roots? Decreasing, right? Decreasing, okay? All this to say, fertilization is a supplemental piece of nutrition to increase metabolic proficiency. We only fertilize when our tree is healthy. So, how do you fertilize? How do you fertilize organically? Okay, that's good. How do you fertilize? How do you fertilize? Proactively. Proactively, okay. I like that. On a schedule? It depends. You guys don't, you know, what's, how do you fertilize? Is there a way? No. No, there's not a way. There's many ways to fertilize. What do you have to ask yourself to properly fertilize? What are we trying to accomplish? What is the goal? We just established the fact that fertilization is not something you do to make a tree healthy. That's balance of water and oxygen. Now, fertilization is a supplemental addition to the growth process. What are we trying to accomplish? You have a healthy tree, do you want more growth? Do you want elongation? Do you want thickening? Do you want wound healing? Do you want foliar expansion? Do you want root regeneration? Do you want the trunk to get bigger? These are all reasons that we would aggressively fertilize. But what if we have a tree like this larch? This is in refinement. Do I want big, thick tips at the end of the branching? Do I want big, long inner nodes? Do I want a massive amount of foliage mass added to this tree? No. No. So this is where we start to look at looking at and addressing our gas pedals. Okay, we've got two gas pedals. We've got quantity. Love that marker. Got quantity and we got timing. Okay, and we've got three general ways that we can fertilize. Heavy, moderate, and light. Okay, so we've got two gas pedals. We've got three different dosages that we can apply to a tree with these two different gas pedals. Quantity for a heavy feed, one and a half tablespoons per location. Moderate, one tablespoon per location. Light, one half tablespoon. Yeah, let's talk about that. I'm glad that you asked. What does locations mean? Can't number of locations be a gas pedal? Really? So when we put fertilizer on the surface of our tree, what are we trying to achieve? Even distribution throughout the container. Very good. Very good. But, but, dang it, shoot. Even distribution. Even distribution. So wouldn't that mean that we should just spread it evenly across the soil surface? Interesting. This is a very interesting question. Why do we put it in concentrated piles? Why don't we evenly distribute it throughout the tree? Now what is the problem with fertilizer? Okay, maybe it kills moss. That's like, that's low on our totem pole of priorities. Maybe kills moss. It's highly water soluble. Fertilizer is water soluble or else the plant would never be able to take it in. So if you distribute that fertilizer evenly throughout the surface of that tree and it's highly water soluble, do you ever get a concentration of nutrition in any one area of the tree? You flush it through, consistently flushing it through, small dosages continually flushing through. So we put it in concentrated locations so that we have more nutrition built up for the tree to access every time that we water. This is fertilizer or nutrition. Deliver it in a manner that allows the tree to grab onto it, okay? Can you put your fertilizer on one side where you can tell which side of the roots are feeding that side of the tree and you want to grow that one branch? That's risky. That's risky. Risky. You probably could, right? Do you have a lot of control over that? We'll come back to that though. Okay. 12 inch container. In general, 12 inch container is our reference. Three locations. Okay. The triad. Evenly distributed between the rim of the container and the base of the tree. Evenly distributed between each other so that we get concentrated delivery of nutrition yet still evenly distributed throughout the container, okay? So if we up the size of this container, all of a sudden now we have a bigger tree. We move to four locations. So the number of locations proportional to the size of the container. This is how we dictate where we put the fertilizer. That's not one of our two gas pedals. Understand that please. Okay? So when we come back to this, if we're just looking at distribution of fertilizer across this system and we've got our trunk here and say we stayed with the bigger container, our second application, do we pull the first application off to apply the second application? Why? Why? Because it takes up to four weeks for a lot of the nutrient and nutritional components to become available in the form the plant can use, right? So when we start to look at this, our second application, evenly distributed throughout the container between the rim and the trunk, between all other applications of fertilizer that were previously applied and currently applied, okay? What about that third application? Do we take off the first? Ooh. Yee. That's a lot of fertilizer there. I'm going to give you guys a hint. If you still have the first application on when you go to apply the third, you should not be applying the third application. You should not be applying that third application because if that first application eight, 10, or 12 weeks later is still present, your microbiotic system in that container is broken and you need to focus on regaining the balance of water. Okay? It's going to get better. Again, it's just an indicator of what's going on. Just a little bit of an indicator of what's happening. This is the tree speaking to you, right? Okay? So, when we start to look at this for timing, what's the shortest amount of time we would typically go in between fertilizer applications? Four weeks. Why four weeks? Nitrogen is expended after four weeks. So, when we start to look at fertilizer, what is the component of fertilizer that contributes to foliar growth and development? Okay. Nitrogen, nitrogen, nitrogen is the most readily available, it's the most water soluble, it's the first thing to leave the fertilizer component. Nitrogen is usually gone out of the system in four weeks. So if we're talking about heavy fertilization for elongating, foyer development, thickening, tissue construction, that all hinges on nitrogen, every four weeks keeps a consistent dosage of nitrogen in the container. When we go to moderate, we're saying, hey, we don't need that kind of vigor. We don't need that kind of production. We don't need that kind of growth. We're going to back off. We're going to allow the system to be free of nitrogen and settle down before we reload. And if we're in a really high level of refinement, or say, for example, we have a tree like this spruce is freshly repotted, I'm not going to hit this tree with every four weeks one and a half tablespoons. There's no way it could tolerate that. It's producing new roots. They don't have a cuticle yet. They're very sensitive. This is going to be a very light dosage. Four to six weeks. Six weeks after repotting the tree, if it's showing me good solid growth, and I'm going to fertilize it every eight weeks through the spring just to reacclimate it to that introduction of that fertilizer. So we've got these different ways that we can quantitatively drive growth in this tree. So just to illustrate this point, and I have to be really honest with you guys, I've never fertilized a tree in front of somebody, but I'm willing to do it. I'm willing to do it for you guys. Okay. All right. So here's what I'm saying. I'm saying for this larch, this is a highly refined larch. I don't want to push coarse growth. However, larch as an elongating species is a plant that we can drive ramification and the development of ramification fairly easily by adding supplemental nutrition. I'm going to go with a moderate feed on this larch, which is to say I'm going to be using a tablespoon of fertilizer per location. Now if you fertilize enough, which we put on eight applications a year at Mirai, take the larch, typically, then you start to get pretty good at gauging that quantity just with your hand. But if you wanted me to, I could pull out the tablespoon. So I'm going to apply this halfway between the trunk and the edge of the container in a concentrated pocket. Okay. This container size, I'm going to say probably five locations is going to be significant enough to deliver nutrition evenly across the system. And I'm going to evenly distribute. Okay. These pockets of fertilizer in the spaces that are provided so that I get an even distribution of nutrition. Okay. That's fertilization of a larch. I know that was exciting. We believe very heavily in BioGold as a good fertilizer resource. How's that? We believe very heavily in BioGold. Okay. So this is the idea of using a teabag. Now when would you guys use a teabag? I'm using, if you saw, I'm using a pelletized form, which means that this has been coated to not decompose rapidly. Now I know you guys make a lot of poo balls, right? You guys use the Rose, the Portland Rose Society fertilizer. It's a finely grained grain powder, almost powder fertilizer. You want to show the folks on the stream? Yeah. It is pelletized. Has a lot of dust though. Yeah. Breaks down very quickly. Yeah. So when we start looking at powdered forms or we start looking at pelletized fertilizer that might not be really well pelletized so it decomposes quickly, this is a great opportunity to start using these teabags. Now these are paper loose leaf teabags. You can get them in the quantity of like a thousand in a pack for 20 bucks or something. And this is a really awesome way to hold all of your fertilizer in one location so that your fertilizer does not seep into all of those oxygen spaces that we have in our soil system, clog up that soil and cause you to lose percolation all the way through the volume of your container. So we'll fill that with the quantity that we want per location based on what we're trying to achieve. We'll lock up that bag and then what we like to do at Mirai just to take away the excess is we just fold that over, wrap that string, and we'll always apply the surface that has only one layer of paper on it. We don't want to apply the double layer. Ideally, we want to apply the double layer. Ideally, the fertilizer being in contact with your soil is the very best way to apply your fertilizer, but you're not willing to sacrifice the oxygen movement through your soil system to get that contact. We also like to use this in areas where there's no way that the fertilizer is going to stay on this soil surface because it's built up with moss, roots, tree's very healthy. So we use this to hold fertilizer on these angled soil surfaces and we'll just drive a toothpick right into that to hold that in place so that it doesn't go anywhere. Now, for a deciduous tree like the linden, the last thing that I want to do is prune this tree really heavily and then have it shoot out these big coarse branches. Right now, we're at a moderate phase of development with this tree, correct? So I'm actually starting out my feed with a very moderate application or maybe even leaning towards a lighter application of quantity, and I'm also going to be leaning towards a moderate or light application in terms of timing. So I might be applying one tablespoon, three-quarter tablespoon per location so I don't build up too much vigor and I continue to refine the shape of these branches, okay? So I'm just going to keep this to three locations based on the size of the container, using the tea bag to make sure that I keep the fertilizer on the soil system or if this were powdered to make sure it doesn't percolate into the soil system. Okay. Ryan, what do you do about squirrels? What do I do about squirrels? Fertilizer. BB gun. BB gun. No, I know that you have dogs, you have squirrels, you have kids sometimes, raccoons, possums, birds, and this is where all of a sudden you have to start to ask yourselves, what's driving the boat, the bonsai or the critters that impact the bonsai? There's multiple ways that we can preserve fertilizer on the soil surface. If you have dogs, put them up on a higher bench, okay? If you have squirrels, get a cat. If you have kids, get a cage. Simple answers to simple problems. Yeah, exactly. As far as we're concerned when we deal with birds or whatnot, we'll move to an organic liquid solution. During the period of time where birds are impacting the state and nature of our containers. Once they're done building nests in the spring, once they're done accumulating insects from all the larvae that are feeding in the soil in the fall, then we can go back to using our pelletized forms of fertilizer. So that's just working within the natural environment, but that's an easy fix. Organic liquid feed is a great solution, okay? Last but not least, this spruce, coming out of the repotting process, the last thing I want to do is fertilize this tree. And I know a lot of people that promote, well, put a little bone meal in there, it'll help the roots grow, mix it in with the soil. Okay, let's just first understand, water, oxygen, that's all it needs. Fertilizer is a supplement in addition to, okay? So we don't need to be fertilizing. Four to six weeks, we see healthy growth, tree is saying what? I'm good. Tree is giving you healthy growth. What is it saying to you? You haven't been a very good student today. I'm good. I have enough to sustain and add. There you go. Boom. I got enough to sustain and add. Everybody together now. I have enough to sustain and add. One more time because I love it. I have enough to sustain and add. Very good. Excellent. When you see growth, I have enough to sustain and add, optimum time to apply your first application of fertilizer. Tree doesn't need it to survive, light dosage, light frequency, until we get past that first spring of growth, moving to the fall. Now we can start to increase dosage, build up strength, all depending on what are we trying to accomplish. Got it? Moving forward from this point until I see you guys again at the end of April, you guys are going to be needing to fertilize your trees, probably prune your trees for whatever you need them to do prior to that foliage elongating or originating. If they're already in leaf, you're going to hold back until that cuticle forms, and this is how we start to practice bonsai in the spring. Small baby steps, one month at a time, acknowledging what the tree needs and working within that tree's system to give it those things to thrive and maximize its growth as a bonsai. Does that make sense? Super easy, right? I mean, but it really is. All I did was clean off some soil, prune a few branches, throw some fertilizer on it, and guess what? I'm a bonsai professional. You guys could do it too. Great. Okay. Last thing and then we're done. You guys have been awesome tonight. Ryan, could you just restate what the types of pruning you did on each of these trees was? Oh, good. Nice. Nice. So the types of pruning for the larch. What did we do with the larch? Refinement. Refinement. Refining the tips, removing coarse growth, making sure that we're creating finer and finer ramification. What did we do on the linden? Transitional. It's still developing. We dictated the silhouette and maintained the branches that form the body. What did we do on the spruce? Development. Foundational establishment of our ramification to create our fan-shaped path. Refinement. Moderate pruning. Developmental pruning. Last thing, disease and pests. Few things that we need to be aware of, particularly in the Pacific Northwest, but across North America as well. Okay? Few things we need to be aware of in terms of disease. Okay? When we start to speak about disease, we need to understand that disease has to be controlled proactively, not reactively. Okay? There is no fungicide that's produced in the scientific world today that solves a fungal issue. It will not cure a fungal issue. It protects from a fungal issue, but it will not cure a fungal issue. Okay? So with disease, prevention is key. Okay? So with disease, prevention is key. Okay? Common diseases that we experience across North America are deciduous trees, peach leaf curl. You guys ever dealt with this? Yeah? Elms, pomegranates, all kinds of fruiting and flowering trees. Peach leaf curl. How do you prevent it? It's happening right now. It's happening right now. Spraying your trees before the leaves emerge. Before the leaves emerge. Okay? Prevent it. Prevent it. Prevent it. Prevent it. Prevent it. Prevent it. Prevent it. Prevent it. Prevent it. Prevent it. Prevent it. Prevent it. Prevent it. Prevent it. Okay, treating it with a chemical. I cannot tell you which ones. They're not appropriate anymore. Okay, treating with a chemical called Clearest 3-336, that is capable of wiping out the spores before they start to grow and infect the foliar mass. Okay? Peach leaf curl before growth starts. Needle cast. Has anybody ever seen needle cast on your pines, needle cast on your spruce, needle cast on your fur? stroma, whether that's Lophodermia, whether that's Swiss needle cast, whether that's Rhizosphera, needle cast affects almost every conifer, okay? We've got to be treating as the new growth is emerging to protect that new growth before the cuticle is formed in order to prevent infection of needle casts on our conifers, okay? So we're treating this as new needles emerge. I walked out into my garden this morning, had classes all weekend, walked out this morning and I was looking at the pines and I was thinking, holy moly, I'm already at the point where if I have a fungal issue starting to flare up in my garden, the needles are starting to elongate, it's time to be treating those needles to protect them from infection, right? Daconil is still the reference in the industry. Daconil is still the best chemical, okay? For junipers, thomopsis, which is commonly known as the best chemical for fungal infection, is the best chemical for fungal infection. If you guys have junipers in the Pacific Northwest, I'm assuming you have juniper tip blight or have seen it or have dealt with it. It is a real common issue for us because of the abundance of moisture, okay? Number one way to treat juniper tip blight, remove infected tissue, okay? Number two way, mancozeb, mancozeb. Mancozeb is the very best chemical to protect junipers from juniper tip blight. What's it look like? The chemical? Oh the tip blight. Oh juniper tip blight, just like what you would think. Okay, here's your foliar mass with your scale, or immature, it'll attack juvenile as well. You'll see this tip starting to turn an off color right now it might be turning purple or it might be getting a duller green and what you'll see is that tip will continue to discolor and that discoloration will move down this foliage mass now if you look closely at this foliage mass at any scale you'll start to see these black spots those are the spores that are being produced to continue spreading the infection so if you get an infected piece of tissue and you remove it you eliminate its ability to reproduce and that's why removal of infected tissue is so effective but we can always follow that up with a protective barrier man goes that and that's a general broad spectrum knock down for any kind of tip blight on our junipers to protect that newer growth that's emerging okay all right those are the only three I'm going to load you with next week or next month we'll have quite a few more let's talk about insects and we'll be done what kind of insects are you guys going to be dealing with very very very soon aphids aphids aphids aphids how do we deal with aphids smash them strong stream of water take them right off physical identification and removal totally legitimate or you know we can use a very mild chemical that can wipe them out just as well how do how do we control the spread of aphids so many people reduce ant populations when you start to talk about aphids aphids are one of the dumbest most completely totally dependent insects in the insect world and most of the time when you say aphids moving it's directly a result of ants you farming okay so just by cutting down on the population of your ants all of a sudden your aphid problems start to disappear or decrease what are some beneficial ways that we can work with aphids or treat against aphids okay we'll save that one all right working with aphids we could talk about predatory mites we could talk about ladybugs we can talk about what else B T the cilius thergiensis right which is actually a bacteria you spray on the tree and it causes the exoskeleton of the aphid to disappear okay all non-chemical ways that we can treat aphids or the use of a broad-spectrum insecticide okay does anybody online have any questions for the next month of growth before we say adieu yeah it's Daconil Daconil uh-huh okay on a Colorado no don't use Daconil on a blue spruce don't use Daconil on a blue spruce never use Daconil on a spruce that's it don't just don't don't don't do it don't what's that on a blue spruce manco's up manco's that would be what I use ah so Daconil is a Daconil is a magical little beast we'll have to talk about that some other time hey listen you got yeah rich just wanted a little clarification on the fertilizer I said place it in piles to create a higher concentration versus an even spread mm-hmm which would provide a lower concentration right he just wants some clarification because he said it would seem like the same volume and water so theoretically it would be getting the same how is it different right basically well when you have when you have less concentration of ions in one location and you distribute those concentration of ions across the entire container and they're incredibly water soluble the location where nutrition is bound come back to this trying to let you guys go okay say this is a soil particle how how are ions or nutrition held in the soil do we know that okay so we've got cation exchange capacity which is to say if a soil particle has the cation exchange capacity it has charges on the surface of that soil particle hey this is a very big broad brushstroke to illustrate the point when fertilizer breaks down starts to smell gets all sludgy it's breaking down into cations and anions in a form that's tape that's a capable of being taken up by the tree okay so these cations or anions have a charge and all of a sudden you've got this particle that has a charge and you lock phosphorus on you lock potassium on you lock phosphorus on you lock potassium on on and it holds nitrogen okay now think about this if you have a 111 Akadama pumice lava throughout the duration or throughout the entirety of your container and you're washing ions through it where they're evenly distributed only 30% of your soil mass has the ability to bond those ions and those ions are being washed through your soil at a very low concentration 30% can hold them low concentration how many of those ions do you think are going to latch on to or be grabbed on to by that charged particle surface a very minimal amount have you ever seen that game Cowboys and Indians where you throw the cards in there and then how many can you catch before they leave to hit the ground it's like that like Cowboys and Indians okay so when we start to talk about this and we're saying listen you've got all of these ions moving through the soil we'll quadruple this in any one location how many of those ions do you think are going to latch on to the soil surface of that particle a significantly greater percentage right so all we're trying to do when we concentrate nutrition in an area is increase the amount available nutrition that's going to be present for the tree to access over the course of four weeks six weeks eight weeks then when we come back we rotate that location so here's our container here's our first application here's our second application here's our third application always rotating to be delivering that concentration in a concentration it can be held but also moving it every four to six weeks so that that location shifts and roots can access that nutrition does that make a lot of sense yeah okay cool rich we feel better about that I think rich probably feels great yeah feels great about that I think we're timed out yeah we're timed out thank you guys so much very very nice appreciate it 
