So like so many other scopes of work at Mirai, a lot of the techniques that we end up having to develop and kind of figure out how we get the job done happen on the fly to maximize the quality of the tree. And steam bending is this long-standing technique that's known in the carpentry and woodworking furniture making boat building world to be able to heat up the core resin and components of wood to enable us to be able to bend very old very solid and very established pieces of wood into new positions. Now as the application applies to bonsai, what this allows us to do is it allows us to save very beautiful detailed components of the deadwood of some of our trees and manipulate those into new positions so that they continue to carry forward the quality of the design and further add to the overall aesthetic of the tree. Now steam bending as a whole is a very tiered system, right? The thinner the piece of deadwood the less effort, less time, less heat it takes to be able to manipulate that wood. We're going to kind of start at the bottom here with a very slender piece of deadwood and over the course of this year I'm sure we'll come across opportunities where we're going to be increasing the girth, increasing the involvement, increasing the heat, the water quantity, and the time that it's going to take to be able to manipulate that wood. One of the biggest challenges that we face though in the steam bending process is the fact that we can't take this wood off and put it into a steaming box as you would with a boat or with a piece of furniture. We have to do everything on the tree with the living foyer mass and the living portion of the tree exposed and at risk of receiving that heat. So we're going to show you the process of how we begin the steam bending process and prepare the deadwood, how we identify where it's going to move, and then how we actually do the physical process of the steaming, the moving, and the after care to that that bend holds its shape and give us the best possible quality product. So in the steam bending process we've got a few things that we need to have prepared before we start trying to heat up this water, get steam generated, and manage this system, right? And the success of the operation is all about preparation. Okay, first and foremost we've got a water bottle. Cold water in the water bottle capable of moistening the deadwood to start the moisture absorption process. More than anything though, cold water bottle to be able to cool off surfaces mainly the living foliage mass if we start to heat it up a little bit too much and have problems, okay? For this very thin pencil-sized piece of deadwood we are going to use just regular standard tin foil as the component that contains the heat inside of this system and around the wood as we're pumping it with steam, okay? Now the benefit of tin foil is it's flexible so there's no limit to how much we can move that piece of deadwood and in the case of this instance we've got a very tight space and we're going to be bending that deadwood almost 90 degrees to get it into the position that we want. So the flexibility of tin foil and the heat retention capacity is very nice. If this were a thicker piece of wood though, tin foil is a little undergunned for a thumb-sized piece of deadwood or bigger to be able to hold the heat for the time that we need to make that flexible and capable of becoming very flexible, okay? Next we're just going to have some standard paper towels that we're going to be wrapping around the deadwood we're going to be using a lot of the old paper towels because they're going to be very flexible and they're going to be able to get them very wet they're going to start to soak into the wood and these paper towels are going to stay on for the duration of the steaming process because they're going to be holding the moisture and the heat in that location that we're going to be manipulating that deadwood we're going to be applying the tin foil around this leaving some air space for the steam to be able to move all the way around the piece of deadwood but a really nice solid durable paper towel one of the most important things we can have, okay? And then last but not least we have a very well constructed standard readily available inexpensive steaming device for clothing it has a very wide nozzle and we want to concentrate that steam so we've used vacuum extension parts from any hardware store with the metal duct seal tape that is designed to take heat and moisture condensation from the heat cool in terms of heating ducts and we've been using this device so that we have a nice stream of steam that we're going to be pumping into the tin foil and the moistened paper towels in the region, okay? Now when we come back to doing that we're going to show you all of the nuances and thought process to making this successful but this is the basic kit that you're going to need to have success in steam bending a piece of deadwood on a bonsai. Okay so the region that we're going to be bending on this guy is this nice pencil sized piece of deadwood that comes straight across this downward dropping gin behind this very fine detail piece and we're going to try to preserve every single piece of this while bending this deadwood up and past vertical off to the left side of the tree and this is really an interesting piece of deadwood because of all of the angle changes as you move out and at the tip particularly having these knobs and this transition to a very fine piece we want to preserve every single component of this, right? Now this is a little bit of a precarious situation because this piece of deadwood is sandwiched between this finer piece and this larger piece behind it so we're going to go ahead and try to just use the natural flexibility that exists being very careful to pin some of these pieces out of the way with just a real rudimentary strip or length of aluminum wire to open up some of that space that we're going to need to go ahead and get the paper towel and the initial hydration of the deadwood started, okay? And I want to be extremely careful because again we're dealing with very very brittle wood here so I want to be extremely careful and cautious when I'm dealing with these because these details are what make a tree particularly a tree of this size so valuable, okay? We have to be careful now because if we wet this area of the deadwood before applying the paper towel the paper towel is going to stick to the deadwood and it's going to be very difficult to get inside that area. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to prepare my paper towel. So in terms of the use of my paper towel I'm just going to take the tip of my toilet roll it's like this also I'm just going to take the tool and then I'm going to come back down to a employ this heefter unit and then just go ahead andś I'm going to start stuffing it's going to be brought up by the quality of thezoil into like the top of theclip tapest or whatever okay so if I were to move it over or dran on this side or turn the top over I'm just going to just pump all the way down. I want to get therounded relationship. More importantly, it's not going to disintegrate when the deadwood rubs together or when we start applying the heat. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to very gently slide this piece of paper towel around this piece of deadwood with the space that I've created here. And I'm going to try to, the best of my ability, get this behind this larger piece of deadwood in this area where it's contacting the greater structure of the tree's deadwood and shari. And this is going to be the most difficult part, sort of, of this process. Okay, and we'll slide that all the way up to the point, even past where we want to start the bend, just so that we make sure that we heat that entirety of that area. Okay, so now I've got that inserted. I've got that nice amount of paper towel, water absorbent material around it. I'm going to go ahead and just trim a little bit so that I can get one wrap, no more. I don't want to create an excessively. thick, cumbersome area because this is also going to be either contributing to or reducing the amount that I'm going to be capable of bending this once we do get the steam in the system and create flexibility. Okay, now I'm just going to tie this with wire on both ends. Make sure that I've got this system nice and buttoned up. Now there are obviously so many shortcuts that you can take to have a quicker application of this, but once you start the steaming process, you're the first. process. thing that you're going to notice is that there is absolutely no way once the steam starts flowing, that unless this system is entirely buttoned up, you're going to be able to have success. And so take the time now on the front end to do all the things that allow you to free your hand so that you can maximize the steaming operation and really get the best possible product from all of your time and effort. Okay, now I'll also notice too that where I'm placing these wraps are in a different location than where I'm placing them. Okay. where the bend is going to be taking place, I don't want these contributing in any way to the resistance that we're going to be experiencing when we start the steam bending process. Okay, so obviously if we're doing this in a portion of the tree that has no fine deadwood around it, is exposed and super easy to access, this process is very, very simple. But in the education process of this entire discussion of steam bending deadwood, it seemed to make sense to make it as challenging as possible so we can see worst case scenario and understand how we work around it. Okay, so you guys apply this as it works and as you can. This is probably the most difficult area we could be bending. It's good to show all of the consideration that belongs here. So now that we've got the paper towel secured to the portion that we're going to be bending and even past that portion a little bit to make sure we've got total flexibility, we're going to take a double layer of aluminum foil and give ourselves plenty of length to be able to slide. Between the paper towel and that thicker piece of deadwood, the same thing we just did with the paper towel itself. And this is going to be a delicate operation as well because we've got to create the space to get the tin foil behind it without tearing the tin foil. This may take a few attempts. We want to be careful to not break that deadwood as we're doing this. But once we have this behind there, we'll be able to moisten the wood and we're set up for once it's wet, close down the aluminum foil and start the steaming process. So fingers crossed. Here we go. Ha ha, victory, that is victory. That is super nice. So aluminum is in place between the sandwich of the deadwood we're bending, the sandwich of the finer pieces we're trying to preserve. And in that process, imperative that we do not tear the aluminum, which is why we doubled it up and also why we took our time kind of slowly working it through those systems. If we just yanked, it would have torn. Now that it's here, we can actually start to wet the deadwood and we're not yet to the point where we're going to be applying steam. So I'm just going to take my spray bottle and I'm going to come in here and really moisten to the point that I can have pooling water, not an issue, and maybe even use the aluminum to hold some of that water around the deadwood so that we start that moistening process. And really. We're going to be using the deadwood to have some thorough moisture in it. If you know you're going to be steaming, the bigger the piece, the longer we need to be moistening it before we start the steaming process. So you might be starting 24, 48, 72 hours in advance to get to a point where you've got moisture penetration in a really thick piece to be capable of, of the steaming process, maximizing its potential and impact on the deadwood for such a small piece, just moistening it here, walking away for 20 or 30 minutes. Coming back, wrapping this up and starting the steaming process is going to be more than enough to make this very flexible and capable of handling the bend. So I'm going to go ahead and moisten this. We're going to let this soak for about a half an hour, just with the paper towel and the aluminum in place. We'll come back and we'll start the process of steaming. So the deadwood has been soaking for 30, 45 minutes now and no noticeable change in the flexibility of the deadwood with cold water. And we wouldn't expect that. Okay. So we're at a point where we're ready to start moving forward because we've got hydration of the deadwood, which means the heat's going to be able to penetrate into the core and give us that flexibility. So first things first, I want to go ahead and I want to be very considerate of where the foliage is in relation to where the heat source is going to be. And if the foliage is above it, I'm going to change the angle of the tree slightly just to be able to move the foliage mass back and away from where all of that heat is going to be moving up from the bending process. The last thing you want heat doing is rising into the foliar mass of the deadwood. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to move the foliage mass back into the foliar mass of the tree. That'll be instant death for steam or fire, whatever tool we're using to get the manipulation of different components of the tree. Okay. Now what I'm going to do is I'm going to come back in here and even though I've moved that foliage mass up and away, I still have some that's going to be in close proximity. And what you're going to see is that the steam is going to find the path of least resistance and it's going to leak out of the edges of this tin foil. So I'm going to go ahead. That seems like it might be in danger just to make sure that we take all precautions prior to the heat being applied, knowing that we're not going to have a lot of time or ability to fix things once this system becomes overly hot. Okay. So I've got my heat barriers up. If this were a bigger piece of wood, higher heat, longer, more pronounced time, we would probably have to use some wet rags. Moisture, et cetera, to cool those off. For this occasion, because we can pull it so far back and it's a very thin slender piece, minimal amount of time, minimal amount of heat, I think that tin foil alone is going to be able to deflect that heat. Now I'm going to be pulling the steamer in and I've got it set on a surface because you don't want to have to sit there and hold the steamer. You want to set a system up that allows it to function and if you've got your two hands free, to one, be checking or managing the system as it heats up, but more importantly, two. Once you've reached a heat where it starts to have flexibility, you're able to move and manipulate that system. That's very, very important. Okay. So I'm going to roll this in. Now I've already got my theory about how the heat and the steam are going to move through this. This is going to be my entry site and I'm going to make sure that that nozzle fits in here really nicely and then I'm going to close this up around that nozzle. I've got an exit point here which is higher, heat rises, so it's going to be higher than my entry point where the steam is going to escape. Whenever you do a steam bending operation, you have to create a point where the steam escapes or you'll literally build a bomb. Now it would be difficult with tinfoil, but we've also done a lot of steam bending with plastics where we utilize those as containers to hold the heat and that has become rather expansive in terms of the pressure that it applies. It will surprise you. Okay. So an entry and an exit point, steam device is going to be rolled over and self-sustaining. Once we have all that worked out, we're going to plug it in, we're going to heat it up, and we're going to start the process. So I'm going to set up this system so that it closes around this tip. I've got to leave this loose enough that I, one, can move the hot air through without impairing its movement, and two, I want to be able to insert and freely remove the steaming device when it's time to start the bending process, okay? So this has to be flexible in every way, shape, and form that we set this up. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm just going to kind of customize and contour the rest of the portion of the tinfoil, leaving a nice exit point, nice and open exit point for my steam. I'm going to neck that down just a little bit. Okay. I'm going to create some binding points throughout here with my wire, and then I'm going to go ahead and close this up right here at that point of entry, making sure that I've got a good, nice, solid, deep passage there. And then I'm going to go ahead and close this up right here at that point of entry, making sure that I've got a good, nice, solid, deep passage there. Okay. I'm going to try and get some more penetration into that tinfoil so that I'm really able to guide and direct the heat. Okay. So I've removed the steamer. Everything is set up. Entry is set up. Exit is set up at the right height. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to plug this in. Now, I don't want to be pumping any steam or anything through the system until I've really got it built up and I've got the system working. I'll put it in there when it's pumping a lot of heat and high heat. This is what's going to give me the strength. Okay. shortest amount of time that I've got heat around my foliar mass with the most effective delivery of that steam to create that flexibility. And while I'm doing this and letting this heat up, because it'll take about 5-10 minutes depending on the quality of the steamer that you have, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to set up my guy wire system and look at my anchor points for where I'm going to be moving and holding this deadwood in place so that when it happens and the time comes and I've got that maximum flexibility at peak heat and peak moisture penetration, I've already got my system set up to be able to slowly move it, anchor it, turn it off, and be done. So when I look at the nature of the bend that we're going to try to create, I see this very nice elbow here. I'm going to have heat moving through this entire system. I've got to think about the forces that are going to be applied. Now if I apply my guy wire too far out in this area of the deadwood, I'm going to get a big looping bend because it gets thinner and thinner as it moves out and this is going to be far more flexible than this base. I'm assuming that my force is going to need to actually be applied to the aluminum in this location and locked up to this very sturdy gin to accomplish exactly what we're saying we want to accomplish. So I'm going to go ahead and set up that system where I've got the wire sourcing from here, tying here, and in one fell swoop I can bend with this hand up, tighten with this hand here at that point that focuses my bend across this very origin of the deadwood. To maximize the success of the operation. So now you can hear the water boiling. You can see the steam rising. We're going to go ahead and we're going to insert our system right into the base there and start filling that bad boy with heat. Okay and we're going to let this really run through a significant portion of this tank and we want to be focused on what we're going to do next. We're focusing our attention now on where is the steam going? Is it heating up the foliar mass? We want to focus on the living portions of the tree. This is where having that steamer positioned correctly allows us to really manipulate the system and maximize its effectiveness. So we know the system's working when we start to put our hand towards the escape route here and we've got a high amount of heat coming out of there. If I leave my hand there too long it's going to burn it but that means that we've got heat traveling through the entire system. I've re-sort of formed some of this aluminum, pulled it up a little bit now seeing that the heat isn't necessarily escaping through the bottom here. That's perfect. You also notice that there isn't a tremendous amount of steam leaving through the entry point. Most of it is leaving through the exit point. So we've got that air gap in there that's drawing a lot of that steam. And when I look up into here I'm feeling the foliage mass. Foliage mass is cool. Steam is being deflected. All systems are go towards creating the right sort of metric for a success. And I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to let this steam this wood for 10-12 minutes trying to maximize the amount of heat and the amount of moisture I can pump into it before I start to try and bend the wood. Now we would stop the steaming process and go for the bend if we started to feel some of the components of the foliage mass experience heat which means the interior of the aluminum foil would be warming up or portions of the foliage mass were being exposed to hot moist air. So we're just going to pump this thing full of steam and let it do its work. So we've got the steam entering through the entry point and we know that it's exiting here because if you put your hand close and I don't want to even put it that close because it is very very hot burn your hand in a few seconds. But we've got that funnel working with that air system softening that deadwood. Now I'm continuing to kind of check my entire system making sure that my aluminum foil is deflecting the immediate heat that's rising from the foliage mass. So I'm just going to pump this thing full of steam and let it do its work. I have a little bit of steam coming out of the rest of the system here because we've attached this piece to the steamer. This is not actually even coming in contact with the foliage. All is good. Now I'm going to run through most of the water to try and give this piece of deadwood the best possible opportunity to bend and to move in the way that we want. I would stop the system or cut it short and go for the bend though if I felt the aluminum getting too hot or I felt the foliage mass starting to heat up behind my aluminum heat shield. And so I'm just continually kind of monitoring that process and making sure that that system is good. As long as all is good in the foyer mass we're gonna steam this for as long as we can. Use the majority of the water and go ahead and make that bend after we've got good solid penetration and saturation. The moment is upon us my friends. We basically boiled all of the water into steam. The tin foil looks as though it's going to fall apart. It's a perfect sign. Foliage is doing great. We're at that point and I just gave this a little test bend and it's really turned into a very soft piece of deadwood. Now I've got gloves on. I obviously can't leave my hands in front of this while it's still steaming because even with gloves it'll burn me. So I'm gonna go ahead and I'm going to, I have my pliers set, I have this set, I have my wire set. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna shift the steamer out into open air not pointed towards anything and I'm just going to gradually and slowly manipulate this deadwood trying to preserve the integrity and I'm focusing the pressure of my bend on all of the areas that I want that to occur. And it's literally like beef jerky at this point in time. I've got total control. Now the heat is escaping vertically so I'm gonna have to shift my hands and use that. I've got my guy wire set up already. You can see how malleable and how crazy that is. No cracks, no drama, everything is just exactly as we want it. I'm gonna go ahead I'm gonna take my pliers and I'm gonna lock this in real quick. Just to get this up to the point where we want it there and then watch closely how I manipulate this system with the the tail because I want to continue it moving in this direction. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna take this tail and I'm gonna continue pulling over in this way just to get that past that vertical like we talked about. I'm gonna lock this system off. Just to get that past that vertical like we talked about I'm gonna lock this system off. here. Okay, I've got another tail here or I can even use the same one and I can even create a little bit more bend right here just to hold that right up and out of the way. Okay, I'm going to loosen that a little bit. I'm actually going to take a step back. I see I've got more flex and I've got more capacity here to potentially tighten and increase that holding and movement in that direction. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take it. I'm going to try to get as dramatic of a move as I possibly can out of that dead wood and just get it all the way bent out of the way, create as much shape as I possibly can. Everything is totally intact, nice and hot. Everything's working perfectly. Now we can go ahead and we can let it rest. So we've got this beautiful, beautiful shape. Interesting. If we wanted to, and this is where we start to have the ability. Because we overpress. We overplayed the length. We actually could start to create some shape there. I think this is going to be better going off into the foliage mass. I'm going to take advantage of the opportunity to see these curves that occur through there and just go ahead and enjoy what we've been able to accomplish with this steam bending technique. I now want to go ahead, let it cool for a moment. Then we're going to open it up and we're going to take a look at what it looks like and we're going to cool it down rapidly. Okay, so the moment of truth, we've given it about two or three minutes. Just to let the excess steam burn off the top, I'm going to go ahead and start cutting the pieces that were just holding the tin foil so that we can unwrap it. The nice thing about the tin foil and the paper towel is in the removal process, as difficult as it was in the application process because they were so fragile. In the removal process they're very easily removed and so to tear them and be able to cool this piece of deadwood off more rapidly is going to solidify its position a lot more soundly and this is one of the golden sort of aspects of these less expensive and less significant materials. I'm now to the aluminum of the paper towel. I'm going to go ahead and just remove that. You guys are going to kind of see just how beautiful this bending process is. The grain is not going to be split. It's not going to be cracked. It's not going to be reduced in any ways or diminished. It's just going to be different. Now that I've got it in its final position I'm just going to cool it down. The nice clean spray really chill that core of wood and you can see that this used to be here coming straight out. We unfolded that brought it back up and actually changed the direction. Now you'll notice that this creates kind of a very pronounced loop on the front of this tree. When we let this go there is going to be some rebound in say a day or two and it will kind of come back which is why we exaggerated the bend with that last little bit of flexibility before the composition really cooled down. All in all a very successful operation. Exactly what we would plan to see with that level of proactive sort of approach to the steam bending process. Thank you for watching and I'll see you in the next video. 
