What's going on Mirai Live community? Super duper excited to be here with you tonight and launching sort of the next series of streams that I think are going to establish a backbone to really grow you guys as bonsai practitioners and give you some solid technical fundamental basis for expanding and building your bonsai approach. And what better way to kick off sort of this fundamental series in place of the BSOP stream that we did all last year than by breaking down wiring and the practice of wiring to give you guys the paint and the paintbrush to be able to build your creations on. Now, we want to start off and systematically build on this skill set. And so I'm going to dive right into wiring and just sort of lay out the foundation that's going to set us up to be successful. And at Mirai, every time we approach a single bonsai, every single piece of wire, we ask ourselves one significant question. And that question is, what are we trying to accomplish? What are we trying to accomplish? Now, one of the biggest mistakes that I see made in wiring across the world as I travel is people wire the tree first and think about what they're going to do second. And this is not an effective way to be executing bonsai design. We should be and need to be and have to be asking ourselves, what are we trying to accomplish? One of the big reasons that we're helping you guys build your concepts of design and your understanding of design and how you break down that process of design is so that you have that process already in mind and laid out for yourself mentally before approaching the tree physically. And that allows us to answer this question, what are we trying to accomplish? Okay. Now, there's two things every single piece of wire and every single action that we take in bonsai also need to succeed in. Needs to succeed in providing function. It has to work, okay? And it needs to be aesthetically pleasing. So we're always, always, always considering function and aesthetics. Does it work and does it look good while it's working? Okay. So what are we trying to accomplish is what allows us to start to crack into where we start, how we start, but we're always making sure that whatever we do, whatever action we take, works and looks good. Okay. Now, as far as wiring, we're going to lay out three overarching sort of governing principles that we abide by whether we're structurally wiring or we're wiring the finest branches on our finest pads of the tree. Okay. So now that we've got function and aesthetics established and we understand that we're asking ourselves, what are we trying to accomplish, I want to establish three fundamental rules, right? We don't like to follow rules and we don't like to create rules at Mirai. Bonsai is too malleable of an art form. But in the technical practice of wiring, we need to have our boundaries that we follow to give us the best possible function and aesthetics. Okay. So three rules. These will be the only three rules that I establish for you guys in terms of the wiring process. All right. So rule number one, same angle on every turn. Every single turn of wire that we apply, whether it be a structural piece of wire, whether it be a fine piece of wire, wiring out the finest pad, is going to have the same angle on that turn. And that angle that maximizes our function and aesthetics is a 55 to 60 degree angle. Now you should be asking yourselves, hang on just a sec. Common book knowledge says 45 degree angle is the most effective angle to apply wire out. My instructors have taught me that. Bonsai practitioners across the globe have lived by that for the past 20, 30, 40, 50 years, as long as bonsai has been practiced. It's true to a degree, but I don't know that everybody was always asking, what are we trying to accomplish and trying to maximize the function and aesthetics of the wire? When we consider the function of the wire, in order to not overly work hard in copper, and in order to give aluminum the best possible angle to not only provide rotation and bend, front to back, side to side movement, 55 to 60 degree angle, increasing that angle slightly from that 45 degrees, gives us far more function with a far softer piece of wire to achieve that movement that we're striving for. In addition to that, when we talk about the aesthetics of it, that uniformity of every single turn of that wire being even and same angle makes the wire and that pattern of the wire disappear. And inside of that, that uniformity of that angle in terms of aesthetics, elongating that past 45 reduces the quantity of wire on our tree and improves the overall appearance that we get to see. Now I want to take you into the studio and I want to show you guys the correct way to do this and compare it to some of the errors that we can make so you're able to visually see the function and the aesthetics of the same angle on each turn. In the application of structural wire, we need to use both hands. Now the hand that's applying the wire is going to use the length of the wire as leverage to be able to smoothly apply the wire. The hand that's supporting is going to be maintaining contact of the wire to the branch so that we're able to establish that similar angle and we're able to maintain contact to avoid spacing in the application of the wire. Again, that angle that we're trying to achieve is that 55 or 60 degree angle. Watch closely. So there's two major issues that can cause us to really lose that same angle on every turn. One of the major issues is not supporting the contact of the wire in the branch. So if I'm just applying here without supporting, it's hard for me to get that guidance and also that reference point for that support with the branch, which starts to make it very, very inconsistent in terms of the application. The second issue that we run into a lot of times is people try to manage the thick structural wire too close to the branch so we lose that consistency and the force being delivered compared to if we're using the length of the wire to apply the leverage, which gives us a much smoother application. This is exactly what we're trying to avoid. This is not how we want to be applying structural wire. Utilizing your hand to support and maintain that contact gives consistency to the application using the length of wire and the leverage to create that consistency of force and that rhythm of pulling the wire down the branch, establishes that 55 or 60 degree angle. Let's take one more look at how we do this correctly. Using my hand to support, using the leverage of the length of my structural wire, you can see how much easier it is to consistently apply this thicker wire to this branch and achieve that similarity of angles that we're looking for in our application of structural wire. Our second major rule that we like to establish or try to establish in terms of the consideration of function and aesthetics is same spacing between each angle. Now this is an interesting one when we start talking about that same spacing because there isn't a set spacing that is going to exist. This is going to differ based on the girth of the branch and the gauge of the wire that we're applying to that branch. However, it is a checks and balances for the same angle on each turn, because as long as we maintain that same angle on the front side as we're applying, on the back side as we're applying, on the top and on the bottom, that angle being consistent will, over the course of wiring that branch, give us the same spacing from one turn to another so that over the course of that branch, that spacing is equivalent and we get that repetitive pattern that again maintains the angle that gives us maximum function as well as creates the pattern that allows the wire to disappear to improve the aesthetic. So let's take a look at how this works out when we execute that same angle on every turn to achieve that same spacing between each turn and to make sure that we're maximizing function and aesthetics. When we come back and talk about the idea of same spacing, we want to make sure that the distance between each curve is similar so that we're maintaining that 55 or 60 degree angle of application across every single movement of the wire. This gives us similarity in the pattern and allows our wire to aesthetically disappear and also maintains the same function of that 55 degree angle over the course of our branch. So if we're not using our hands correctly to one, support the wire to the branch and two, using the length of the wire to provide leverage and a consistent application of force, we're going to start to establish an uneven spacing between our coils. And let's see how that happens. So when I'm just supporting or holding the branch but not necessarily guiding the wire, and I'm using sort of up close or longer turns where my application of leverage is applied, all of a sudden, we start to see this spacing between each coil start to differentiate and become significantly less effective. Now, the problem with this is tighter turns mean that we've got to bend the branch far more in these areas where this turn is tight to get this wire to flex and hold. When we get longer turns, all of a sudden we have less wire and we have less expansion and less control of the movement of the branch. We want even distribution of force across this branch and even control of the movement of the branch, which is why we want to accomplish that same spacing. Same spacing means that we're achieving a 55 or 60 degree angle on each of these turns. This is not what we want to see happening when we're applying structural wire. And the way that we fix it is by maintaining contact with our supporting hand and using the leverage of the wire to maintain a consistent application of force as we apply the sticker wire. Let's take a look at how we fix this and do it correctly. Using my supporting hand, I'm going to focus on maintaining contact with the branch and the wire. Using my application hand, I'm going to use the leverage of the wire to apply a consistent force. Now, let's see if our spacing works out to be the same as we originally set it to be. Almost perfect. Almost perfect. Just based on the simple, fundamental utilization of the supporting hand and the application hand in the way that we need to apply technique to maximize our structural wire. The final rule in terms of really proficiently wiring a bonsai, regardless of the gauge of wire that we're utilizing, is to be sure we have no gaps. Between wire and branch. Now, we're going to go forward and we're going to explain the actual technique that you guys need to utilize to proficiently apply wire in all of its varying forms to the tree to make sure that the tree doesn't suffer, the wire is applied in the most proficient way, and we have that maximization of function and aesthetics to achieve what we've decided we're trying to accomplish. But I do want to say this. In the establishment of no gaps between the wire and the branch, we're creating a system where the branch directly responds to the movement of the wire so that any move we make flexes the wire and the branch to an equal degree. When we have that space between the wire and the branch, we can move the wire, but the branch inside of that, finding those spaces to relieve that tension being applied, doesn't move with the same degree as the wire itself. And this is where we lose some of the function and we also create, that negative space that decreases the aesthetic quality of our wire. Let's take a look at this, how it looks, but also let's take a look at this in terms of how we accomplish this without damaging the tree, without being too rough, without being overly aggressive, without crushing, and also how we make sure that when we do apply the wire, we're able to mitigate this to the biggest possible degree. Notice that as we show the contact of the wire with the branch, or in this case the dowel, that there's no negative space between the wire and the dowel. It's important to understand that this lack of space is accomplished as much by the support of this hand maintaining contact as the wire is being applied, as any sort of force or application of wire to the branch being applied by the hand that's actually wrapping the wire. This support here is what eliminates those spaces and this is a fundamental aspect of achieving no gaps between the wire and the branch. Improper use of the hands has given us inconsistent angles, inconsistent spaces, and one of the other things that's occurred here is we're starting to have a lot of separation of the wire from the branch. Now, as a result of these spaces that are occurring between the wire and the branch, we're going to lose the ability for this wire to hold the effective bend that we're trying to accomplish with the application. We said we need to consider function and aesthetics. Not only does this wire not function, it also looks quite poor in its application. This is not how we want to be applying wire and not the aesthetic and the product that we want to be achieving. Let's take a look at how we shore this up and do this better. By maintaining that contact with my supporting hand and using the leverage of the big wire, I'm going to be able to consistently apply a very nice, consistent angle, similar spacing, but notice now that there's no gap between the wire and the branch. This is going to be effective wire to evenly distribute the force of the bend and hold the branch in the exact position we decide to place it. Okay, now let's see this applied to an actual tree. I'm going to be using the length of the aluminum to be maintaining that same consistent application of force, and I'm going to be using the supporting hand as I move down to maintain that contact between the wire and the branch so that I get that really nice angle, I get that even distribution of space, and I make sure, in that supporting hand, that I'm making that contact of the wire and the branch. So now you can see we've gotten that even distribution of that 55 or 60 degree angle. You can see that there's wonderful continuity and contact of the wire to the branch without causing damage, without crushing, and then I'm going to come back in here and I'm just going to check out my spacing to see if I consistently maintain, and it looks like we've really got this beautifully structurally wired. In every single sort of checkpoint of how we apply structural wire in a very sustainable and quality, functional, aesthetically pleasing way. So now that we've laid the foundation to have a really solid, clear-cut, governing methodology to these overarching major concepts for wire application, we need to start breaking wire down into two very specific functions, okay? So when we start to talk about this, the goal for this whole video is structural wire, okay? Now when we talk about structural wire, structural wire and the theory, strategy, and technique behind structural wire varies greatly from the wiring that we do to define and form our pads and do our secondary tertiary wiring, okay? So I want you guys to draw a very significant line straight down the middle, so we understand that structural wiring is one thing, secondary tertiary, or what we would consider to be our fine branch wiring. This is an entirely different world that we're not going to be discussing today. And one of the biggest reasons that a lot of you guys struggle or are confused or don't quite get either what we're talking about in the Mirai live stream, or don't quite understand how to make the correct decisions and apply the correct techniques and get the best function and the best aesthetics is because a lot of the concepts and the techniques for secondary and tertiary wiring are pulled into the structural realm, right? When in all actuality and in reality, the structural wiring is its own unique thing that derives its function from its own very specific areas on the tree and it sets the backbone for the strategy that applies to secondary and tertiary wiring. Okay? So let's understand structural wiring to be setting the backbone of, number one, trunk shape, and number two, primary branch shape. Okay? And primary branches being the branches originating, from the trunk. Okay, so when we come back and we start talking about our primary backbone of design, it's always the trunk. When we talk about structural wiring, we're either going to be setting the shape of the trunk or we're going to be setting the shape of the primary branches which are the branches emerging from the trunk. Alright? Let's be very clear about that. Okay? Now when we start to, and I'm just going to, just kind of back into this a little bit, in terms of how we start to move between these two things. When we start to work with a very young tree that we're developing, this may be a tree whose trunk shape we would like to alter. Alright? And if we're going to be wiring the trunk, we need to have a point where that wire gains function. Alright? Now with structural wire, when we talk about the function of structural wire, the function is derived from contacting a point of immobility. Alright? And I'm not going to write that down because that doesn't mean anything. Contacting a point of immobility. Cool. Where is that point of immobility? That's the question. Where is that point of immobility? Now if we're wiring the trunk, that point of immobility on the trunk is the crown of the root system. Okay? And the crown of the root system is where that tree joins the soil line and goes from trunk to roots. Okay? So when we start to think about and conceptualize creating a trunk line by wiring that with our structural wire to change the shape and form of that trunk, the point where our wire gains function is the crown of the roots where the trunk intersects the soil line. This concept will dictate every single way that we approach wiring the trunk of our tree. Now when we go to the primary branch shape and we start to say, what is that point of immobility? You say this point of immobility. Speak to that. Tell us about that. Where our trunk intersects and that branch originates from that trunk. We call this the branch collar or the branch shoulder. This point in terms of establishing the functionality for our structural wire on our primary branching is the point of immobility that our wire must contact to have function. Collar slash shoulder of primary branch. Let's take a look at the anatomy of both of these things before we move forward so that you guys have a very clear image in your head of where these locations exist and how they play into the strategy that we develop to execute what are we trying to accomplish with function and correct aesthetic. So when we start to define the crown or try to identify the crown, oftentimes we'll have to pull back the surface layer of soil to find where the nebari spreads and actually forms that junction of the trunk to the root system. Now softer barked trees like a beech, we want to be very careful when we're pulling this back so that we don't scar this really soft thin barked portion of the trunk. And thankfully on this tree we're not going to have to go very far. I'm already starting to identify some spread in the nebari right here around the base. So I'm just going to go down and explore and see if there's any more flare that I can get out of this base and it looks like I do have a little bit more nebari forming here creating that nice stable flare that's going to give us a really beautiful aesthetic. That then becomes the crown that I'm going to use as the anchor point whenever we start wiring and applying wire to structurally change the shape of the trunk of this tree. So I'm going to go ahead and pull this all the way off of 360 degrees of the trunk here. Make sure that we're good to go in terms of having total identification of the crown and understanding this structure is really important so that we can formulate our strategy when we're trying to when we start to think about what are we trying to accomplish. We get to form the strategy of how we go about accomplishing that knowing the point of functionality being the crown when we start to adjust the shape of the trunk and using that as an anchor point. So I'm just kind of getting rid of some of this overgrown root mass here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to come in and cut clean off some of these roots that are up near the surface get down to that really structural nebari that we have sitting below it and we're right there at the crown of the tree. Just get this nice and cleaned up for you guys so that we can clearly see what we're dealing with. Now if we were doing a full fledged repot of the tree we would probably clean the trunk off we would better identify this base etc. And if you guys want to see that the beach forest creation showed Troy and I really digging into bringing out the nebari of these beautiful long slender beach that are just so elegant. And you guys can check that out to see the whole kit and caboodle in terms of a repot. Okay. It's a little bit dark because it's wet but here we see the flare as that base joins that soil. We see that flare. This is the crown of the tree. Anytime that we're going to be adding structural wire we're going to be just coming in contact with this crown anchoring our wire into the solid stability of the root mass here and crossing that point of function so that any bend that we place in the upper portion of this trunk is anchored by that point of immobility and that point of contact. This is the crown of our tree. So as we dissect the anatomy of the tree and we start to look at those functional areas that give us that point of immobility and that area that our structural wire needs to hit to give function, we see the shoulder of this branch is the location where our primary structure, our primary branches, any of these branches that are originating from this trunk line, we see that junction right here as the shoulder or collar. Okay. And this occurs again in a 360 degree circumference of that branch. When we approach this with structural wire we just have to hit that point still maintaining that same angle as we enter that shoulder but hit that point of immobility. That'll be the point where the wire has low mobility here and high mobility here and that movement in the wire when we flex that branch at that point of the collar is what's going to provide the structure and the support for us to change the shape of our primary branching. If we move up the trunk a little bit we can see areas where we actually have older branches that were removed and the shoulder still remains because this is a significant point for the healing process. And as we move up the trunk we see smaller branches still have a shoulder, right? And these will require smaller pieces of wire to be able to structurally set these branches but every time a branch originates from the trunk it always has this collar or shoulder that forms that point of immobility and that point that we need to hit to gain function in our structural wire application. All right. So now that you guys have seen the anatomy we've looked at some of those points I want to take you guys deep into structural wiring and your understanding of how to manipulate the shape of a trunk. But before we do that we need to spend some time with the mechanics that are very, very specific to the application of structural wire. Those thicker gauges in those really pertinent points that we've got to hit to give it function. From body placement to the use of both of our hands let's dive into what we need to be doing to have success with every gauge in any situation with our structural wire. Come back into the studio with us for just a brief moment. Okay. So diving into the mechanics of structural wire application there's a few fundamental things that we need to understand that are very different than the way we wire secondary tertiary branches. Okay. So in this process say for example and this is all hypothetical at this point because we haven't applied wire to the trunk but we want to talk about our body position. All right. When we're applying structural wire we always want to be standing to the side of the branch. Okay. So if you notice here this branch is protruding and I'm to the side of it. Right. And this is a far better position to be able to support the branch and gain the leverage of pulling and pushing the wire as opposed to if I move to the side of the branch here all of a sudden I'm trying to apply a much thicker gauge to the branch where I can't see the turns I can't necessarily see those points of contact and I'm pulling the wire towards me I don't have the same amount of leverage with the application hand. I don't have the same visibility with the supporting hand. Okay. So to better illustrate this I have a little bit of a dummy branch here. And this is to say if this branch were protruding from this tree in a structural application scenario I would always be standing here in relation to the application of wire structurally around this branch as opposed to standing here looking down the branch at the tip trying to get that thicker application of wire around this branch with no reference to my angle to the distance between each turn or to the ability to hold that wire in contact with that branch and really get that elimination of gaps that give my wire function and create that aesthetic. Okay. So body position is a big part of understanding how to structurally wire. The reason that I bring this to your attention because if we're starting to wire the finer branches and create ramifications secondary, tertiary wiring we would always be sitting at the tip of the branch and wiring these branches towards us to be entering the different shoulders and having that layout of the pattern that gives us that presentation of the branch pad. This is a fundamental and major, major difference to being able to structurally wire with proficiency always orienting yourself so that you're standing to the side of the branch or the side of the trunk that you're wiring to give yourself that leverage that visibility that capacity to support. The next major discussion of mechanics in terms of application of structural wire is the selection of the gauge of wire that we're going to be applying. Now, a lot of people have the misconception that we want to apply a gauge that allows us to just achieve the amount of movement that we want. We need to be very clear though that when we take the time to apply structural wire to a tree we need to be applying a gauge of wire that allows us to move the branch anywhere it could possibly be moved. And this is a significant shift in the mentality. So I've selected three different gauges here. Now there's a happy medium that we've got to select and we've got a strike because when we start to look at this and we think, okay, if I want to move that anywhere I'm going to apply this big massive gauge of wire to this branch. This wire is close to the same diameter as the thickness of that branch and we're saying, man, if we tried to apply this wire to this branch we would probably do more damage and cause more scarring and potentially kill the branch in the application to gain that function. Okay, so this is a little bit too thick for this branch having a diameter and a girth that's similar to that size of the branch. Okay, now if we go on the opposite end of the spectrum and we start to look at, all right, I'm going to wire with this branch because maybe we think the only place that we want to actually adjust the shape of the branch is out at the tip. This wire, obviously being significantly thinner, isn't going to give us any kind of mobility in the structural portion of this branch and if that's the case, even if we don't think we want structural mobility here, we shouldn't be applying a gauge of wire that does not allow us to move this branch anywhere we want it to go. So when we get to that sort of happy medium, we're talking about a gauge of wire that allows us to move the branch but also during the application process isn't going to be damaging the branch. Now there's a lot of different sort of rules about selection of gauge of wire, but this selection process hinges on three major considerations. What is the girth of the branch? What is the rigidity of the branch? And how long is the branch that branch? The thicker the branch, the thicker the wire. The harder or more rigid the branch, the thicker the wire. And the longer the branch, the thicker the wire to successfully choose the right gauge that allows you total mobility and control of that branch shape. This wire right here is going to be the best selection to be able to give me control with the rigidity, the girth, and the length that this branch is offering for us to be wiring and positioning in the new shape of the tree. So now that we've chosen an appropriate gauge, we understand that our body position is to the side of the branch and not to the front. We have to talk about the actual directional application of wire. Now the way that most people apply wire is they loop the wire around the branch. But when we're applying structural wire to a branch, we want to be functioning in straight lines to be applying the wire directly to the branch using our supporting hand to be maintaining that contact and gaining that consistency of angle. Once we start to loop, we lose the ability to control where that wire actually touches the branch. So this straight angled, and I call this the diamond approach to structural wiring. Watch closely. Notice how my supporting hand maintains contact. Notice how my application hand uses the full length of the wire to obtain leverage. These are the techniques that allow us to execute structural wiring well. Okay, so I'm going to be supporting here. I'm going to be moving in a straight line towards me down to the back side of the branch up towards me down to the back side of the branch up down back up towards me down back up towards me down back up towards me down back up towards me always maintaining that consistent contact of each turn with my supporting hand while I'm maintaining the same length of the wire and the leverage with my application hand. This is what gives me proper contact, exact angle and same spacing to get the best function and aesthetics in terms of the application of structural wire. Let's take a look at how we don't apply structural wire. So, first and foremost, if we misuse our off hand and we don't support contact, we're making a mistake. If we don't use the leverage with the application hand, we're making a mistake. So, if we misuse our off hand we're making a mistake. But let's just talk about some of those mistakes that we commonly, we are all guilty of, mind you, I'm as guilty as anybody else, that we're all guilty of and some of the misnomers in terms of the education. So, holding the wire very closely and trying to control the wire from very tight location is going to give us a significantly greater amount of work and effort that we have to input into the wire to get it applied to the branch. So number one, we don't want to be holding here. Number two, we don't want to be pre-looping and this is one of the mistakes that people make when they say I want to make sure that my wire is really delicate so I'm going to be pre-looping or I'm going to be applying my wire in a circular fashion. This is what we don't want and I'm going to show you the product of why we don't want that here in just a moment when I'm finished with this. So if I'm not holding and supporting, if I'm not using the length of that wire for leverage and I'm pre-looping the application of my structural wire, everything in terms of our system of obtaining that function and aesthetics falls apart and it's hard for me to even use my hands in that fashion but I'm going to rotate this so that you guys can see the product of this and what you're going to notice is your angles start to tighten up significantly. We start to form gaps and let me show just a little bit of a lean back profile. We start to get gaps in between the wire and the branch that create that lack of function, start to jeopardize the aesthetic. Notice how tight, notice how inconsistent the angles are, notice how different the spaces are. Believe it or not that was my best attempt at applying structural wire when I start to violate a lot of those fundamental techniques and principles for application. Okay? So we want to make sure again, coming back to what we want to avoid. We always want to be using this hand as support. We always want to be using this hand at the end of the wire to obtain leverage and we always want to be sure that when we're applying the wire we're applying it with the diamond strategy or in those straight lines of application here, here, here, here in order to get the best possible contact, angle and spacing. Let's take one more look at how we do it correctly. Coming back to our fundamentals, supporting hand is always maintaining contact. Application hand is always using the length of the wire and we're moving in straight lines towards me, down, away, up, towards me, down, away, up, towards me, down, away, up and you're going to see by the end of this how consistent the application of this wire is. The contact, the angle to their highest degree. This is functional structural wire. Okay, so let's just take a moment to step back, take a deep breath. I know how you're feeling. Oh, this is so much. You know, like one of the things we liked about Bone Timerize, you didn't give us a lot of rules. You were teaching us how to freely think. Now all of a sudden I've got points of immobility where there's function and structure and secondary, tertiary and trunks right? Breathe with me. One more time. Okay. What are we trying to accomplish? It's what we always ask ourselves. The two things that we've always got to be justifying is does it work with function and does it look good while it's working? Function and aesthetics, we consider this with every action we take in Bonsai. All right? Now from that we know, listen, if our wire has the same angle between each turn and doesn't have any gaps between the wire and the branch, it's going to look good and it's going to function. Right? Now we're at that point where we're saying that point where function is achieved in structural wiring if we're wiring the trunk is at the crown of the roots, contact with the crown of the roots. If it's in the primary branches, it's at the collar or shoulder of that primary branch as it originates from the trunk. Simple. Okay? When you wrap it all up and you bundle it all up, it's simple. Same aesthetics, same angle, same spacing, no gaps, got to hit the shoulder or got to hit the crown depending on what I'm trying to accomplish. Cool. Let's dive deep. Here up on the board I've given you guys a recap so that we can continue to refer back to this and I've crossed out the secondary and tertiary wiring or the finer wiring of branches. This again is not the world that we're functioning in right now. Okay? Because all of the function and all of the behavior for secondary and tertiary wiring is established by what we do here with structural. We can't apply the concepts that dictate this action to the structural world. This is what causes this to work. Okay? So I've drawn a scenario up on the board in terms of setting the backbone of the shape of a trunk. Alright? And we know that the crown of the roots where the trunk intersects the soil is that point of immobility that we've got to contact. Now you guys might be saying, okay cool. I'm going to stick this wire into the trunk. I'm going to round that crown and I should be good to go. No, no, no, no, no. No. Because we said, listen, same angle on every turn, same spacing, no gaps. That angle when we cross that crown has got to be 55 or 60 degrees. Okay? So where do we insert that wire into the soil to accomplish what we want to accomplish is exactly why we start this whole thing out with what are we even trying to accomplish. Okay? Say for example, I want to increase the curvature of a trunk. This is what we're trying to accomplish. This diagram here. Okay? I've got this curvaceous trunk and I'm saying, ah, I want to increase the significance of that curve. That means we've got specific points on this trunk that we need to hit to position our wire correctly to achieve that curve. I'm going to take you guys off on a slight tangent here. Okay? Common fundamental bonsai knowledge says, if you're going to bend a branch or a trunk, you need to have wire on the backside of that bend. Right? I'm going to say that that is the most non-functional and aesthetically low quality aesthetic decision that we could make when we look at the wire dynamics because if I'm trying to bend in this direction, okay, I'm going to try to bend this trunk in this direction, I've got two points of hold and two closest hooks that are holding that formation. Alright? Now, what ends up happening when we bend a branch or a trunk is we actually end up compressing that shape of that structure and that trunk and when we see the result of that, that reinforcement, that common book knowledge tells us needs to exist on the backside to prevent breakage. Often times, with the compression of that wire causes that wire to pull off of the backside and we have two very distant holding points to secure that bend. So, we've lost the protection and we've also spread out the length of that bend to make a very loopy, non-functional, non-aesthetic curvaceous piece of movement. Okay? Come back to me here. I want to bend this trunk. I know that this is not as functional as the way a wire functions. I'm going to propose that our two holding points are extremely close to the place where we want to accomplish the bend and instead of that wire hitting the outside of that curve, I propose that the wire hit the inside of that curve. In doing so, if we press into this wire on the inside, out here, we're causing this wire to break into this curve. You act as the fulcrum while our hook in the two closest areas gives us a stronger bend. Right? This is function and aesthetics working together to give us maximization of the bending process via the action of the wire. Okay? Now, what's the caveat to that? Well, we don't have any support to the back side of that bend. That bend can break. Yes, it's true. It's something where the wire is on the back side and ultimately the function defeats its purpose and we get a lower quality bend. Okay? So, as we see that bend start to take place, we're always applying the concept of knowledge of how a break starts to indicate stress and how we start to see that bark give us notions that there could be an accumulation of force on that piece of tissue that is bearing the brunt of that bend. Okay? So, again, just to recap, when we look at this now, to hit this point so that we have our two closest points acting and that wire is our center fulcrum and we're watching the way that this tissue behaves, the location where we insert this wire knowing we maintain the same angle on each turn is going to be on the front side of that bend. So, it's going to be on the front of the trunk right at this first little crook crossing that crown and that location where we gain function is right there. Okay? I know that this system here is confusing but let's just take a step into the studio and let's see what it looks like to properly as well as improperly apply the wire to increase the curve. So, finally, all of these nuts and bolts and board talk and, oh man, come on, do some bonsai, right? We've got this beautiful literati-looking beech, wonderful tree, absolutely outstanding. We've identified the crown of the tree because we are going to want to put some movement into the trunk and I've marked here where I see the front of the tree being. Now, the front of the tree being there from the perspective of the nebari, the movement, the trunk moves significantly to the back and because the nebari plates out and is really robust in its formation, I don't want to bury any of that by tilting this forward but then beyond that, beyond that three-dimensional issue that we have here, if you guys look from the front, you notice that there's several lines and changes in direction and it gets relatively straight up here in the canopy of the tree. This is a perfect opportunity in a young, developing piece of material to be applying wire to the trunk, to be applying movement now and letting that tree just grow on that foundation that we're going to set, okay? So, when I start to look at this, we always keep in mind what am I trying to accomplish as the guiding light for the application of wire, making sure it functionally works and that it aesthetically looks good. And as I go through this and I'm just going to step slightly forward here, as I go through this, I love, I really love the line that we've got here, real subtle changes in directions. It gets very straight at this point right here is going to be a really pivotal point to be able to add some movement not only back in the direction of the right but also towards the front. And I'm just going to hold this line and I'm going to kind of rotate this towards you guys so you can see that this is a already naturally occurring bend that gives me an opportunity to extend that bend, add more movement and curvature to it and actually physically move the whole apical region of the trunk forward. Now, I'm going to come back to the front that up in the top of the tree we also lack and lose some of that movement. It does become relatively straight. So we'll carry our structural wire from the base all the way up to the top of the tree making sure that we hit this one point in the correct way for our structural wire to have function. And as we talked about on the board in order for our structural wire to have the ability to create a bend here my wire needs to hit on the inside of this bend so that my turn here here become the holding point for this fulcrum to be able to accomplish that movement that we're setting out to achieve. So if I take that knowledge, this is what I'm trying to accomplish, a bend in this location, to bring this forward, shift more over the base of the tree, and then carry that wire up through the canopy to add some more movement in that upper portion of this trunk, I can work back now and start to identify from here if I'm basing my consistency of angles and spaces on a 55-degree basis, I can hit here, I can hit here, I can hit here, I can hit here, and I now know, oh, my wires got to occur right here in the base to provide that point of anchor to cross that point of stability and that point of immobility in the crown of the root system, and I've just basically set up my wiring strategy by identifying the this is where I want the bend to occur and these are all the places that my wire is going to hit in order to get that wire anchored in the appropriate position. This is the thought process we go through when doing major structural wiring and adjustments. So let's take a real close look at how we anchor in there and how we go about that wiring process to hit all of those points, maximize the capacity to bend, and achieve that shape that we're trying to establish. Alright, so I've selected a fairly beefy gauge of aluminum wire. Now when we're dealing with deciduous trees, I generally tend to utilize aluminum. It's a little bit softer on the bark. It also doesn't harden as quickly as copper does when we're bending it, not to say that it doesn't harden though, don't make that mistake that that's not an occurrence in aluminum because it does work harden just like copper does, not to that severity though. But the bigger issue and the bigger reason that we use aluminum as a resource on deciduous is the smoothness of the wire. It doesn't have the same gritty ability to be abrasive on a thin bark tree like a beech. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to get myself a fairly extensive piece of wire because I know I want to make it all the way up to the crown and anytime that we're trying to create and structurally wire a tree of this nature, I always give myself a fairly significant amount of wire beyond what I actually think will cover the trunk because I want to use that point of leverage to be able to execute appropriate application all the way to the top and inevitably in the structural application process you will chew up more wire than you think so give yourself a little bit more and think about it this way. Generally when we cut wire too short we're trying to conserve wire and and the amount of wire that we're using. However if you don't make it to where you're trying to get to accomplish what you're trying to accomplish you're going to have to cut it off and do it again and now you've wasted three times more wire than you would have just by over cutting and giving yourself that tail for leverage. Ok so I've got my fairly significant piece of wire here, I've got my point and I marked this point with a piece of chalk so that we make sure that we hit it. Now when I strategized I was saying that I needed to be hitting the crown right across the front of the tree here following that fifty five sixty degree angle to hit here, here, here, and here to maximize the functionality knowing that if my wire touches this point that acts as the fulcrum, my my hook here, and my hook here, give me the function. So let's see how that works out. Let's give this a good try. Now as I'm coming around the base here, I want to make sure that I'm going to have that point of contact. I want to make sure that in the application process that that point of contact occurs with that same sort of rule set, same angle, same spacing, no gaps. So a lot of times what you'll see people do is create a tighter angle here to hit the base of that or the crown of that. What we actually want to be doing is hitting that with that same 55, 60 degree angle from the very beginning in order to execute that appropriate application. So I'm going to hold that and I'm going to approach this just like I would any other wiring application, 55, 60 degree angle. I'm going to be supporting this through the entire time using the length of my thicker wire to provide leverage. Closing up on it here. Hold, boom, hit that point. Intersected that point really, really close, so close to a degree that I feel like it's going to be functional. I'm going to go ahead and carry this all the way up the tree, maintaining that same angle, supporting that contact with my supporting hand. When I'm wiring structurally, if I ever hit these moments where my wire is pushing, I'm pushing off of the trunk because of a scar or an old shoulder, I want to come back in and really clean that up before I continue with the wiring process. I want to make sure that that wire has total contact and total control, minimizing those gaps that can form between the wire and the branch, or in this case, the trunk. Still using that leverage, getting just below that shoulder right there, going to come right up near that shoulder. That sets me up structurally. Now I'm set up to enter that shoulder and have a lot of success in the wiring of that structurally. When we come back, carrying that same angle, same spacing, no gaps all the way up through. You guys are going to watch. All right. I'm going to show you that I'm somehow serendipitously going to be hitting every point just prior to the shoulder of a branch as I get up into the apex of this tree. You're going to say, wow, how did you do that? You're just before this one. This one's free and clear. You're just before this one. You're just before this one. You're just before this one. This is the serendipity of identifying what we're trying to accomplish, establishing that methodology for applying the wire at that consistent angle. Following that practice all the way through the application process, this is a beautiful establishment of a structural wire on the trunk of a tree to give us maximum utilization and accomplishment of what we're trying to achieve. Time to bend. Now this is something we haven't talked about and didn't diagram on the board, but it's something that I want you guys to be aware of because when we talk about the wiring process, we talk about all of the mechanics, all of the theory, all of the strategy. What we also need to talk about is how to put that wire into work. If I want to be bending using this as my fulcrum and these two points right here as my two hooks, I'm going to be pushing in here with one of my hands or at least a few digits on one of my hands, and I'm going to be applying the torque on this top as well as supporting on the bottom to be able to maximize the functionality of the bend. Watch my ring and my pinky finger. They're going to be pushing into the wire here. My thumb is going to be up here. This is going to be sort of a whole body movement. Now also notice that the bend is rotating with the wire, so the wire is going to slightly tighten and further enhance the holding of that bend. If I were trying to bend in the opposite direction, we would be unspooling the wire and losing the efficacy or that functionality of the wire. Here we go. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to apply that torque on the fulcrum. Okay. Now, when I rotate this towards you, what once was leaning back, watch closely, now has a significant movement towards the front of the tree. This is what we were trying to accomplish. We have a flawless execution of that objective while having a beautifully aesthetic in terms of same angle up the trunk, same spacing between each angle, and a minimal number of gaps. Basically, based on any gaps occurring in the instrument. Okay. All right. So, we have some inconsistencies of the smaller movements in the trunk that we can't necessarily mitigate or completely eliminate, but we do our very best job of trying to eradicate. Okay. All right. So, I'm going to step back. I'm going to take a quick look here. Oh, that's nice. So, now that that's coming towards us and we start to get that beautiful bend here, I want to take that apex back. I don't necessarily want to center that apex over the front. I want to center it over the base. We've got a nice base. We're creating this very delicate flow. We've got a very dominant branch on the left here. I'm going to shift the apex back again. And this is part of that sort of second objective of creating movement in the upper canopy of the tree. Now, I've got a little bit of a bend here, but notice that I have wire on the backside. And I'm going to show you guys that close up. Okay. I've got a natural bend right in this area here. My wire is in the wrong point to be establishing a bend there. If I were to bend right here, okay. What's going to happen is I'm actually going to get a big space in my wire right there. So, I have the ability to either focus the bend here or focus the bend here in order to maximize what's happening in this region of the tree. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to focus it right here and just shift the apex towards the left side of the tree away from the base. Okay. So, again, my fingers are going to go here right on that fulcrum point. My thumb here. My supporting hand here. Okay. And I'm going to go ahead and see and just sort of test how I feel about the movement that I'm putting into the tree. Okay. So, that created and notice, and this is a really interesting aspect. The more that you guys structurally wire and create these shapes, you're going to start to notice, oh, but this got straighter. True. But this curve here got incredibly more attractive. Okay. So, you're actually positioning one curve at a time in terms of creating this movement. So, you've got to be really identifying what are we trying to accomplish on a curve by curve basis. Better curve there. We want more movement. Now, I'm going to come back into here. Okay. Now, I'm going to rotate this to the 2D and show you guys how far forward this is. Now, when I come back to make this curve, I'm going to be pushing into this point here, supporting here. Okay. Using this hook here. And I'm actually going to pull the apex back a little bit. Okay. So, pulling it back so that it's not so far forward, now we've got that beautiful movement carrying out. Now, the apex is off center, away from the base. I might do a little bit more of a shift. So, our first bend was here, which is where the mark is. Our next bend was here, which gave that beautiful angle. I'm going to see what it looks like. And I'm looking for some natural bends and natural capacity to be able to execute a little bit more of a movement. I like that, though. It's nice. It's nice. It's soft. It's subtle. The thicker wire fills in a lot of the micro movements that gave this trunk quality. When we take that out in, say, six months, when this is really set, first flush all those resources, sets its structure. We cut that off before it scars the bark. You'll see all of those little jogs in the movement. They come back into the tree, and we want to anticipate that. It looks actually straighter and less movement-filled now than it did prior to the wire application. It's because where we placed the wire to get the effectiveness of the bend has filled in some of those changes of angle in the trunk, okay? But I like this. I feel very, very comfortable with where we're at. I think the last thing I would like is another small little bend right up here in the apex, which means I'm going to have to get this wire onto the back side of this. Okay. All right. I'm going to do one more kind of pushing right in here using this hook, and then that just boosts that apex up slightly to give us exactly what we're looking for. I'm going to cut my wire off knowing that this point is effective and functioning in this last piece of movement. I've just set the line of the trunk. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . And then I just pull my rates and bends in, identifying how the wire functions, where it needs to hit, that influencing where we start in the base of the tree, and carrying all of the design objectives up through the upper apical portion of this beach. So, one of the things that I wanted to do was to come back to sort of wiring the trunk and showing what happens when we hit that point that most books illustrate us needing to hit having the wire on the backside of the bend for support, but coming back after we've explored. do it hitting that point with the wire on on on that inside of that bend so we've got the two hooks wire serves as the fulcrum the hooks hold our bend and we very carefully are watching that bend coming back to see what has been recommended but we what we identify as being less functional and also not um being very aesthetically pleasing let's just explore that for a minute so what i've got here is i've got just sort of a mock trunk set up i'm going to hit the back side of this bend right here let me just um put a little mark so that we can see we're going to hit right here okay and we're going to be playing on this bend and extending that bend having the wire on the back side as opposed to where we would typically want to put it at bone timer eye on the front side all right so let's just see what happens here let me go ahead and get this applied hit that point and i'll carry this all the way up to the top okay so now when we do this technically this wire is supposed to be in the correct place so when i bend it pushes into the trunk and supports the bend preventing it from breaking this is the theoretical now what i'm assuming is going to happen is because we've now extended the points of hold to here and here and we're pushing on the fulcrum right here at the inside of this piece i'm assuming that that extension is going to compress the wire and actually push this wire in the correct place so when i bend it pushes into the fulcrum right here and i'm assuming that that extension is going to compress the wire in the physically off of the trunk so let's see what happens and as predicted even with just a little bit of movement you can see here that it's completely let go of this coil this coil and push that wire off of the trunk okay and i'm assuming we've all experienced this exact same thing so what was a concept that said this wire should be on the back side of that bend to support it so it's going to be in the correct place and we're going to push that wire in the right place and it's going to be in the right place and we're going to push that wire in the right place and doesn't break is actually a misplaced piece of knowledge because of the dynamic of wire pushing into a point on the trunk compressing two points here and having our two areas that are actually holding the bend so far away we lose the function we lose the aesthetics and we lose the quality of that wire in terms of its structural application so now we start to understand the functionality of the wire and the aesthetics that maximize the quality of the final product to increase the curve but what if we want to go the opposite direction what if we want to straighten out the trunk what if we want to remove the curve what if we want to create that formal upright redwood spruce lodgepole whatever it is okay we've got to apply the same fundamental concepts to make this system work but we've got to adjust them to hit the correct points to achieve what we're trying to accomplish okay so here i've kept the same wire rhythm just to discuss the same wire rhythm we used with this uh increasing the length of the wire and the length of the wire and the length of the wire and the length of the wire and the length of the wire and the length of the wire and the length of the wire to discuss the function of that wire rhythm so to say now we want to be moving this point in this point in that direction and pushing here now we've got the wire on the back side this is just to go back and digress the same exact situation as having the wire on this side where it loses function it loses aesthetics okay so i'm going to take this and i'm going to say no that's not what we want and we know that's not what we want because in order to get the bend out of this trunk here i've got to be pushing in i've got to be using my hook here and my hook here to be tightening up that movement so that i eventually end up with that straight trunk where again we pushed in here we pushed here we pushed here with those hooks to pull that bend out of the trunk and straighten that trunk and this is very very difficult to do and that's what we're going to do now now that's what we're going to do next. unless we hit the precise point where that wire has function, okay? I want to take you guys into the studio. I want to show you guys this concept and show you the thought process that is going to go into this because when you have a tree that has multiple points that you're either increasing the curve on or straightening the trunk, you've got to hit each one of those points while still following the same angle, same spacing, no gaps, and you'll be surprised. If you follow the system, serendipity will always prevail. Let's take a look. Okay, so now that you guys have seen how we increase a curve and where our strategy for structural placement is, how we work that back down to the base, anchor the tree at the crown, crossing that crown at that 55, 60 degree angles, you've seen the system work. Now I want to take you into another scenario where we're actually trying to remove a curve from a tree, and this means that our placement is going to be opposite of what it was on the beach, okay? So here I have a Colorado blue spruce. I've marked the front again for you guys, and you can see that for a very straight trunk tree, the upper canopy of the tree tilts dramatically to the right side, okay? So I'm going to be looking to pull this trunk back to straighten it out to the best of my ability without adding any further movement, and when I look at accomplishing that bend, I've got to decide where in this scenario does that movement actually occur, and I'm going to say that that movement actually occurs right here at this hip, okay? Now I'm going to be gentle because I don't want to remove the bark here, but I always like to give ourselves a bullseye or a target to hit so that we can functionally know exactly what we need to accomplish. Now I'm going to show you from the left and right side here that you can see that the trunk also has a sort of a bend right here. I'm going to mark this as a potential ideal, but I don't know that four gauge is going to be enough unless I doubled it up to hit this, and I don't want to necessarily double it up. When we start to create some of this movement or relieve the tree of some of this movement, there are points where we have to recognize that we're not going to be able to overrun what already exists in the structure of the tree. Down here, this feels pretty beefy to be trying to take out a real subtle curve. If it's a very severe curve, if it's a very severe curve, maybe we could do some techniques to mitigate that. If this is the case, we'll always be looking at it from here. We're always trying to find the truest, straightest line when we select the front of a formal upright in addition to the tremendous base, and the base is what led us to this actual selection of front, knowing we have to mitigate that, okay? So now we're here. Now I've got some wire scars up in the canopy of this tree. Anytime we come back and we wire, we want to make sure to either miss those or wire in the opposite direction. I'm going to continue wiring in the counterclockwise direction just because all of the other spruce that we have and make forests with have that consistency of rotation. If you guys are ever putting multiple trees together whose trunks you have wire on, you'll always want the wire to spin in the same direction to maintain the best aesthetic. That's just a little tidbit for you guys to digest, okay? So I've got to hit here. In order to be able to straighten this now, my wire has to hit here, and my hook here and my hook here are what's going to support that straightening. You can see that gives us a lot of function from that fulcrum point, which means if I hit here, I'm going to hit here, I'm going to hit here, I'm going to hit here, I'm going to hit here, okay? And that means that if I'm following that 55 or 60 degree angle, I'm going to be coming down around the backside and actually entering right here at the base of the trunk. Okay, so reverse engineering. What am I trying to accomplish? Straightening from where? Here. This means this is a point that my wire has to cross on that 55 or 60 degree consistent angle. I work my way back. I start to look at all of the different locations that I could potentially anchor. This is the one that allows me to hit that spot if I'm judging my distances correctly, okay? So let's go ahead and see if we can execute. Now, again, I'm going to go from bottom all the way to the top, because there's a lot of straightening that needs to happen in the upper canopy of the tree, and we're going to be adjusting where we provide that movement based on where our wire hits and where it's necessary to straighten that trunk, okay? Now, I'm using copper in this instance. So this is four gauge. This is the heaviest copper that we have at Mirai currently. This is going to be a little bit more work. There's going to be a little bit more of a wild sort of copper flying everywhere type of scenario. We're going to try our best to make this look professional, but usually this gets a little wild, okay? And this is the point. I removed the moss just to be able to show us and remind everybody that's watching online. This is the point that we had marked to insert the wire to hit those strategic points on the trunk. But I wanted to come back before I start with the four gauge and just show you one pitfall that I do see people make in terms of wiring trunks and anchoring at this point that is the crown or the intersection of the trunk with the roots, okay? So I have a much smaller piece of wire here to more easily illustrate this. But say, for example, I inserted this smaller piece of wire into the base, really nice and firm. And one of the things that we talk about is maintaining that 55 or 60 degree angle coming out of that point where we've inserted that into the roots. Now what I see a lot of people doing and where I see mistakes and problems happening is the assumption that we really need to have a lot of contact with that crown or that point of anchor before we start working our way up the tree, okay? And this is not what we want to accomplish in any way, shape or form because we said, listen, same angle, same spacing, no gaps. This is the fundamental backbone that we will follow always when applying wire to a bonsai. So if we deviate from that in any way, shape or form, we lose functionality in the application of wire. We lose the quality of aesthetics that allows the repetition of pattern to be sort of disappear to the organic form of the tree. This is not how we want to approach this, okay? So I wanted to start off here. I'm going to undo this now and I'm going to show you how we do approach this. Okay? So I'm going to take my thinner wire out. I'm going to come back with my thicker four gauge, okay? And this is a big, long, cumbersome piece of wire, okay? That's our point. I'm going to go ahead and anchor that, find that sweet spot, okay? I'm going to anchor that at that point and sometimes it takes a little bit of finagling and I'm going to cross that, cross that crown at that 55 or 60 degree. And as I continue to find that this is terminally threatening piece of wire, I need to test that to be okay. Okay? I don't even have time, wow. I'm starting this over mindlessly. Okay? direct straight line application of wire to the trunk okay so when I'm doing this I want to be pulling this in straight lines so I'm gonna pull towards me across me I'm trying to keep my hands off the bark as much as I can away from me across the back towards me across me away from me towards me okay now this is going to be beautiful I'm going to rotate this so that Ricardo can see it there's that point that we're gonna cross right there boom okay notice that we've hit that with that consistency of angles and I'm just gonna unpin undo this just slightly because in trying to illustrate the point, it's gotten a little bit loose. Let me just kind of take this back just a moment, spark, boom, okay, hit that point, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. Now we start to work with the branches. Boom. Boom. Okay, now when we hit these points, when we get into these points up in the canopy of the trunk where we start to engage with the branches, we've always got to be thinking about where is this and how is this branch going to be wired. Now if I extended, and let me show you this in the close up, if I extended this to come to the top of this shoulder, I'm going to be overly elongating my wire, okay? Now a lot of times if this wire were even just a half inch higher, I would elongate over the top of that. But because we are where we are, I'm going to go right underneath that and try to get right against the shoulder of that. But in order to do so successfully, I'm going to create a very soft bend here that doesn't flex this wire right here so that when I come underneath it, I go straight back up underneath the armpit of that to get that nice and secure and maintain that same angle, same spacing, no gaps. Okay, and I'm going to encounter the exact same scenario on this branch in the back. I'm going to rotate this and show you guys, okay? Notice that I'm right up against that armpit, so I'm going to do just that slight bend again, and I'm going to move that wire right up into that, okay? And this is where that straight line movement is so effective because when I move up, you can see it pulls it right in there, and then I can come back to my, towards me, across me, away from me. Across the back, towards me, across me, away from me. Across the back, towards me, across me, getting into these branches here, away from me, across the back, towards me. Okay? So, I'm going to do it. I'm going to do this. I'm going to do this. Oh, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. How do I want to handle that? Now we're at this crux moment with a branch right where we want our wire to be. And since I've consistently gone below it, I'm going to follow that trend. I'm going to go below. Now we're at the farthest point of leverage. This is when it gets really, really technical. Okay? We did it. We did it. Okay, I'm going to add that front just so that you guys can see the consistency of those angles, all right? Not bad, not bad, not bad. Thicker trunk here makes the angle look a little bit longer, and then once this started to fold over, it changed just slightly. Not bad, not super noticeable. As that trunk changes diameter, though, it does show a different expanse of wire, which can play with your eye. For the most part, that consistency of spacing. Really, really nice. Really nice. It's a little bit long there on that thicker portion of the trunk. That feels really, really solid, okay? So coming back to this point that we said we wanted to hit, we nailed it, and Ricardo, you show them that point because that's basically a bull's eye. Right above the junction of this branch, so now, again, because I'm pulling this back and trying to remove that curvature from the trunk. I'm going to be supporting here, okay? Knowing that I want to push in here, I can't move, really, this down here because it's so thick, so I'm going to hold here, I'm going to grab here, and over the length of this curve, I'm going to remove that bend. Ooh, okay. Just maybe a little bit of a return. Not much. It gives me that beautifully straight line. Beautifully straight line, and now you see straightness from here all the way up to this point here, and now this apex is coming back totally fine. So now we're going to go ahead and we're going to shift right at this point. I'm just going to shift this branch out of the way right here. I'm going to push in here to shift this whole line back that way. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to grab here, I'm going to apply my pressure here. Straighten that out. Okay. Now we've got that really, really, really solid, and then the last point here, we had a change in direction of the apex. We're even going to try to get stability here. I'm going to offset just a little bit. I'm going to finish this off, even though this is the worst possible place to try and apply foregauge, but we've got the wire, and we've got the technique to do so, and now I'm going to push. I'm going to push here where I see that bend, and all of a sudden we've got this really, really beautiful straight trunk movement. So just to recap, because I told you that was going to get really wild. Just to recap, we set that intention. This is what we want to accomplish, straighten the trunk. This is the point that the bend has to occur to make that happen. Because we're straightening here, we've got to have here, here, here. Here is my point of intersection. I wasn't even looking at that line. I was just wiring with a 55, 60 degree angle, girth of the trunk, obviously shifting as we're moving up the tree, supporting straight line movement to get that correct application and minimize the amount of spaces. Okay. As I went up the tree, no matter what junction I approached, maintaining same angle, same spacing, no gaps, got me underneath and around all of the junctions of the branches in a very serendipitously awesome way. This is proper execution of structural wiring when we're defining or changing the line of the trunk. So now that we have a really clear or at least far greater insight into how we manipulate the trunk, how we wire it, how we gain function, where our wire needs to be placed to achieve that function in aesthetics and allow us to accomplish what we wanted to accomplish, let's move on to the primary branching because this is actually probably the more applicable and probably the more widely practiced form, particularly when we're dealing with already established trees, like a field grown piece, like a nursery stock piece, like a piece of collected material. These all have trunk lines that we're purchasing the material for that trunk line. We're now worried about setting that primary branch structure and getting that angle and that placement exactly how we want it. So we're going to start off with basic broad brush strokes of the fundamental ways that structural wire should be applied and enter the shoulder of that branch as it originates from the trunk to give us control of the movement. Follow me here. If we want to lower a branch, we're going to enter the top of the trunk. If we want to lower a branch, we're going to enter the top of the trunk. I want to diagram this for you guys as you're here. I don't want to preload this. I want to diagram this together so that we understand what it means to enter the top of the shoulder. Let's just first set the understanding of a few basic concepts. Number one, when we set the structure of a tree in terms of the primary branching, we always move the branching from the point of origin, which is its origination from the trunk or from the shoulder. Number two, that shoulder exists in the 360 degree circumference of that branch. So that point of immobility exists in each of these locations on that 360 degree circumference. We have to hit one single point in order for that wire structurally to function. So when I'm looking at this and I'm going to say I want to lower this branch, my structural wire, maybe it's coming from above, maybe it's coming from below, I have to hit that point on the shoulder on the top side of the branch in order to get that branch to be able to go down. Now, why on the top side of the branch? As I lower this branch and my wire is crossing that point of immobility, that means that this mobile point and this immobile point is causing this wire to elongate and stretch. Elongate and bend, elongate and flex, elongate and harden. Now when this branch tries to return back up to its original position, that harder wire, that stretched wire, that point of immobility that doesn't have any flex to it is going to prevent that return to its initial position and this is where we achieve function. So when we're lowering that branch, whether we're coming from here and crossing that point or whether we're coming from below and crossing that point, we're entering that shoulder from the top in order to lower. Let's go the opposite direction. What if we want to raise? Now you guys might be saying, when and why? Who wants to raise a branch? Doesn't every branch in bonsai come down? And I would say, I hope after executing a lot of the streams that we've executed where we see the aesthetic aspect of environment reflected, in the shape of the point of origin of our structural branches, I hope we understand that there are definitive points where we want to raise and there are definitive points where we want to lower. So we need to understand these wiring dynamics. So coming back to the exact same situation, here's my branch, here's my shoulder where it connects to the trunk, now I want to raise this branch. So just the same as when I wanted to lower the branch, I had to have a wire on the top to elongate, hit that point of immobility, and stop the return. If I want to raise, I've got to enter this shoulder and cross that point on the bottom in order to be able to raise, stretch, extend, have that point of immobility, it wants to return, and it's being prevented from doing so. So we're going to cross-enter the bottom of the shoulder. Okay, we're going to enter that bottom in order to raise. Now we can apply the exact same in four big, thick, primary structural branches. We will want to apply the exact same concept when we're talking about shifting a branch to the right or maybe towards the front of the tree, or to the left, possibly towards the front or towards the back. When we start this lateral movement, we have to understand how to achieve that. So we say, listen, if you want to move a branch to the right, just the same as if you want to lower, you go from the top, you raise, you go from the bottom, you go to the right, you enter the left side of the shoulder. Okay, so this is to say now if I want to take this and I want to go back, I want to go back away from me here, I've got to hit this point. On the left side of the shoulder as I come across this turn, I've got to hit this point with my wire in order to be able to move that branch away. I hit this backside and now it can't return to its initial position. Every single primary line, every single primary branch, every single trunk is going to want to return to its initial position. You have years of growth established, years of memory, years of tissue. Our wire is the only way that we stop that from happening and gain control of that motion and that placement in those branches. Okay, so finally we say, oh okay, right, we enter from the left. If we want to move it to the left, we enter the shoulder, excuse me, enter the right. Try to keep this all straight, this is killing me. Enter the right side of the shoulder. Okay, so now we're coming here, here. All right, we got that? So one more time, we want to lower. We're going to enter the top point of the shoulder. Okay, we're going to contact, same angle, entering at that 55, 60 degrees. We only have to hit one point. We hit that point of contact, we lower, our wire stretches. Immobility here, mobility here, wire flexes over that. Boom, it wants to return, it can't. Wire's hardened, wire's in position, wire won't let it return. I want to raise, we hit that bottom. Boom, stretch, immobility, mobility, wire flexes and stretches, can't. Wire's supporting it and preventing it from returning. Okay, here, can't. Here, can't. Now we've got function. Okay, let's go into the studio. Let's put this knowledge to work. Let's see how we use our hands, how we use our application, how we actually enter that shoulder and get that contact and create that function so that we can better stretch. How we structurally wire our trees, set the framework, and build on that to create a great bonsai. Let's take a look. Okay, so now that we have the primary wire giving shape to the trunk, we've got to come up with a strategy for how we're going to be wiring our structural wires together. Now, we're going to dive into strategy a lot deeper in future wiring fundamental videos, but just to kind of kick us off and jump into that next point of how we effectively wire our primary branching, the branches that originate from the trunk, I wanted to come back in and look at a few situations on this tree. Now, oftentimes we don't have a wire giving position and shape to the trunk, particularly when we're dealing with Yamadori. And so then we start to apply the same concepts for wiring primary branching as we're going to apply here. However, if we do have those wires, we work around those wires and develop our strategy in tandem with that wire on the trunk. Today we're going to be talking more about that. So I have a very significant thick branch here, lowest on the tree of this beech, and this is grossly thicker than any other branch on the tree. I'm going to be treating this as a singular location in terms of wiring this by itself because I don't have another branch of that girth anywhere on the tree or even anywhere close. Now, if we move up the tree, we can see that we have these two branches that are very similar in thickness and similar in strength, and there's another thing that I'm keying into when we start to look at pairing branches together. Now, I'm going to rotate this so you guys can see this up close in the detail cam. Okay? Now, when we're looking at structural wiring, we always need to be looking at where does the branch occur in relationship to the coils of any thicker wire around it. And you guys will start to realize as we do secondary-tertiary wiring that this will become a major strategy. So notice that this branch emerges in between these two turns and this branch emerges in between two turns. What this means is similar sizes as well as similar locations allows us to follow the same angle, same spacing, no gap strategy. So I will be wiring these two together. I notice that I also have a branch here and a branch here that are equal in size. Both of these occurring towards the bottom of a curve. If you notice this in terms of our primary wire moving up the trunk, this branch emerges very close to the turn of the wire. This branch emerges very close to the turn of the wire. And then I have these two pieces up here that are also emerging very close to the turn of the wire. This makes for good combinations that follow same angle, same spacing, no gap and execute a very flawless strategy for being able to combine our branches. All right? So now I'm going to come back to this initial branch down here that's extremely thick. Okay? And we're going to talk about now the dynamics of structural wiring primary branches. Now, if I want to be lowering this branch, if I wanted this branch to say drop down, fundamental knowledge says that I need to come across the top of this shoulder. Okay? And so let's just take a look at this dynamic for a moment. I need to come across the top of this shoulder. Now, this shoulder exists in a 360-degree circumference. You can even see sort of that difference in girth in here where it's a little bit thicker as it originates from the trunk next down to the actual vascular system that's moving resources through the branch. That right there is the collar. This is also the point of immobility and the point that we have to hit. Again, same angle, entering at that 55, 60 degrees. Just a piece of contact on that collar is what gives our wire function. Okay? So technically, if I want to lower, I'm going to be looking to enter from the top of this branch. Now, we'll come back and talk about how to lower. We actually, because this is a deciduous tree, and deciduous trees technically and typically start with an initial movement up and out, as you can organically see through here. As you can organically see through the rest of the structure, I'm actually going to be raising this branch. Now, when we raise a branch, we want to be entering from the bottom, still hitting that shoulder, and our strategy looks like this. If we enter from the bottom and we raise this branch and we cross that collar at that point of immobility, the wire in front of that point that that wire crosses or the wire in front of that point where we cross that collar is going to stretch and extend. Stretch and extend when we bend it. The wire behind it is going to stay immobile, and that difference in movement is what actually gives our wire function. As we bend that branch up, that elongation of the wire, when the branch tries to return, stops the return to that position. Okay? So if we came from the top and we bent down, as long as we hit that point of immobility, wire elongates and stretches as we bend down. Point where the wire has not moved based on the contact with the shoulder, branch tries to return back up and the wire stops its return. Okay? So let's dive into one more concept here. Now, I also have to be thinking as I'm wiring, not only down or up, but right or left, in terms of how I want this branch to be moving. Okay? Because I can approach the bottom of this collar from two directions. I can approach it from here, entering from the left side of this branch, and giving myself the opportunity to move this branch, to the right. Okay? Or, I could actually approach still from the bottom side, from the right side of this branch, entering the bottom, crossing that collar, and being able to move the branch up and to the left. So this is where strategy and knowing what we're trying to accomplish gives us all of the capacity to be able to apply the wire in the correct direction, and in the correct manner to get the function that we're striving for. I actually want to pull this branch back to the left, away from the front of my collar, from the left side of my tree, which means I'm going to be entering my wire from the right side to move it to the left, and move it up and out, because it's a deciduous tree whose structure generally has that upward direction as an initial point of movement. Knowing that, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to apply my structural wire in a way that allows me to move this up, and to the left side of the tree, approaching it from the bottom to the right side of the branch, and this is going to give me all that I want. Okay? Finally, when we start to try and apply this structural wire, knowing that that collar is the point that is most significant to hit, my hand, supporting hand, is always going to be holding that junction right there, because I still have to work on that 55 or 60 degree angle. Now, what people typically want to do is take this wire and try to loop it around that collar, and then start their angle of that 55, 60 degrees. This will cause our wire to absolutely not function, because now we've created virtually a 90 degree angle, as opposed to a 55, 60, overly hardened the wire, and in order to bend this branch to a point that flexes wire with this tide of a turn, it's impossible. Okay? So watch what I'm going to do here. I'm going to hold with my off hand, my supporting hand, right against the collar there, so that I don't lose contact. Okay? I'm going to take my application hand, and I'm going to be drawing this wire forward at a 55 or 60 degree angle, and you see, because we know that collar exists in a 360 degree circumference of the branch, I'm hitting that collar on this back side, and that's all that I need to maintain contact. Okay? So now I'm going to be moving out the branch, supporting each turn, using the length of the wire as leverage. 55, 60 degrees, same angle, same spacing, no gaps, and this is where our supporting hand also plays a significant role in the function of maintaining that contact of that collar with the wire as we bend. So I'm going to be rotating with the wire, bending up and to the left, and when I let go, watch what happens. Now that branch tries to return to its initial position, and that point of contact at that collar is what gives the wire function or holds the branch in the place that we've moved it. Okay. So our initial primary branch and sort of defining branching that has the most girth is now placed. We walked through the strategy of how to place that. We've lifted that up and shifted it away from the front so that you can get a clear view of that line and it doesn't feel like it's trying to poke you in the face. I'm going to move to the second combination that we talked about, which is this medium-sized branch to this medium-sized branch, and we discussed that strategy of both of these sort of originating from a point that's in between two turns of our wire that has been applied to the trunk. So now, following the same strategy, both of these branches are going to be raised up, okay, which means I need to be approaching these from the bottom. Now, in the structural wiring realm, it's very possible to say, if I wanted this to drop down and I wanted this to go up, I technically could start on the top here to lower and enter the bottom of the second one to raise. Okay, this is very, very possible. On this deciduous tree, because what I'm trying to accomplish is movement that is indicative of a deciduous tree, and in deciduous trees, that initial movement in the shoulder is generally upwards, I'm going to be approaching the bottom side of each of these branches, okay? Now, on this thicker branch, I'm just going to take you back to the front. Remember, we wanted to move this to the left to get it out of the plane of the viewer, so we entered the branch from the right and on the bottom instead of from the left and on the bottom, okay? Up here, I need to follow the turn of my structural wire as I move from this branch to this branch. So at the very least, my only control of that direction in terms of these two branches is going to be following that initial wire that was placed on the trunk, okay? So I'll be entering from the bottom here. I'm just going to start this with one small turn to sort of hold that position, okay? I'm going to be using that same angle as I go up the trunk. Notice the angle is similar on my smaller piece of wire to my thicker piece of wire, and I'm going to be entering the bottom side here. Now, I'm going to turn this so that you guys can see it. Excuse me, I've just lightly placed that on there. Okay, turning it so you guys can see it. Now, this is a perfect time for you to be able to see how I'm able to enter the shoulder of this branch, okay? So this shoulder exists 360-degree circumference. My supporting hand is going to be pushing that wire into that shoulder as I'm pulling that wire out at that 55, 60-degree angle. So again, note, I'm not taking this and making a super sharp turn right here and then starting to wire. I'm actually pulling this out at that 55, 60-degree angle, maintaining that contact right there in order to make sure that I've got functional wire that meets the aesthetic needs and gets us to accomplish what we're trying to accomplish, okay? Supporting each turn as I move out the branch, utilizing the length and the leverage of the wire with my application hand, getting to that point of finality. Now I'm going to come back to this original piece. Now a lot of people always say, how do I start, how do I start? This initial turn gave me enough stability to get this wire on effectively. Now I'm going to come back here. I'm just going to drop this down to get it to that collar. Supporting hand holding that wire right against that collar as I move out at that 55, 60-degree angle. Now my supporting hand starts to enter the equation. I start to be supporting with each turn using the length of the wire and this is where you can see that up, down, to me, up, away from me, down, to me, up, away from me is very functional in the application of this structural wire. We've got great contact at the collar here. We've got great contact at the collar here. Now when I bend, supporting that contact as I bend up to form that initial movement that a deciduous tree is so iconically known for. And then I can start to put whatever movement into the branch is indicative of the species. And with a beach, it's this very soft sort of upward movement, not very curvaceous in terms of angularity. It's very smooth. So I'm going to keep my movement relatively passive on a beach. I'm going to come back to this initial piece. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to give that upward movement and I'm going to bring the directional orientation of this branch a little bit more towards the front so that I offset these two planes. And this is more aesthetics than structural wiring but it's difficult to talk about wiring and not talk about aesthetics being that we're applying this wire to achieve very aesthetic intentions with the design of our tree. Go ahead and go there. There we go. There we go. Okay. So I'm going to do a little bit of pruning, but this is the first structural setting of these primary branches originating from the trunk, hitting the collar of both. You saw the handwork that it took, the strategy to be combining these two. I'll go through and I'll wire the rest of these branches together with the same strategy and application, but here's what I want you guys to take away from this. If we're going to raise, we're approaching the branch from the bottom knowing that when we hit that point of immobility, that wire elongates and prevents the branch from returning. If we're going to be moving to the right or to the left, then we're going to be approaching the branch with the strategy to accomplish that move. And when we combine two primary branches in terms of our wiring strategy, we're looking at what obstacles, whether it be a wire on the trunk or other components of the tree, stand in the way and allow us to properly pair to get the best application of same angle, same spacing, no gaps, supporting hand, holding that contact with the shoulder and always maintaining that 55-60 degree angle. Now let's take a look at what it looks like to lower a branch with our structural wire. Okay, so we saw with the beach how when we want to raise, we enter from the bottom of the collar. I wanted to come back and kind of demonstrate with a species that would warrant the kind of lowering that we talk about where we would enter the top of the shoulder with the wiring of our primary branches. So here we've got a Colorado Blue Spruce. You guys have seen the wire applied to the trunk to make this much straighter. Very different from the beach where we applied the wire to the trunk to extend the curves. Now we're going to be lowering these branches. So when we come in close here, you'll notice that these already have a really beautiful downward angle. I want to continue to drop these down and create this super narrow alpine feel. So what this means to me is I'm going to be wiring these two together and my entry point, instead of being on the bottom to raise, is now going to be across the top to lower. So watch closely how I pair these. I don't think we need to go through all of the other fundamental understandings of this. I think you guys got it. If we want to lower, we apply from the top. If we want to raise, we apply from the bottom. So I'm just going to hold this right there on that shoulder. Watch how this hand maintains that contact. The hand that's applying the wire is going to come around the back side and I'm going to come to the top of this branch as well. Now at this point, I have no ability to maintain contact of the wire. So I'm going to come back here and support this. I'm going to use this same hand and I'm actually going to get one turn right on that shoulder. Notice this finger maintaining that contact. This is one of the most important aspects of fundamental structural wiring. Always pushing that wire into the collar as we maintain that 55-60 degree angle. Now that this is anchored, I'm going to come back to this wire. Using that leverage, notice where my thumb is. Always pushing into the shoulder, hitting the top of that shoulder as I enter 55-60 degree angle. Now I'm out onto the branch and I can support contact of wire and branch. Making sure to get that nice clean application. To me, up, away, down. To me, up, away, down. Supporting and using the leverage of the length of that wire. And we've got this beautiful application. Now watch closely as I lower this branch because when we talk structural wire again, we still need to talk handwork and aesthetic manipulation. I'm going to be pushing that wire into the branch as I'm lowering that point of functionality, that point of immobility right where it transitions from trunk to shoulder at the collar where the pressure is applied. As I push down and you watch that wire, it'll change color actually. You'll see that wire stretch and flex underneath the tension of that bend because that's stretching and flexing right there at that point where we're lowering. When I release, we don't get a return of that branch because I have immobility where this is against the trunk. In particular, work hardening happening to that wire right there. When this branch tries to return to that initial position, this is pushing into the trunk right there at the collar, stretched, flexed, and hardened to hold the bend. This is functional structural wire. Here's branch one. I'm going to come back to branch two. I'm just going to tuck this guy in here so you guys can see this effectively. Now I'm going to be holding here and also starting to work my way down so that I can get a nice, good, solid application. Now I'm on to a smaller piece. The more technical you get in terms of proficiently being able to handle structural wire, the finer the branches you can carry your thicker wire out to. This isn't the goal necessarily, but if I can carry this wire out to a point on this primary branch where I now have a turn and a half of my structural wire, I can combine these two small pieces of wire. Using that structural wire as the backbone. This plays into the strategy that we'll discuss later. The strategy of where we stop our wire, how we stop our wire, etc. To set ourselves up for that secondary tertiary structural wire being the backbone for that secondary tertiary, finer wiring and pad formation. I'm going to go ahead and cut that wire. I'm going to cut this wire. Watch how I bend this second branch. I'm going to go ahead and hold the end of the shoulder of that branch. I'm going to be applying my hand to the top of this. Nice strong downward bend. Watch, I'm going to let it go. It'll relax a little bit. Once that wire pushes into the major trunk, holds that steep downward angle, that's exactly what we're looking for in terms of establishing that really beautiful downward position. I'm going to step to the front here and just make sure this branch is a little bit tight to this side because we're entering from the right side and we want to see the opportunity again to move this to the left. It wants to return. This is here to stop that return and that kind of pushes that branch right out of the way of the front of our tree so we get to see that beautiful straight let me just orient that straight upright form beautiful drop branch and I'm going to actually swing this guy slightly over to this side just to get a little peek-a-boo here right here so that you have that for depth starting to set that really beautiful structure for our spruce. Okay. Getting that structural skill built. I love this. I love this system. I love the fundamental function of the knowledge. I love the aesthetic. I love you guys having the ability now to say, I want to lower this branch and this is how I do it. Okay? Or I want to raise this branch and this is how I do it. One more small tidbit. It's not going to ruin your day as long as you don't let it. It's not going to totally destroy everything we've just established. But we do need to look at this singular instance and address it head on crash into it, wrap our arms around it and understand it. When we're wiring our primary branching our function occurs with the contact of the shoulder. Please keep this in mind. That point where we cross it, that singular point where we wrap our wire around the shoulder we saw how that's not the effective way to handle that shoulder. We cross that point. We make sure there's contact there. As we bend, we hold that contact. We're clear there. And when we say we want to lower, we go from the top, we raise from the bottom to the right, we go from the left, to the left, we go from the right. Cool. Except when. Except when. And this is a big, big concept for you guys to be aware of as we start to apply our wire in these situations and circumstances which are very common to encounter. And we say except when we have an acute angled crotch. And this is to say, notice that the angle that this branch forms and the crotch of the branch forms with the trunk. If I want to lower this branch, fundamental knowledge in terms of lowering says we need to enter this branch from the top. But because we've got an acute angle between the trunk and the branch on the top, I can't get a 4, 6, or 8 gauge wire to the point where I can touch that point on the shoulder that gives me function. Function occurs with contact of shoulder. An acute angle means my structural wire cannot touch that shoulder to give me function. And so here is the exception to the generally overarching, almost always correct, except for in this instance, even if I want to lower this branch, I have to enter the obtuse side of the angle. And in this instance, the obtuse side of the angle is the bottom of the branch. Now you guys might be saying, wait, wait, wait. If you enter the bottom of the branch and you lower, there's nothing stopping that branch from returning. You're correct. You're absolutely correct. Wait, wait, wait. If you enter the bottom, you're going to be compressing the wire instead of expanding it so it's losing its function. Yes, you are correct. You're absolutely right. This situation is very difficult to deal with. And guess what? It's also extremely common and extremely standard for us to have to confront this issue. Now there's multiple ways that we can get the function to be able to lower that branch despite that obtuse on the bottom, acute on the top that prevents us from following our formal functional knowledge of primary wiring. Maybe potentially we use a guy wire, a piece of rubber here, a guy wire here, down to a point to hold that bend so that we can enter the bottom and we don't necessarily lean on the structural wire to establish this bend. Maybe that's one. Maybe the other is as we enter this branch from this bottom side, we have the ability to lower and rotate with the turn of the wire to take up the slack as we drop that down so that it does stretch and flex the wire and gain function and give us some holding capacity. Each situation that we encounter with this exception, based on that acute angle and the necessity to enter the obtuse side of the crotch is going to be different and we're going to have to be malleable in how we face that and accomplish what we need to accomplish. But as long as you guys know that there's not an option there, that that contact with that shoulder still establishes the function for the rest of the wire, we have other techniques we can compensate for and that's all we need to talk about. Now I want to show you that in its totality and its form and show you some of those modified ways that we can adjust that to give you guys every single point and technique you need to now use structural wire and accomplish everything you want to accomplish in performing these tasks to build your bonsai. So now we've established if you want to raise you into the bottom, if you want to lower you into the top, if you want to move to the right you enter the left and to the left you enter the right. All of that's good and grand and great and fundamental. Absolutely without doubt we need to apply that but what about the exception? Okay and we talked about this on the board. We have this exception unless we have an acute angle of entry. And I'm going to take you guys up to the top of the tree now and show you this branch that exists up at the top of the tree. So when we look here we have this branch that's growing almost straight up. It thinks it wants to be another apex. We're saying hey we actually would really like for you to be another branch where you're at but notice this acute angle that it forms with the trunk and we're saying I want you to come down. I want you to come down. But you have an acute angle and the place where we establish our point of immobility and our point of function in the structural wiring of our primary branches is at that point of contact. So if I'm going to lower I'm entering from this top. My point of contact is right on the top unless we have that acute angle which will prevent us from seeing that point of contact. So I'm actually going to apply a piece of wire here. I'm going to let you guys see that fail and then we'll talk about how we do that correctly to get what we're trying to accomplish done. If I'm saying okay if I want to lower I start from the top and I try to enter this acute angle and I'm just going to carry this wire up as if I'm going to wire the apex yeah I'll leave that there as if it's established. Now watch closely from the detail cam. Watch closely no matter how hard I try if I'm going to maintain that same angle and try to enter from the top clean off a few of these needles so you guys can see this is the best the best that I can do. Now notice that that is a space. You see the negative space right there? We lack the contact which means when we bend that branch we're going to have the space for that branch to rebound back up as a result of not hitting that point of immobility and now all of a sudden our wire stops functioning and aesthetically looks very poor okay and so this is that exception I want to lower I've got an acute angle of entry from the top to fundamentally lower I have to enter the obtuse side obtuse side being the bottom side so I want to lower but I'm actually going to enter the bottom side. Let me show you how we make that function because this is really where the technique and the knowledge of wiring starts to expand beyond just what the books teach you Alright so I'm going to start a few turns down below this is kind of an anomaly of a thick branch I'm actually going to anchor it kind of in between the armpit of this shoulder very similar to what I did with the beach I'm going to follow my structural wire applied to the trunk and I'm going to enter this bottom side of the shoulder. Now watch closely as I enter the bottom side of this shoulder notice I'm still going to be pressing in but look at how good the contact is now at that point when we enter that obtuse side so now that we've got that entry we're going to need to be thinking about how in the world do we want this branch to be moving. I've already identified I want this branch coming to right here in this location towards the back with a little peekaboo here but not sitting over this so it's going to sit right in here so I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to carry this wire out supporting using the length of the wire for leverage we'll come back and decide how long we want these to be but watch closely how I compensate for the fact that I'm going to be lowering and entering from the bottom because we would say I'm going to lower it's going to want to return to its initial position we're on the bottom. Watch closely now notice that my wire is rotating in a counterclockwise direction and watch just the slight amount of rotation that I put on this thumb on the top using the wire as my guide hand pushing that wire into the shoulder and I'm just going to give a very very subtle counterclockwise twist to the lowering of that branch now notice that it held well number one I'm using that gauge that gives me the ability to move the branch anywhere but number two I'm taking up the slack as I'm lowering and I've got that thumb in there and I'm lowering I'm taking up the slack that would be being added to that because we're entering that point on the bottom and bending taking up the slack with that rotation and that is what gives me the function okay so this is one way that we can get around that now a bigger thicker branch means that even if we try to take up the slack we might not even be able to twist it that's when we go to a guy wire to use the guy wire to hold it down structural wire at that point is giving us control of the tip past the guy wire which is why we would still be using functional structural wire okay so this gives us a wonderful angle of drop now a lot of you guys might be saying but that's not a very attractive shoulder true but now that we've put that movement into a very young shoulder it's going to grow swell and thicken as if it were a downward growing branch and in all actuality each of these angles on these trees these were all growing upwards as young seedlings we've put that angle into it and they've grown into that position that shoulder adapts to that aesthetic and as long as we execute that correct technique when we initially form the tree it will provide and create a beautiful structure for the years to come that you're building and developing that shape okay so coming back to our front now then we see if we want to raise we approach from the bottom if we want to lower we approach from the top the exception is if we've got that acute angle of entry that prevents us from having that contact with that point of immobility in that case we approach from that obtuse position and we can use rotation to take the slack out of the tree to still accomplish the bend that we're trying to accomplish okay you guys have virtually every tool in your toolbox to be able now to create a primary line with your trunk in terms of wire structural stability at the crown you're able to raise and lower your primary branches emerging from that primary line of the trunk you understand what you're trying to accomplish you understand the aesthetics and the function that are necessary you know the angle you know the spacing and you know that contact in terms of no gaps is absolutely fundamental to the function and aesthetics of your structural wire this is the very base fundamental jumping off point for this technique that gives us all of the freedom in the world to create with bonsai you're moving into the aesthetics of the deciduous up the coniferous down the coastal up the alpine down you guys now have the tools to be able to go out and explore and expand beyond what the books are telling you to actually realize the images that you're seeing in your environment and that you connect to and want to reflect in the art of bonsai technical limitation has always been the problem and the stopping point for artistic exploration we're going to do away with that this year we're super pumped that you guys are with us to dive into these fundamental series and I hope that this structural video is the first of many that are going to establish a new platform for you guys to artistically explore bonsai as a medium thank you 
