What's going on everybody? Super Tuesday. Super excited to be here tonight. Okay, now just like we did the spring wrap-up, and I don't know if you saw that video that was a mini-stream when we streamed it so long ago, but the feedback from that was just absolutely monumental because of how clear and succinct the information can be when we deliver it in this fashion. This is very much like, hey, let's go back to school, but inside of this to pull all of these species that we speak singularly about in a live stream, to pull them together in a cumulative discussion, right? That makes sure that we understand how our bonsai process and how our approach over the year kind of fits seamlessly together and allows us to have this success in the continuation of each of the different aspects that we've got to be on point about to really be good at bonsai, okay? And we're going to start with the physiology. I'd like to start with the physiology because you know, I've been doing this for a long time, anytime we start to talk about, whoop, that's a single L, anytime we start to talk about how do we base the information, the timing, the knowledge, the nuances, how do we base that information on what's the backbone, where's the reference? It always has to be on the function of the tree. When is the tree in a state where it is ready for that action to be performed and how do we know it, okay? In the physiology, when we start to talk about the timing of the seasons in the northern hemisphere, right? You could also utilize this in the southern hemisphere and sort of flip that timing. But when we start to talk about it, fall, when we talk about fall, we talk about a season where we are generating vascular growth, vascular growth, okay? Now, what does vascular growth mean in terms of what's happening with the tree? Vascular growth, doesn't a tree grow roots over the spring? Doesn't a tree produce a little bit of girth over the spring? In summer, I saw my wire biting in, that means that it's producing vascular growth then. Now, you're saying in the fall, vascular growth is occurring. Yes, and let's just understand that if we took a tree ring, you take a cross-section of a tree and you have sort of this sequential number of rings that occurs here. Inside of a singular ring, you have two pieces of a singular ring. You have a dark portion of that ring and you have a light portion of that ring. Now, the light portion of the ring is the source of the vascular growth. Now, the light portion of the ring is the source of the vascular growth. It's the smaller of the two pieces that formulate one year of growth. The lighter portion is the spring growth. It's the more minimal vascular productivity that occurs. And typically, that spring growth, when we talk about that very small portion right in there, just that little bit right there, and if we just look at that singular ring, right, we have all of this really dark, and it's kind of a murky line that they form. All of this really dark fall growth that occurs in this little, this little tiny kind of sort of the gradient between those two is a little gray, this little tiny sliver of light growth that occurs in the spring. Now, we talk about the notion in the spring of getting back to energy positive, energy positive. And when we start to get back to energy positive, that energy positive state where the tree is now paying back the spent sugars and resources, that is the energy positive as it equates to vascular growth over the spring season. A minimal amount of vascular growth. A minimal amount. A minimal amount of reaccumulation of energy in excess of what it dumped out over the course of that foyer production, spring foyer production, okay? But we do see a little bit of that, and that's where we might see a little bit of wire biting in. Now, here's the other thing. Vascular growth for every tree across the board does not begin at the same time. There are trees that hit a tail end to their foyer growth much earlier than other trees. If we just look at, say, we look at, let me think here for a second, if we say, we look at, a singular flush pine, right, versus a multi-flush pine. This is a very interesting nuance. Or even a short-needled single-flush pine like a Scot's pine versus a ponderosa pine. Scot's pine is finished. Japanese white pine is finished around that June, July, that midpoint of the year. Yet ponderosa pine, Japanese black pine, these two pines are elongating their needles. They're in foyer growth production all the way until September. Okay, that's a great illustration of that difference of when these trees met. That's a great illustration of when these trees make those transitions. And understanding that transition is important. So when we talk about all of these things happening, we're talking about the physiology, but inside of the physiology, each species does have nuances. Okay? But our focus today is not on that energy-positive spring. We've already talked about that in the spring wrap-up. We've focused so much this year on that energy-positive utilization techniques, plant responses that trigger our awareness. We're back in energy-positive. Now we're focused on this. I want to focus on this big, broad vascular productivity this time of the year. And what we recognize when we start to see this is if we consider the growth of a tree and we say, oh, the first season that a tree experiences in terms of growth is spring, I would say this is where we need to reestablish the conversation. Because in all actuality, if I get rid of this tree ring and we continue to kind of process this information, right? When we start to talk about the seedling, a very beginning of a plant in terms of its germination and its existence as a bonsai, what comes first out of the seedling? Is it the cotyledons or the initial leaves or is it the radical or the very origin of the root? And the answer is a seed will always produce the root first. Now why does it produce the root first? It produces the root first because once these cotyledons are out here and you've got happy Mr. Sunshine who never has a bad day, causing transpiration to occur, if there is not water, transpiration, the evaporation of water on the leaf surface, if we do not have a delivery of water supplying that resource with the capacity to stay hydrated, and if we do not have water being delivered to be broken down, hydrogen, oxygen separated, carbon dioxide, carbon and oxygen separated, hydrogen and oxygen from water with that carbon, C6H12O6, sugar, glucose, energy, food, this is photosynthesis. And if we don't have a source for that water, we don't get to have that piece photosynthesized with success. And we need to think about bonsai from this perspective and the fall season as the beginning of our tree's life, as the beginning of our tree's next season of growth. Summer is actually a dormant moment where there's a break from, right? High intensity, long daylight length, trees are saying, hmm, not the best time to be producing more foliar growth. I don't have the capacity to keep it hydrated. The daylight length and the intensity of the sun and the heat, I don't have a cuticle on that new growth. I don't think it's going to be successful. I'm not going to waste my energy. Actually, it might be so hot that through transpiration, I can't even cool myself, especially in areas of high relative humidity. And consequently, what's the response, what's the action? I'm going to go dormant. I'm going to shut down for a minute. I'm going to stop all of the metabolic processes. I'm going to let my system just focus on transpiration to move that heat out of that system. And we will come back to that water mobility and that water discussion, okay? But that's where we see summer dormancy. And once we hit the tail end of that, all of a sudden, this is the moment where the tree says, yo, I got to wake up, I got to get my butt in gear because now daylight length is decreasing. Now temperatures are starting to decrease, right? Although we're still going to hit these hot spells over the fall season, depending on where we live in the northern hemisphere or the southern hemisphere, that temperature is going to fluctuate to a significant degree, September hottest month in Oregon, really odd, but still it is. So when we start to talk about that, and we get this kind of escalation down, the photo period and the daylight length is decreasing. The tree says, I don't want to be producing foyer mass right now. It doesn't make any sense. The temperatures are dropping. The length of light, the photo period, the daylight length is dropping. Why would I invest my energy? Why would I spend my resources that I've worked hard to accumulate over the season to generate new solar panels when I'm losing the capacity for those solar panels to gather energy? And it says, instead, I'm going to build the highways. I'm going to save up in my savings account. I'm going to start to bank all of the resources from this expanded foyer mass that I produced this year. This expanded solar panel system. I'm going to take all the sugars and starches over these intense periods of heat and this still relatively long daylight length. I'm going to take all of those resources and I'm going to store them. Not only am I going to store them, I'm going to build. I'm going to build some infrastructure. So when we start to look at the fall season and vascular growth, we have to think about vascular growth occurring over all portions of the tree. Now you all know that my trees in this whole design process of drawing, not the best, but it's simple, it's functional. Let's get it done. And we're talking about vascular growth in terms of our five meristems. Now this is really interesting because we have five areas where we have meristematic tissue. Meristematic tissue is where cellular division occurs. Cellular division has got to occur in order for there to be growth. We have the apical meristem. The apical meristem is where we get the growth of the foyer mass at the tip. Now we recognize in the fall, the apical meristem is not the meristem where the focus of the energy is. But in the fall, we will see the buds on pines. We will see the buds on spruce. We will see the buds on fir. We will see the buds on our deciduous start to form. We'll see back budding that's set up for next season. We'll see the buds get more plump. It's almost as if they take on a greater amount of color. This is the tree planting all of those sugars and starches in that vascular system. So it's saying, apical meristem, let's get it pumped up. We've got the flower and fruit meristem. Now flower and fruit meristem, when we start to talk about this, is functioning over the course of the year and is slightly independent, not of photoperiod and not of temperature, but is slightly independent of the foyer growth versus vascular growth that we see in the general behavior of the tree. But it does not mean that it is completely void of those influences, depending on the species, depending on when it flowers, depending on when it fruits, and depending on how we have to handle that species to trigger the flowering and fruiting. Or, focus our energy on the development of the tree, it might mean we're paying more attention to foyer versus vascular or more attention to the flowering and fruiting cycle. When we start to talk about the cork cambium, the formation of bark, big moment, most of us don't recognize that the greatest amount of bark formation on our tree happens over the fall season. And most of us think the greatest amount of bark formation is due to the vascular meristem, right? The cork cambial layer in the core of the tree swelling. Not true. When you have a cork cambium, pine bark. When you have a cork cambium, we talk about a rough bark maple. When you have a cork cambium, spruce. When you have a cork cambium, hemlock. When you have a cork cambium, redwood. Right? That bark, that fire-resistant bark. Very, I think, significant discussion with all the fires we're seeing around North America. The cork cambium producing the bark, ponderosa pine, fire-retardant, fire-resistant cork cambium, dead tissue. This is important, this is imperative, and this is a very fall period of productivity for the tree. Okay, we have the root meristem, or the root tip meristem, and then last but not least, and really the focal point for where we're at, is we have the cambium. We have the cambium, right? The cambium. The tissue in the trunk branches and all of the vascular system and the woody portions of the tree that gives rise to xylem. That gives rise to phloem. The cellular division, and when we talk about this, okay? We've got this layer, okay? Inside of the cambial layer, we've got the water conductive xylem. Outside, we've got that sugar starch conductive phloem. Right now, we're seeing the phloem extremely active in the vascular growth portion of the year. We'll come back to that, okay? Water moving up, typically sugar moving down. That singular cell layer in between those two pieces, that is the cambial layer. One single cell layer thick. And you think about one single cell layer thick as it pertains to the size and scale and proportion of a giant sequoia, most massive tree on Earth, it's still one cell layer thick. One microscopic cell layer thick is what gives rise to the increased girth of a giant sequoia. It's what gives rise to the increased girth of a Japanese maple. It's what gives rise to the increased girth of an oak acorn that has germinated over the course of the year and is now producing that small little fleshy piece of growth that next year is going to greatly expand. The cambial layer is one of the most powerful single cells. One of the most powerful tissues that exist in the world. When you think about the function that it serves to be able to provide the Earth with all of the mechanisms that transport and utilize carbon in the atmosphere and provide as a byproduct food, breathable air, and resources for us as living beings. Right? It's amazing. This is my most favorite cell. Single, hands down, most favorite cell that exists. Okay? So, when we start to talk about this big, and that's a big tangent, but we have to have that background because when we talk about this, this big, huge chunk of vascular growth in the darker portion, the hardwood portion, of that singular annual ring inside of a tree is happening in the fall right now. Okay? Right now. The beginning of it is right now. Summer is wrapping up. Dormancy is shutting down. Trees are being activated by the daylight length, by the change of temperature, and now all of a sudden they're saying, instead of investing in solar panels, I'm going to be storing this up. I'm going to be storing this up. Okay, now we need to look at what does that storage look like and how does that function physiologically. Let's dive into water movement as sort of the initiation of this discussion and understanding of how this begins to work. Okay, water. Now, we recognize if we don't by now, then we need to go back. Okay? But that's okay. Going back is not a big deal, but we do need to understand as a fundamental pillar backbone of our bonsai practice what creates health in a bonsai tree, a tree that is placed into a shallow, contained environment that is designed to control the rate of growth in the tree and the proportions that growth produces. Right? And the thing that generates health, we have sunlight driving photosynthesis and transpiration, but we have a balance of water and oxygen in the root system. A balance of water and oxygen in the root system, the water being a major capacity to cool the tree. And when we talk about water mobility, we say, listen, over the period of growth in the year, 85% of H2O is for cooling. It's for allowing the tree to remove the accumulation of heat out of the system. Okay? But we have that 15%, and again, this is a very blunt instrument here. This is like a battering ram of a piece of knowledge. There's so many nuances inside of this, but this is as deep as we need to go with water, just to illustrate the point. Right? 15%, if we consider 15% metabolic activities, we're talking about metabolic activities in terms of photosynthesis, okay, where we start to say, listen, in photosynthesis, that bond, when we talk about water and oxygen, boom, that bond is broken in photosynthesis via the utilization of the sun's energy. Carbon dioxide is coming in through the stomata or the holes in the leaf, that bond is broken. And this hydrogen and oxygen combine with this carbon to create C6H12O6. We talked about this a little earlier. Byproduct is the oxygen molecule off of the carbon dioxide. So that byproduct is what creates the oxygen positive production of air when we talk about trees and their sequestration of carbon and their oxygen positive productivity. But this sugar, when we start to talk about this, typically when we're looking at the foliar growth portion of the year, that sugar is being held in that apical meristem or that meristem at the tip where foliar production is occurring. And we only get that small payback, that light little ring of the annual ring, that small piece of vascular growth. We only get a small payback in the spring season because so much of that sugar and starch is staying at the tip of that plant. And this is something that you could actually see by, and you don't want to do this, but I'm just saying, sometimes it happens, right? We have a tree that we've repotted, it falls off the bench, the pot cracks open, and we say, there's not as many roots growing as I thought there would be. Well, come the end of fall, we've got this tree rocking and rolling in the vascular productivity, it falls off the bench, it opens up, and you say, look at all the roots. Now, most of us start to kind of dive into this and say, oh, well, if that's the case, shouldn't we repot in the fall? That is not what I'm saying. That is not what I'm saying. There are so many mechanisms beyond just root growth that would dictate and determine the fall being not as much of an appropriate season as the springtime for repotting. Not universal, broad brushstroke here, but I would say the spring is still the moment where we have the greatest ability to heavily manipulate the root system and the plant have success as a result. Primarily, the energy positive state that that tree is in at that moment in spring, having continued to accumulate resources. Now, this production of C6H12O6, we're talking about in the fall, looking at this mechanism, we recognize water's continuing to be delivered, it's continuing to be transpired to cool 85%, boom. But we also recognize 15% metabolic activity where after the tail end of the heat and the summer dormancy, vascular productivity begins to grow and begins again, bam, kick in 15%. And now we've got this flow of sugars and starches. Now, everybody says, oh, in the spring, everything rises to the top of the tree and the fall, everything goes to the bottom. This is completely inaccurate because if that were the case, then the top of the tree would die every year. It would not have the resources to sustain itself. So what happens with all of this productivity in the vascular growth phase where the focus is on vascular growth? Coming back to the seedling, right? The root is formed before the cotyledons or the photosynthetic piece of the puzzle. The tree is saying, listen, based on this canopy that I have here, I need to, if I'm going to, and recognize this, a tree cannot stay the same. A tree does not want to shrink, which means the tree is saying, I've got this foliar mass that I grew this year that's photosynthetically efficient and I'm going to take these solar panels and amass not just as much energy as I had last year, but I'm going to take the addition of this growth this year and I'm going to amass more. I'm going to amass more energy so I can get bigger, okay? And that bigger is to say, I'm going to expand my root system to be able to take in more water and more nutrition. I'm going to expand the amount of phloem and I'm going to expand the amount of xylem via the cambial growth so that I have more highways to transport the water and nutrition to those expanded leaves so that they can photosynthesize, metabolize, and stay cool in the process. And I'm going to beef up the continued highway of that water delivery system, of that sugar delivery system, but also increase the physical structure of my branching to be able to support the enhanced weight of my anticipated growth next season. All of this is developed. Your growth next spring is completely determined and dictated by your tree this fall. And what we do with the tree this fall in terms of how do we prune it, how have we handled it when we got past that energy positive state, when have we come back and addressed that tree, how are we going to fertilize, how are we going to water, how are we going to manage the foliar mass, is going to determine all of the growth that you experience next year. This moment, right now, not how much you gas the fertilizer next spring, not how much you try to force the tree to grow, not how much you're going to try to compensate for something going wrong this fall, right? None of what you can do next spring determines how the tree grows if you compare it proportionally to how significant its preparation over the fall is. So what we're saying is with this enhanced metabolic activity, boom, all of a sudden vascular growth, we should see water utilization start to ramp up again. This has happened at Mirai where cooler temperatures and I'm using the same amount of water at cooler temperatures because now they've kicked back into a high rate of metabolic activity. And I'm watching on the Ponderosa pines, the orange swelling, fresh new callus formation, fresh new vascular production, Engelmann's spruce, I'm seeing it on my deciduous, fresh new tissue, right at the margins of deadwood and living tissue. It's happening right now. That vascular productivity has kicked into gear. I'm watching third-year needles drop on Ponderosas. I'm seeing third-year needles being shed on other elongating species like hemlock. I'm watching all of those systems start to work right now, triggered by daylight length and temperature. And as a result, with the addition of that, even if we have temperatures decreasing, I'm not saying, hey, water, water, water. Balance of water and oxygen generates health. But recognize over the fall season that that water and that utilization of water that that tree needs is what creates the capacity for metabolic activity to occur, is what generates the hydrogen and the oxygen that go into glucose, sugar or food for the tree that help it establish that bigger, darker, thicker amount of vascular productivity in the referential growth ring of the tree. That is what is happening right now. And this is where water mobility, water utilization and the establishment, right? A tree doesn't have a credit card. It's got to save up and prepare for everything it's going to spend next spring when it produces those photosynthetic solar panels. That's what's happening right now. It's banking energy. Okay? So when we start to talk about banking energy, we also have, in addition to the production of this tissue, we also have the tree saying, hey, hey, on a cellular level, temperatures are decreasing. When we start to talk about the cold hardiness scale, right? We're saying this is minimum temperature that a tree can tolerate. Okay? And during the peak of the growing season, 32 degrees for a lot of trees would be the death of them in the peak of the growing season. So you have a middle of July, trees are rocking and rolling, soft tissues out there, boom, 32 degrees. That's going to be a problem. Okay? But when we get to the winter time, we might be talking about, for some trees, negative 15 degrees, negative 20 degrees, negative 30. Who knows? Right? Nobody knows this threshold. So many different factors. Well, how do you go from 32 degrees being damaging to negative 15 degrees being okay? And this is where we start to see the production of these sugars and starches over the course of time, starting in September here, peaking in January, and being really pretty much emptied out of that plant by April, you see a continual accumulation inside of a singular cell of sugars, starches, and dissolved solutes. Right? So we look at this cell, we have this vacuole, the water holding component, the nucleus also exists here, and this is primarily H2O, especially when we're growing and producing foliar mass. But now we're in vascular productivity, and the xylem tissue is expanding, and the phloem tissue is expanding, and the root tissue is expanding, and the branch tissue is expanding, and the tree is building all of the systems, storing up for what it anticipates it's going to produce from a photosynthetic surface area next season. Okay? But it also has to have, in addition to the production of that tissue, the energy to drive that leaf mass to occur. And inside of the production of that energy to drive that leaf mass productivity, we see a very significant antifreeze or winter hardiness protection. And the only place inside of a plant, when we look at this entire device, the only place where storage can occur is inside of the physical cellular structure, because this is just a big system of cells. And inside of the cellular structure, the only place storage exists, right? It's like the trunk of a car. Where are you going to store all of your stuff when the trunk of the car has all the people in it that are doing the things that the car is transporting them to do? You've got to have a trunk. Well, you've got to have a vacuole. Okay? And in addition to the production of the tissues, we see sugars. We see starches. We see all of the solutes. We see the components of the chlorophyll, the green pigmentation being broken down, iron, magnesium, zinc, nitrogen. Pull all those into the cellular structure. Those aren't winter tolerant. We're going to shed those leaves. I want to reabsorb all those resources before I lose them and the leaves drop off of my deciduous. I'm going to store it in the vacuole. Okay? And inside of storing that, we start to see an increase in cold tolerance to the degree where we're saying, listen, at the peak of January in the northern hemisphere, our trees are at the peak of their cold tolerance because they've continued to amass all of this stored sugar and starch inside of that. And that stored sugar and starch came from the photosynthesis over the fall. And that photosynthesis over the fall and that stored sugar and starch and those expanded highways are what give rise to the push of energy. The sugars and starches from the cellular structure out to the tips of those branches that generate the leaves, the needles, the photosynthetic surface area for this tree to once again be bigger, be growing, and be moving forward next spring. Everything that we accomplish in a season of growth in bonsai is set up in the fall. This is the most important season of the year. Okay? And water is a major driver of that. Balance of water and oxygen for health. Understand water is important in the fall. Nutrition. Now, if we're talking about trying to drive all these resources, dissolved sugars, solutes, metabolic activity, boom, boom, boom, boom, vascular growth, then we have to be providing supplemental nutrition. Right? And when we talk about fertilizer, and I feel like we've discussed this a lot, but I want to come back to this. Fertilizer is not food. Fertilizer is a supplementation. What is food? Food is sugars and starches produced via photosynthesis, the breaking down of those molecular bonds, and the reformation into C6H12O6 glucose, and then that is processed via the Krebs cycle in the dark periods via respiration into storable energy or usable energy. That's the general, again, a big blunt explanation. There's a lot of nuances there, but that tells us how the tree produces its own food. Self-feeding, right? But this supplemental nutrition can enhance the capacity for the tree to metabolize, can enhance the metabolic activity, can enhance the functions, the responses, the strength, the durability, the capacity. And we're saying, hey, over the fall season, we really do tend to want to utilize that opportunity while it's creating its channels, its highways, its roots, its branches, its trunk, its stored energy. We want to use this as an opportunity to boost that if we're looking for a big piece of growth next year. Okay? So we do typically see post-summer dormancy, with the beginning of fall coming on, Mirai is fertilizing this week. Okay? First week of September, it's going to be rather warm. As long as we're not over 95 degrees, we're going to be fertilizing at Mirai. And this is really seeing all the indications, shedding of third-year needles, expansion of vascular tissue, a great indication that it's time, that the trees are in process, and that it is time to be digging into the fertilization strategy. Okay, now this is where we really come back and talk about timing as well as quantity in terms of our gas pedals over the fall because there are nuances to fall fertilization. So we would be saying we have a heavy application. I would say we are in a developmental strategy of fertilization. Okay? We could say we have a moderate. This is more of a secondary phase of development. Or we could say, hey listen, we're light. We're more in a refinement phase of our trees development. And that is going hand in hand with how we fertilize. Again, what's the biggest question we ask ourselves when we fertilize? What are we trying to accomplish? What are you trying to accomplish? Are you trying to accomplish big robust growth? Cool, primary, developmental. Are you trying to establish secondary scaffolding, expand the shape of your pads? Great, you're in a moderate. Are you trying to get the finest, shortest inner node, tightest, smallest leaf? Are you trying to keep the tree at a relative state of refinement for those two to three years that you can hold refinement? Cool, you're on the light. And that is how we start to play into this. So we say with timing, heavy every four weeks, moderate every six weeks, light every eight weeks. When you start to look at this over the course of fall, for a tree that's in refinement, you may give it a moderate or a light dose in terms of quantity one time in the fall. Maybe once is all you get. Maybe you get, maybe twice over those eight weeks. Because we recognize fall and the turn from summer dormancy into vascular growth happens very subtly, but also fall ends very quickly for a majority of the northern hemisphere. And when we start to look at that, to not be building up too many stored resources, to not be expanding and thickening something you're trying to get to refine, to not have so much energy in that tree that next spring, because we misfertilized in the fall, it explodes with growth that we can't manage to maintain refinement, is where that timing comes in for that lighter application of fertilizer. And in quantity, we're saying, listen, one and a half tablespoons per location. We're saying one tablespoon per location. We're saying a half tablespoon per location. Quantity and timing to be able to coincide, to get that moderate push of growth, not an aggressive, not an excessive amount of stored resources, not an excessive number of xylem highways, phloem highways, root expansion. Because when you get all of that and you have the stored sugars and starches in the vacuole of that cell, next spring, whether you like it or not, those sugars are going to go to the tip of that plant and you have to deal with the repercussion of how you set the tree up because the fall is the beginning of the tree's annual cycle, right? And so this is where, particularly when we get into a tree where we're dealing with refinement, fall fertilization, in my mind, is one of the most significant and important things to understand. It's not a deep thought process. It's not a hyper-nuanced process. It is to say, hey listen, when I'm creating the resources that are going to dictate the growth next year, what kind of resources? Quantity. What kind of vascular system in terms of xylem and phloem? What kind of root expansion do I want? And I think one of the limitations inside of bonsai in the western world, is that we do typically tend to be of a mentality that if one is good, five is better, right? One drop of, one drop of, you know, liquid detergent to wash your dishes. Cool. One dish, I'm going to give ten drops, right? That way that dish is going to be cleaner, isn't it? Oh, okay. One half tablespoon, a half tablespoon per location. I'll do one and a half. What's it going to hurt, right? Well, what it's going to hurt is it's going to hurt your ability to maintain a refined bonsai. So, it's going to hurt your ability to maintain a refined bonsai, okay? And so, inside of this, this is really where we do have to temper ourselves. Now, I'm not saying, hey, everybody, pull back on your fertilizer. I'm saying, ask yourself, what are you trying to accomplish? And with the knowledge that you have over the significance of the fall season as the beginning, the establishment of what next year is going to look like, okay? This is a big moment. This is a big moment in time for nutrition. I don't want to go into nutrition beyond this. Oh, I will. I will touch on this, okay? Now, when I'm talking about one and a half tablespoons, one tablespoon, half tablespoon, I'm talking about dry, preferably pelletized fertilizer. People, and there have been a lot of discussions. Is liquid just as good? Is liquid the same? Is liquid better? Do we have to use dry fertilizer? Why? What's the difference, okay? And then in the fall, there's always the discussion of is nitrogen bad, okay? Let's tackle all three of these right now. When we start to look at the soil quality and the soil system of the tree, we have to understand that in bonsai cultivation, if we are simply feeding the tree as the singular organism that exists inside of that container, that we have missed a very significant conversation about the modernization and science of bonsai. Because what we start to understand and what we are learning more and more about right now, the new frontier, I would say, in bonsai study is how that microbial relationship between beneficial fungi and bacteria inside of that container and the necessity for beneficial bacteria and fungi mean we have to consider feeding that component and stimulating and fostering and nurturing that component of our containerized environment as much as the tree if not even more, okay? And when we start to talk about that, how do you feed a tree and how do you feed bacteria and fungi has been a mystery for a very long time. I would say this is still something that they are working on, dispelling a lot of misinformation in the farming community throughout the Northern Hemisphere, especially in North America. And when we start to look at this, liquid fertilizers, and let's say, let's stick with organic, okay? Because chemical fertilizers are going to decompose, break down, and eradicate our beneficial bacteria and our beneficial fungi. And some of you are going to say, I feed with Miracle-Gro, I've got great mycorrhizae, mmm, careful, careful, right? Because actinobacteria and mycorrhizae look very similar, and actinobacteria is exactly what you don't want. And sometimes, that chemical feed leads to the boom, the availability in the forms that that chemical feed is providing, a boom of really bad things in your containerized environment. I'm not saying it does, I'm saying it could, okay? But when we start to talk about liquid fertilizers, steering towards the organic, fish hydrolysates, kelp, fish emulsion, we start to talk about humic acids and other things, and some of these things that we use in addition to the nutritional components to enhance the ability for that nutrition to stay inside of that soil, these are things that are really designed to feed the tree, okay? So when we talk about that, feeding with a hydrolysate, feeding with that emulsion and that kelp, these are things that are immediately impacting and available to the tree. But they are not necessarily demanding, they're not necessitating the action of your fungi and the action of your bacteria. Now, that doesn't mean that they're not supporting it, because when we start to talk about this containerized environment, the growth of the roots over the vascular production portion of the year means if we have a healthy tree and a robust photosystem, and we're producing a lot of sugars and starches that are building those vascular tissues, the byproduct of that with root production is root exudates, sugary excretions of that created food in the photosynthetic process upon which beneficial fungi and beneficial bacteria are going to grow. This is how the flora is created. This is the same thing as saying I poured yogurt on a rock and six to eight weeks later you will get moss. Exactly the same thing. This is identical. The cultivation of the flora in the container. But to continue to perpetuate and enhance your fungi and bacteria, to expand that outreach of the tree's root systems, to increase the tree's root system, resilience in this unnatural confined environment and the stresses it experiences as a compatible, collaborative, symbiotic unit, we have to be using dry. Dry fertilizers. Because this is where all of the fungi and bacteria start to look at this dry fertilizer and they're saying that's organic matter. Inside of our bonsai container with the pumice, lava, and akadama, we virtually have a hydroponic system. We're saying akadama itself is eight to ten percent organic matter and that might be thirty percent, max fifty percent of a coniferous growth range, might be a hundred percent, which means a hundred percent akadama in a deciduous tree still only has eight to ten percent organic matter. In a conifer, we're talking when you dilute it with pumice, when you dilute it with lava, you have a single one, two percent organic matter in that entire container and fungi and bacteria are feeding on organic matter and they're trying to break it down and they have no food source and all of a sudden, boom, you drop in that dry pelletized fertilizer that is just raw organic matter sitting there and they're like ahhhhh. Right? And so they go up and they start crushing on this organic matter and breaking it into nitrogen ions and potassium ions and phosphorus ions and these are in that decomposition a production of humic acid as well through the decomposition of organic matter and we get sites expanding. We get organic matter increasing and you're saying I thought we didn't want organic matter. We could use pine bark instead. No! Balance of water and oxygen is what keeps health. We have to add organic matter. That's what generates the resources for the fungi and bacteria to be present, enhances the humic acid content which increases the sites upon which this nutrition latches on but we don't want more organic matter that's going to be breaking down rapidly like a pine bark. We're still staying inside of okadama, pumice and lava because the balance of water and oxygen gives us health. Okay? So don't take one drop and make it five or ten is better. Stay inside of your lane. We know what gives the tree health balance of water and oxygen but we have to understand supplemental nutrition liquid feeds the tree dry pelletized fertilizer feeds the fungal and the bacterial expansion of our microbial network that gives the tree the resistance the tolerance the durability and the capacity to respond to all of the things it experiences in that containerized environment and again boom when we come back here and we start talking about that application right? Are we going with the full application the label recommends for liquid? Are we going with the moderate application the label recommends for liquid? Are we going with the light for what the label recommends? Okay? Are we going to be going every four, six, eight weeks with liquid? No. We want to be going on a weekly basis because we don't have a lot of places for that liquid to be held but quantity concentration of the liquid fertilizer is definitely going to be the measuring stick for how we adjust to what we're trying to accomplish over the fall season don't deny the microbial activity you don't have to lean on liquid if you've built it and you're using dry fertilizers but if your trees need a boost liquid is the feed that targets the tree specifically this is how we deal inside of the liquid versus the dry organic I always want to try to cultivate the microbial activity with dry with over the course of time and then move to a strictly dry organic if you're asking me that's the success that we've built on it's the success that Komuro was built on it's the success that Japanese Bonsai was built on not a lot of liquid fertilizers being applied in Japan right and yet their Bonsai are still of the highest caliber that should tell us something in North America right if your dry fertilizer is not decomposing on the surface of the soil then you have not tended to the fungi and bacteria that you need for that system to be holistic complete and your tree to be as strong as it possibly could and that's what I want to tell you to be careful I don't say it's good I say it's bad I say it's good I say it's good nitrogen good nitrogen is good okay the whole the whole discussion of the 0-10-10 listen if you've been using 0-10-10 and it has been effective rock on don't let me tell you otherwise okay but also recognize that most of the time when we talk about 0-10-10 already our soils have an abundance of phosphorus any of those other processes, we can actually cause potentially negative things to occur with the 0-10-10. Now, there are some species, Japanese maple, Pacific Northwest, I'm not saying this is universal to Japanese maple. Everywhere I'm telling you, Pacific Northwest Japanese maple, you feed them with too high of a nitrogen feed, too late into the fall, you get a heat spell, you will get growth and you will empty those resources the tree has been storing, okay? That's the danger. That is a singular scenario. Is a black pine going to do that? Is a ponderosa going to do that? Is a juniper going to do that? Is a spruce going to do that? Is a beech going to do that? Is a hornbeam going to do that? And the answer is no, no. And that nitrogen is so important for photosynthesis, for the decomposition of those oxygen and carbon dioxide reformation of sugar to set the backbone up over the fall season for everything the tree is going to do next year. And we're starving it of that resource. I would say think twice about 0, 10, 10, right? Use it strategically if you've had success with it, but think twice about it. Think intelligently about it. Think physiologically about it. I don't see it making a lot of sense. Plants have mechanisms. Their nitrogen isn't stripped out of their system in the fall, okay? So we're dealing with a little bit of a nuance here that does have some effectiveness, but I would pull back on how much I believe or utilize that piece of knowledge. Nutrition. It's a monster. There's more we can dive into. That's enough for now. Now obviously water and nutrition contribute directly to energy. Everything we've talked about is a discussion of energy, but we haven't actually mapped out energy. And when we talk about over the course of the season, and let's just understand when we talk about stored energy on the vertical, and we talk about time on the horizontal, and say we talk about January as the beginning, we'll talk about June as the middle, we'll talk about December as the end. Okay? Even though I'm saying, hey, your season starts in the fall, we're going to see this happen right now. Okay? Now we recognize that the peak or the energy positive that we experience in the early spring is what establishes the resources for that to be the best time to repot, not necessarily January, but in the spring, okay? And this correlates directly when we start to talk about cold tolerance and cold tolerance being dictated by energy stored in the cells, or sugars and starches stored in the cells, and that cold tolerance. Okay? That's your maximum amount of stored sugars and starches, which is to say that over November and December, you are accumulating more sugars and starches to get to that peak. That's fascinating. Tree's supposed to be dormant, yet it's still behaving metabolically. Think about that for a minute, okay? From this point, when we see daylight length increasing, we cross the winter solstice, we see daylight increasing, we see temperatures increasing, some of that energy starts to move, because it's a slow process. There's a lot of storage that occurs over the fall and the winter, and it takes a long time for that to get to the tip over that expanding season. So when we start to look at this, this spring season in here, right, this is really where we're at the peak of energy positive. And this is why we say, number one, time to repot, number one, time to structurally style, structurally style our trees, okay, because you have, just prior to this movement right here. You have a massive opportunity to do heavy work. Tree has the energy to respond, and that big flood of resources is going to happen. Now we recognize, as that growth gets pushed out, the tree is spending its energy. It's spending everything it accumulated the previous fall, right? And it's spending everything it accumulated, because it wants to be a big tree, and it set up the highways, and it set up the root system, and it set up the xylem and the phloem. It set everything up to transport. This necessary growth. This necessary quantity of water to move all the sugar cell to cell up to that apical meristem and produce more solar panels, okay? But we get to a point where it starts to spend all of that energy. There's less sugar being delivered. We're at the tail end. The distribution of sugar and water across each cell is starting to even out and reach an equilibrium. And that's when we start to see the cuticle form. And as the cuticle forms, we start to see energy increase, okay? Now that energy increases. But what happens? Well, when we hit that summer dormancy where metabolic activity, and we're talking now right around that August period of time, we see a lull in the action here, okay? We see a lull in the action. It's not done. No portion, no action in the plant is specifically started and stopped, right? There's never a time where the plant is doing nothing. Even when we talk about the depth of winter for a rock-solid frozen tree, it is still accumulating sugars in this perfect bell curve. And that's because of winter hardiness, winter tolerance, or stored sugars and starches. So when we see this, it's not like, oh, okay, tree stopped metabolizing. It's just cooling itself. No, there's still something happening, just not as much because it needs to allocate its resources accordingly. But then we hit this period come September, vascular growth, and boom. This is really when we get ... Now, if we think about this, this is our baseline, okay? And typically you see a tree get back to baseline right around that July, August period of time in the northern hemisphere. That's when we say, hey, listen, this is the tail end of when you could prune the new growth on a Scot's pine. This is the tail end of when we could go ahead and prune a Douglas fir and have the buds fully mature. This is the tail end of when we probably want to be doing our partial defoliation on our deciduous outside of some random examples we've talked about on the live Q&A. This is kind of the tail end of your foliar growth phase because we are getting back into that energy positive and we're trying to amass towards this fall season. Right? So when we start to talk about this, this has to be in excess of where we started that season if the tree is going to be bigger. And we're saying, well, in bonsai, I don't want the tree to be bigger. In bonsai, I want the tree to stay small. This is true, but recognize that if you try to keep a tree small, if you try too hard, if you starve it too much, if you take off too much foliage, if you pinch, if you prune, if you touch it too much, it's going to head the other way. Okay? So accept that each year your tree is going to get a little bit bigger, a little bit bigger. It has to get bigger. It has to. Not bigger. Not like here. Here. That's not what we want unless we're in development. Okay? If we have a tree, it has to get bigger. And this is why we created the vortex of bonsai design at Mirai, to make sense of, okay, my tree is going to get bigger. This is inevitable if it's going to perpetuate itself as a bonsai. How do we deal with that? Well, this is where we create the opportunity to age the design. To create deadwood, to open up negative space, to reduce the proportions, to regain the pieces that enhance that tree, but still move it forward. So it's not designing it, it gets bigger, I cut it back to what it was, right? It's designing it, it gets bigger, I'm going to advance its aesthetic. We've been doing this over and over and over this year on the live stream to show this tree, boom, boom, boom, got bigger. And now we're going to take an action that advances its representation of age as an aesthetic. Okay? So what is an evolution on the Japanese approach? The Japanese approach stays in the teenage years of age representation as a general practice as the kokufu model, right? But there is more to be had. There's more to understand to be seen, okay? So when we see this fall period and that energy, this is where we say, hey, how are we fertilizing? What does fertilizer look like, okay? Big question mark. But also foyer management, okay? What is our practice, what is our practice for foyer management so that we have total control over the energy accumulated? Because again, fertilizer, what are we trying to accomplish? We just talked about that as supplemental nutrition, quantity, timing. We understand that in the fall season we're building everything that the tree is going to do for us. We're creating the response next year. We have to be very, very careful because we could put a refined tree into an excessive state of growth. By misapplying fertilization over the fall season. But we also, in terms of foyer management, if we want to refine a tree, slightly reducing or timing the work on our tree to have a foyer mass in the fall that isn't as big and as vigorous and as blown out and as robust, means that it does not photosynthesize to create the stored sugars and starches at a level or to a degree where we would have the course push next spring as well. And this is where the fall season is an opportune time to sort of go back into our refined trees and potentially check their foyer density, their level of vigor, and kind of scale back some of the trees that we're trying to slow down a little bit. Is this more work? Yes, it is. Because we've already done all the work on our elongating species. We've already done the work on our short needle single flush pines. We've already done the work on a lot of our deciduous trees. And now we get to the fall, and Ryan's saying, and most of our junipers as well, July, August, and early September, we're right at that point. And Ryan's saying now, this is a moment where we can manage these. You can't have too many trees in a high-level state of refinement, okay? You can't. It's not possible to maintain them there, and a tree can only stay in a high-level state of refinement for two to three years before it's kind of maxed out what it can accomplish. It's overgrown its proportions. And we need to readdress the decision. The design. Now, obviously, you could keep perpetuating that, and the tree's going to look worse and worse. That's not effective bonsai cultivation, okay? You're going to leave it like that until the tree gets bigger and bigger, and it loses all of its aesthetic value. That's not effective bonsai design, okay? So we do have to readdress this, but this is a moment in that two to three-year stretch where you hit the peak of a full cycle of the vortex, and you're seeing that tree, mwah, mwah, mwah, mwah, right? Beautiful. It looks great. You have a short window that you get to appreciate that. Therefore, you have to advance that tree again, okay? So energy and understanding energy and recognizing in the fall season we create all of the responses for next year, we can have a very significant impact based on the way that we supply supplemental nutrition and the way that we manage that foyer mass to change that arc of energy and give ourselves a more nuanced control or gas pedal to achieve what we're trying to accomplish. I'm not telling you necessarily what to do. I'm not telling you necessarily what to do. I'm not telling you necessarily what you should be doing. I'm telling you that the opportunity exists. It's a dangerous opportunity if you abuse it. It's a wonderful opportunity if you utilize it correctly, and it is an opportunity that is reserved for those trees in refinement to check their foyer mass, decrease the amount of energy they store, and keep that growth fine next spring. This is a fall activity for a lot of our trees, okay? But more than that, more than that, number one time to repot, number one time to structurally style just prior to the foyer pull. Prior to the foyer push? This is the time in the year where we should have managed our trees in refinement, our trees in secondary to this point, and we should be at a point where we are ready for any new material we've acquired, that tree we've been building the roots and health on over the season. It got strong. It grew big. It's healthy. Energy positive. I didn't do the work after the growth hardened off. I let it crush through the summer, and now we're here. This is it. Just prior to that onset. This is it. This is the onset of major energy. Number two, time for structural work. This is one of the most beautiful times of the year to do heavy structural styling because we get cracks, we get tears, we get breaks. We push a tree very hard, and it's creating vascular tissue. It's creating vascular tissue. It's moving sugars and starches cell to cell. There's a high amount of productivity. The tree is getting ready for fall. It's trying to chill out, and all of those cracks, tears, bends, breaks are patched with relative ease. This is a moment where big structural styling is absolutely possible because we are in the beginning of a major period of growth. Just prior to the push of foyer growth in the spring, number one. Low temperatures at that time is what makes it number one. Nothing else. Number two, right when we begin vascular productivity. High temperatures, going to have to provide some aftercare, best time to patch damage in the vascular system. Doing the work here, this is when we come back to a lot of raw work, the beginning of a new tree. We've earned it over the course of the season of handling it correctly. Balance of water and oxygen, supplemental nutrition, using the foyer mats correctly. Boom, boom, boom. Energy is here. Let's do it. Let's get it on. This is that moment, the beginning of that season, and it is a beautiful time of year to rock out on bonsai. Energy systems. You can use them. You can enhance your bonsai practice, but you can also abuse them if you do not understand them. This should enhance your capacity to understand energy. Fall season, pests and disease. What are we worried about? When you think about pests and disease, you really do need to dive a little bit deeper than the obvious. I saw an insect. I need to deal with that insect. If we've learned anything from Mirai and being a part of Mirai Live, it should be that there is an entire system happening here that by the time you see something, you were oblivious to everything that was happening prior. One of the things about insects and disease is knowing the conditions that create favorable opportunities for infection. The infection being a discussion of where the tree is at and how strong it is. Anticipating those moments where we are going to need to keep an eye out to proactively prevent or catch something from happening before it gets really bad. I think the fall season is a beautiful time of year for a very specific pest and disease phenomenon. This is when we see all of these sugars and starches coming down into the roots. We're expanding soft fleshy root growth in the springtime with the production of soft fleshy leaves. You've got woolly adele. It's feeding on that rich, robust bud of a pine, pine shoot tipmoth. You've got woolly aphids. You've got green aphids feeding on the soft fleshy leaves of deciduous. You've got phomopsis. You've got peach leaf curl. You've got rusts that are acting on the deciduous trees on those soft cuticulus for your growth in the spring. Well, now we're in the fall and that is what's happening down below. Soft fleshy root tips. No root cap. No... No cuticle protecting that root. It is just a open, sugar-rich, delicious morsel for anything that feeds on the root system itself. And this is where we really start to see, hey, number one, grubs in the soil establish themselves in the fall. This is crane fly larva. This is weevil, vine weevils. This is anything that's going to be... Finding it favorable for their larva to be feeding on this nutritious, rich tissue. I just saw crane fly flying around the garden for the first time last week. We are treating with nematodes tomorrow. Because we understand that this is the moment in our highly irrigated, watered containers of our bonsai entering the fall season and that period of growth, that a lot of nature is finding that tasty, nutritious and helping set them up for a successful growth cycle. All right. them up for a successful winter season okay so we see grubs being an issue and this is also where we start to see root aphids be an issue now root aphids establish themselves in the fall they feed over the winter and we see the tree weakened in the spring but if we're treating for root aphids in the spring we're late to the party we're super late to the party because the root aphids have been feeding and and proliferating on the sugars and starches that have been accumulating and if we look at again the winter hardiness and you see this increase in winter hardiness this area right here you're talking September to January that is your wheelhouse for root aphid and grub activity in the soil right what does that mean then how do I control that what the heck is the answer and this is where we say hey listen don't go soaking your trees and chemicals don't bathe them don't water them don't pour a bunch of harsh nasty stuff on them this is where nematodes have been so incredibly so incredibly effective there's a video on the library nematode application Troy the nematode master walks you through the process nematodes at Mirai have literally saved and changed our bonsai practice 2014 I tried to get rid of all of this stuff with chemicals I almost killed every tree in the garden it changed the way that I do bonsai having that experience recognizing the delicacy of the root system understanding the flow of energy and recognizing when do we dig in to control this moment where all of those resources and again this comes back to just understanding the physiology of the tree oh the tree is creating all of this right now the resources are here the new growth is present here this is where things are going to be feeding on that soft susceptible nutritious tissue BAM got it cool okay now there are a few diseases that creep up in the fall namely when we talk about our spruces specifically or our Doug first we have the raw let me just see if I can get this right rise though space a or a rise the Sparrow a Swiss needle cast on our spruce and Doug first Swiss needle cast and a lot of times in a lot of the literature that we read we typically tend to hear of Dothostroma as a needle cast on pines showing up in the fall, Lophodermia as a needle cast on pines early to mid-summer into the fall, and we typically tend to hear about Cabotina, this mysterious foyer fungi on junipers that looks exactly like Phomopsis, and they say in most of the literature it shows up in the fall. I don't know how true the needle casts are, and I don't know how true the Cabotina is in terms of their fall infection. What I think you're seeing is I think you're seeing a carryover from spring infection, but nevertheless there is the opportunity to see these things expressed at this point in time. Do we treat? I recommend treating. If we see needle cast, if we see Cabotina, if we see Rhizosphera, if we see Swiss needle cast, I do recommend treating. I recommend treating with a recommended fungicide following the label recommendation, but I would... I would also say I think that we are treating to make ourselves feel better. Sometimes it may stem or curb the production of fruiting bodies that are going to infect next year's growth, and that's where the benefit is, but we are not going to stop the infection of those seen foyer visible signs that occur in the fall. The best we can do is try to suppress their ability to reproduce. All of those infections for the most part happened over the spring season as the new needles were emerging, and it has taken... It has taken the incubation time from spring through the summer to express in the fall, and that's generally why we see those show up now when they're at the reproduction phase, and that's how we can have a positive benefit. Dormant sprays, right? As we get past the fall into the early winter, leaves drop on deciduous. Winter color comes on to our conifers. A dormant spray of Lime Sulfur, generally designed to knock down those overwintering spores, overwintering eggs, overwintering insects. Right? These are the things that we can take. Actually, in the winter, we can get some with our first or second winter. We just want to be able to see for ourselves. We can get it in the winter. We want to see the next spring to make sure that it's still there. right? These are the things that we can take action on. At the beginning of fall, though, recognize your grubs, your root feeding insects. This is the moment where you can gain control and avoid a negative impact to your trees. And this is where you could see some disease issues. Now we understand how they've been expressed, where they came from, and how we go about controlling that moving forward. Now we've talked about a lot of the physiological components, okay? I've thrown out a very significant degree of examples of trees that are showing and proving out these responses to water, to nutrition, to illustrate the energy discussion, disease and pest. But I want to circle back knowing this is. Number two, time for structural work and a nuanced timing for refinement. When we talked about the ability to manage foliar mass and fertilizer together to keep a tree in refinement in the fall and not go through every tree and how we handle it, but understand that there's a lot of time for structural work and a nuanced timing for refinement. That this is a moment where we have to make decisions about fertilizer, where we do have the ability to manipulate the foliar mass, but talk about the trees we don't want to be doing this with, okay? Because I think this is really an important component of the bonsai practice is recognizing, listen, I absolutely could be shoot selecting my black pine come the second or third week of September and needle plucking to balance energy. Do I want to be doing that? Is that what I should be doing? Is that what I should be doing? Is that what I should be doing? Is that what I should be doing? If it's in refinement, should I be doing that? Is a black pine, does that apply to it? And the answer is no, and we'll cover that. With a juniper, do I want to be reducing it further? Do I want to be reducing the foliar mass to kind of weaken it? The answer is no, right? And this is what we need to cover, okay? So let's kind of come back to these nuances, all right? I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take this out and I'm going to go through some very general do's and don'ts over the course of this season to help us understand, and inside of this, if we can't answer the question ourselves with our knowledge of physiology, you come visit us on the live Q&A, because we will address this and be handling this over the fall. This is a major, using fall in the way we're about ready to use it is a major breakthrough in my mind for how we go about the process of pursuing bonsai, okay? Let's start with multi-flush pines. Multi-flush pines, okay? So we're talking about Japanese black pine, Japanese red pine, we're talking about Monterey pine, Radiata, we're talking about pitch pine, Rigida, Pinus Rigida, and we're saying, hey, listen, these are still producing their second flush as we currently exist in the first week of September in the Northern Hemisphere. They're still producing their second flush if they're in a level of refinement. If I'm in a secondary or I'm in a developmental stage, I don't want to be plucking to distribute energy. I want to use the whole idea of development and secondary is to use the needle mass. To accumulate vascular tissue over the fall season. This is the moment. This is where you get all your development right now. It wasn't growing those needles. They haven't done virtually anything when we look at the growth ring of a tree. What they're going to do is from this point forward, developmental and secondary trees over the fall season, this is when you get the development. This is when you get the secondary. So really when we talk about manipulation over the fall season, we are talking specifically about trees in refinement as the fall season being this tool we can use or potentially abuse. And multi-flush pines is a tool we would abuse. Because let's just follow the understanding of this. This tree on a singular branch had its needles, pushed out a candle, that candle needled out. This is over the spring. We come back in in early summer. We cut that whole thing off. By decandling it, we trigger all of the dormant buds. Those dormant buds produce shorter internodes and shorter needles and a plethora of them at that site. Okay, now think about this. Think about the physiology here to answer your own question. Should I be doing something at the beginning of fall to my multi-flush pines? I know that the second flush of growth is going to harden off at the midpoint of September. Japanese black pine and any multi-flush pine will only elongate as far as the midpoint of September. Daylight length becomes the trigger. Ponderosa pine will only elongate until the second week of September. Daylight length becomes the trigger. This year, they stopped elongating even earlier than the midpoint of September. Does that mean, is this year different? No. None of it is different. And here's why. Multi-flush pine, because the tree is accumulating resources over the fall that dictate its behavior next year, our refinement technique with multi-flush pines is to cut off that growth at the tip, no matter how coarse it is, and we get a flush of finer growth next summer. So, we are not trying to hold a multi-flush pine's energy back by reducing its foliar mass in the early fall so it doesn't accumulate the vascular tissue. In fact, if you do that you will decrease the production of back-budding on the branch, you will decrease the productivity of usable shoots at the tip, and you will decrease the productivity of usable shoots at the tip. And you will decrease that tree's ability to be decandled, needle plucked, and refined over the course of multiple seasons in a singular action of shoot selecting too soon and needle plucking too soon if you do it on a multi-flush pine and refinement in the early fall. It needs, it demands that we leave this mass, which replaced, bear in mind, big old needles, big old strong candle, tree has to accumulate energy in excess of, this replaced this. It needs the entire fall season to amass all the energy it possibly can to build this vascular backbone, to set up back buds so when we decandle we continue to get interior ramifications. An enhanced aesthetic, to have the ability to cut that branch back in the future to an interior piece we've been developing, all of that is created over the fall season. There's a reason that you say, hey listen, multi-flush pine, we come back in November and shoot select and needle pluck. We're past all energy reaccumulation, we know if we do it in the fall we can't let that tree freeze to a large degree. We may even wait till next spring before it starts to actually move and do it at that point. Now some of you might be saying, well wouldn't that create thicker branches, etc? Well hang on now, hang on now. Because this is where you really have to marry every aspect of the physiological response. Strength in pines comes from the roots. We control the strength that exists in the roots via the way that we fertilize, but also we control the strength in roots by the container size that we put it in. We recognize that container size is what creates the concentration of X, the strength in the roots. And we recognize that. We recognize the more branchlets we get, the more that controlled amount of energy is distributed across that greater number of branches. Each branch gets less and that's how we get a smaller shoot. So even if we allow the foliar mass to accumulate vascular tissue, you're controlling that in a pine with the strength coming from the roots by that container. And this is where we say over the fall season, multi-flush pines, once they harden off at that midpoint of September, they get darker, they get sharper, and they become well attached. You start fertilizing. And you fertilize aggressively. Fertilize aggressively to get that energy. Fertilize aggressively to get that vascular tissue. Fertilize aggressively to get that back-butting so that we can do it again next year. Because this is one of the most stressful operations we perform in all of bonsai. Multi-flush pines. There's a nuance for you. Deciduous. And I'm going to do deciduous as a broad sweeping discussion here. And obviously there are nuances to this. But let's just understand how deciduous work in the fall. Because there are opportunities to design deciduous in the early fall, especially the larger leaf varieties where we can set that structure, not do a lot of damage because we have such a coarse leaf mass and we don't have any tertiary ramification on a big leaf deciduous in development. And because we leave that leaf mass on, it sets that structure over the course of the fall. Great time of year. We did it on a quince, a pseudocydonia on the live stream. You can check that out. We talk about that nuance and that timing. But for the most part, again, development and secondary, you're using all of that leaf mass over the fall. What about that deciduous and refinement? Well, I think there's multiple aspects to this. I think first and foremost, when you get a deciduous to the highest level of refinement, you automatically have to understand that you're going to be pulling back on fall fertilization. Because fall is the moment where all of that leaf mass causes all of those twigs to swell, the branches to swell, the wounds that we've created via cuts, no matter how clean they are, to swell. And we've got to be very, very careful that we're not driving that swelling and that coarseness to occur for a deciduous and refinement. So fertilization, being conservative over the fall season for a deciduous and refinement only makes sense. You listen to the Dennis Wojtyla podcast part two. He says, I don't really fertilize that much in the fall or else my trees will get too big and bulky. That gives him finer ramifications, something to think about. But how do we handle the leaf mass in the fall? Should we be pruning our deciduous trees right now? No. No. The answer is no. Do not remove the hormone at the tip of a deciduous tree right now. This does not make sense. And if you remove the hormone at the tip of a deciduous tree, you are going to incite the tree to try and replace it and stimulate it. You don't want to empty your stored sugars and starches. But when we talk about, hey, I got these kind of coarse tips and I want those really fine tips. How do I get those? This is where we start to say on those leaf masses, when you're dealing with larger leaf varieties, because something that has a small leaf, right? A super refined Chinese elm, a chojubai. Okay, perfect example. You're not going to be going in there and reducing the number of leaves. Or the size of that leaf in the fall season. It's already small. It's already geared up to give you fine branching. In fact, you have to work hard to get coarse branching in these things. Okay? But when you start to talk about a larger leaf, you're talking about a hornbeam, you're talking about a beech, you're talking about a Japanese maple, right? And all of a sudden, we have these five fingers here. And we're saying, how do we handle that over the fall season? Now, we've talked about partial defoliation. We've talked about partial defoliation as a 70% leaf reduction. We've gotten those flushes of growth to occur. We don't continue to partially defoliate into the fall. But we do get to a point where we have these leaves as a byproduct of partial defoliation. This is that moment where you can reduce that leaf mass. We're not removing number of leaves at this point in time. We're not pruning branches. We're not stripping the tree of two-thirds of its leaf mass. But we are reducing the size of each independent leaf. Because this independent leaf is feeding this independent twig. And if you reduce the amount of sugar that moves through that twig over the fall season, that twig will stay finer. Massive, massive methodology here. To reduce the leaf size of your deciduous, create finer twigging, but understand. Oh, here it comes. Here it comes. You know there's no good without bad. Understand that that twig, with a reduced quantity of sugar, with a reduced amount of swelling, with a reduced amount of stored energy in the vacuole of the cells, is more susceptible to cold damage. And this is where you start to say, hey, listen. Hey, listen. We apply fall technique to keep those branches finer. The tree next year is a little bit less vigorous. Not saying it's weak, okay? Because it's not that big of a swing from being vigorous to being weak. But it will be a little bit less vigorous. It's still stored up energy. We're still leaving the leaves on. But we're trying to keep that twig nice and thin. A little bit less energy next year in the spring, okay? But we're in refinement. That's okay. Why does refinement only last two to three years? Because of these discussions. A little bit less vigorous next year, a little bit less vigorous the following year, a little bit less vigorous that year after that. At some point, you've got to let the tree regain its vigor. We move out of refinement, okay? But also, when we start to look at that, less winter tolerance. Okay, and this is where you start to see deciduous trees that have the finest ramification being protected in greenhouses. Because of the fact that you are doing so much to keep that ramification beautiful, fine, really worked out, that you don't have a tree as tolerant as something that has not been reduced and has not had its stored energy decreased over the course of the fall season, okay? So this is a major component of deciduous, right? Maybe we pull back on fertilization and we leave the leaf mass. Maybe we continue fertilization and we decrease the leaf mass. Maybe we do a little bit of both and meet each other halfway, okay? But if we're going to decrease the leaf mass, it's via cutting back the size of each leaf, not taking leaves off and not pruning the branches of the deciduous. Fall season, don't evacuate the stored energy. Don't cause the tree to replace hormone at the tip. Allow that tree to go through its process and just control the sugar each twig produces. Now we recognize, tail end of the fall, as those leaves start to lose their color and just start to crumple up, this is a moment where we can go back in and prune. We can correct, we can guide, we can do big removal, we can do small refinement, right? That's your moment. Don't try to do it now, okay? This is a moment where we are just managing sugar productivity and that's it, okay? You have the strategy there. Understand that, believe in that, okay? All right. Now, last piece that I want to talk to you about in terms of fall, great time, great time. Number two time for structural work, okay? Deciduous has some nuances. Multi flush has some nuances. Short needle single flush, no nuances. Long needle single flush, now is the time, right? Ponderosa pine dropping all of those third year needles. Indication if you prune now in terms of adjusting, reducing needle length, you're going to have a far smaller increase in needles next year by doing that work now at the beginning of, at the beginning of that accumulation of energy, right? We're saying, hey, listen, we're here. Ponderosa has been spending energy all season and it's right now when it drops its third years that it goes like this and it does it like a cannon, okay? If we're taking any excess foliage, readjusting the shape, tweaking things, etc. here, it only builds that energy on the needles it has left and that's where we are able to pace, do we go up here with the energy or do we go right here? That's what impacts needle length. Okay, there's two streams that focus on that. Check them out in the library. But when we start to talk about, what was I going to say here? I was going to talk about, ah, right? Number two time for styling and all of us are saying, I'm going to style this tree this fall. I'm going to repot it next spring. How many of you are saying that right now? I'm going to style it this fall. First, styling. Yamadori, God help me. I'm going to style it. I'll repot it next spring, right? One major operation a year. We're good. Wrong. Sorry. Ain't going to happen, right? If you care about that tree, and this is a broad brush stroke. This is, again, that blunt object. If you care about that tree to say, oh, I styled it in 2020. I potted it in 2021. You know, one major operation per year. Uh-uh. Because you're saying, I'm styling it now at the beginning of vascular productivity. This is when it stores the energy to respond to the repotting process. I'm reducing its ability to store energy. I'm reducing its needle mass. I'm reducing all things that it needs to recover from the repotting operation next spring. Don't do that. Okay? Now, this is different because we're saying, hey, listen. If we're styling, number two time for structural styling, this is big work. This is first time on a tree that's never been a bonsai before. Field-grown tree, we're going to have heavy foliar reduction. Yamadori tree, probably some big bends. Okay? If we're doing that, that also means that first repotting is going to be big. And it's not going to have the energy it needs to respond to that next spring. If you style fall of 2020, you're repotting spring of 2022, not next year. You give it the entire year to amass energy because that's a big first styling and it's going to be a big first potting and you need a lot of energy and a lot of foliar mass to recover from that first potting. That does not coincide. But, but, and this is where the nuance is. This is where we start to kind of refine that blunt object. We say, listen, it's a secondary or it's a refined tree. It's a second potting, not a first or it's a routine repotting. I have to do the work. I'm going to do the work. It needs to be repotted next year, but it's not like I'm reducing 80% of the root mass and all of the field soil and rebuilding the microbial system. It's already in a pot. I'm going to do sides bottom. I'm going to take away decompressed or organic matter accumulated on the top. Okay. Okay. Good. I love that strategy. This sounds intelligent to me to take that approach. So, good. So, just recognize, this is a great time to do structural work, but it does impact what you get to do when we move. Summer wrap up, bam, everything happened, dormancy, we're moving out, second phase of growth in the year, first phase of growth for the tree's annual cycle right now. Okay. Be very careful with how much you try to cram into the next six months, tail end of this year, beginning of next year, because it is very, very critical that we respect the energy systems of the tree. Okay. I feel like that puts us at least in the right orientation, headed in the right direction. Okay. Understanding of where we need to be, where we can go. This is, I feel like the fall is a time of year where we take a deep breath with all of the intensity we've been trying to grab on to how we help a tree continue to get better. And we get to let it all go and say, I just get to be creative. I get to style some cool, awesome material that I've earned the health and the right to style right now and enjoy this transitional moment, setting my trees up for success next spring. Come back with any questions you have on the live Q&A. We'll be here to answer all of those as we move into fall ourselves. We'll be sharing with you all the scopes of work that kind of meet us where we're at and the timing for where we're at. We thank you guys so much. Appreciate it. I might be seeing you, some of you on the road, but wishing you all well and we will see you next week live on Moriah Live. Thank you everybody. 
