So, you guys are now officially in the bowels of Mirai's repotting system, the greenhouse. It's dark, it's rainy. If the sound is a little bit off, we apologize, but there's not much we can do to turn down the nozzle on Mother Nature. Bear with us because this lesson and this concept is so important for you guys to have. We're going to go ahead and weather the storm, so to speak, and give you the knowledge knowing that you guys can deal with some of those little annoyances. So, top dressing is something at Mirai that we are constantly pushing, we're constantly trying to spread knowledge about, and we're constantly trying to dispel a lot of the misinformation about moss and top dressing on our bonsai containers and as an integral part of the ecosystem that we're building in this confined environment. Now, I wanted to show you, before we start showing you how to make top dressing, first I wanted to show you what it looks like when we apply it and what it turns out to be. So, here's the Japanese Katsura tree that we repotted in the Shohin Repotting Stream, and you can see the grayish sort of covering, very thin. You can still see the soil below that gray top dressing application. We're not trying to stop oxygen movement through the container, but we are applying a nice thin layer that coats the surface of that soil. Now, over the course of 6 to 12 months through the growing season, that top dressing is going to be cultivating and stimulating the development of the collected moss spores that are an integral part of that system, and over that course of maturity, they start to form a nice dense carpet and matrix of moss that's going to be growing on the soil surface of our tree. Now, there's a lot of things written and a lot of misinformation about whether moss is a good or bad thing to have growing on your bonsai. If we were to just take a layer of moss and slap it onto the top of our tree, that is a very negative thing to be doing. In terms of the tree adapting to oxygen and water movement through the container, but via this method, when we freshly repot a tree and we've got that open system of oxygen exchange and water penetration, we allow that moss, by creating that top dressing, to integrate and grow with the expansion of our microbiotic system and the growth and expansion of this tree's root system to form this whole complete cycle and environment that facilitates maximum health and the ultimate balance of water, oxygen, and water. Thank you. Dr. Thanks so much, Jason. Just so awesome that you brought up this. Thank you so much, Jason. You're welcome. Dr. Thank you so much for coming. And that would be great. Dr. Thank you so much. Now we're going to look at a couple additional points that we have made in the previous lookbook to actually be able to go over our top dressing and distribution of nutrition and all of the things that we need to facilitate to establish that environment. So knowing top dressing is such an important part of the system, we're going to show you how to make top dressing and create the best possible environment for your tree. Before we do that, though, we want to make sure that you have a concise knowledge of why we use it, what it does for the soil environment, what it does for the containerized system, and how it benefits all components of our tree, soil, and its root system to to facilitate the best possible growth. Okay, so understanding the why behind top dressing is a big reason that helps support how we make it, how we use it, and why it's necessary. Okay, and there's a lot of, again, misconceptions that we've gotta dispel about top dressing. Now, let's come to the number one reason that we use top dressing, and this is solidification of the soil. So if we expect the roots to be occupying the container, and we've got mobility in the soil every time that we water, there's no way that roots are gonna be growing in the upper 30% of our soil column. So when we look at this confined environment here, and we've got this tree in this confined environment, every time we water that soil, if we're shifting or getting movement there, roots don't occupy that area. That cuts out 30% of your soil column for root growth. That means you're utilizing only 66% of the containerized environment for root growth of those roots that are gonna create that fine ramification and that fine foliage mass. And so we want to be maximizing 100% of this soil column. Now, in that same vein, in terms of solidification of the soil to cultivate and establish those roots, we also wanna have even distribution of water. So when we start to talk about the fact that gravity on this soil column is gonna be pulling water down through that container, we're gonna hit a point where the cohesion of water molecule to water molecule is going to stop the movement of water out of the holes at the bottom of the container. Now we get an accumulation of water at the bottom of the soil mass that is significantly greater than the soil above it throughout the rest of the container. If we're capable, via the top dressing application, of stopping the rapid loss of water on the surface from wind, from sun, from evaporation, what ends up happening, capillary action and high concentration of water moves back up the soil column and redistributes that high quantity of water from the middle to the upper portion of the container to give us that balance of water and oxygen through 100% of the soil column to facilitate the best root growth. Now beyond that, we come back to some of those more consistent, easily understood aspects of top dressing. Number three, we hold moisture at the surface. Number four, we keep the environment dark. Roots love moisture, roots love darkness, roots love a great balance of water and oxygen and roots love stability. Top dressing takes care of all of these components and allows us to maximize the growing environment, the quality of the soil, the particle size and the composition that we've spent so much time and effort creating, as well as that finality gives us that mossy covering that's part of the microbiotic system that maximizes the tree's ability to endure, survive and thrive in that containerized environment. What better reason to be using top dressing than every single one of these points that we've outlined? I hope that dispels some myths and gives you guys some incentive. So to start the production of top dressing, there's a few things that we need to have prepared before we begin. Number one, we're going to need to have a lot of water. Number two, we're going to need to have a lot of water. Number one, we need to have sifting screens and in terms of the sizes of screens that we utilize, it is dictated by the size of the soil particle size you're going to be using for the interior portion of your container. If you're repotting a larger size tree and you're using that quarter inch to sixteenth inch, then we'll have a quarter inch sifting screen on the top and we'll have a sixteenth inch sifting screen on the bottom. If you refer to some of the streams or some of the knowledge where we say we pull the sixteenth out and we go between that one quarter inch and that one eighth inch to decrease that particle size, have more oxygen, have more water penetration, then we'll have the quarter inch screen that we grind the moss over and we'll have the eighth inch screen that we're sifting out the fines so that we make sure that our finest particles of the top dressing are the same size as the finest particles of soil in our container that are cultivating the root system. In addition to these screens, we need a good solid bag of just long fibered, high quality sphagnum moss. We typically tend to choose sphagnum moss that is New Zealand based sphagnum moss. That's our highest quality that we've found. And then you also need a bag of collected green moss from your local environment. Now this could be green moss that you harvest off of, outside of car washes, gas stations, off of aggregate surfaces, stone, concrete, brick, etc. Moss that is geared and designed towards growing on that aggregate surface and thriving on that aggregate surface. And we're preferably looking for shrubs. Short fibered moss so that we maintain a very nice tight carpet that we create or that top portion on the soil surface. Really nice and fine and in scale and in proportion to the bonsai tree that we're going to be applying this to. For us at Mirai, when we first started, we collected all of our top dressing from around the local environment off of aggregate surfaces and that's what we used to inoculate that system that we were initially applying to the tree. Now as we repot, we take that surface layer of moss off, we save it, and that's what we're using to recycle that surface layer of moss and top dressing, grind it up, and reapply it to the new trees that we're repotting. That's what this bag is representing. Okay so I just pulled out a little bit of the green moss that we're recycling from the tops of our bonsai containers and honestly if you scrape this off of an aggregate surface somewhere in the local environment, it wouldn't look much different. Now a lot of people ask, what about this sort of soil or muddy, mucky stuff that exists on the bottom of the moss? Do you cut that off? What do we do about that? Ideally. In the perfect world, we would dry this moss out and in the grinding process, that dust and that muck would separate from the moss. However even when it's wet, when we start to grind that moss, that mucky stuff adheres to the sifting screen itself and the way that we pull off the ground moss we're going to use, we're going to further separate it from that soil and from that mucky bottom layer. And so it's not a big deal if it's wet. Most of the time, the first few times that we prepare top dressing in the season, it's dried because we're collecting that over the course of the repotting. The season and we have a lot of moss left over by the end of the season that dries through the spring, summer and fall before we use it the following year. Now that we're this deep into the repotting season, all we've got is wet moss coming off of the surface of a lot of our containers. So we're going to go ahead and we're going to grind wet moss to show you the worst case scenario, but you should know that if you dry it, it does make it easier to separate that system. Either way, wet or dry, we still get the same positive quality of material to be top dressing and creating a solid environment. Okay. So when I go about this grinding process, I'm just going to place my quarter inch screen on top of either my one eighth inch screen or my one sixteenth inch screen. This coming weekend, we're going to be using a one eighth to one quarter. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to keep my one eighth screen on the bottom and my one quarter inch screen on the top. I'm going to take my pile of moist green moss and I'm going to set that right on top of that quarter inch screen and I'm going to lay down a fairly hefty quantity of moss on top of that screen. Okay. Now a lot of people think that this takes a lot of strength and it really doesn't. You can let the weight of the moss and you can let the abrasiveness of the screen do a lot of the work for you. And we're just running that moss over this quarter inch screen to break it up into smaller chunks and smaller sizes. Okay. Now some of this is going to be lost, obviously. We're going to be breaking this down into dust. We're going to be breaking it down into really fine particle sizes, but our priority is just to get it so that we don't have big clumps. Okay. That's sitting on the top of our surface. That's going to create a really unsightly, uneven layer of top dressing. And more than that, we don't want big thick chunks that are going to be impairing oxygen movement through that top dressing and through the container itself. So I'm going to grind this over the top of this. Now when we get down to a very minimal amount of top dressing, we can always come back and just take a piece of wood and use that wood to further sort of get those last remaining pieces ground down into that. Quarter inch screen. Okay. Now when I remove this, what you're going to see is you have a much finer system of broken up moss now into small particles and it's been torn and ripped apart and deconstructed. Now you also see the integration of soil. This doesn't worry us at all. Okay. So our next focus, after we get that broken down over that quarter inch screen and we've collected that on our eighth inch screen or 16th inch screen, depending on what your interior particle size is. Okay. The size is for the trees you're repotting. I'm just going to do a quick sift of this finer particle and get rid of all of those fines that have been ground down below the size that our smallest particle in the container is going to be. Okay. And you can see now any big chunks that made it through, we'll go ahead and pull those out by hand. But this is exactly what we're looking for in terms of the finished product of that grinding portion of the work. If we get into a situation where we have a high quantity of weeds or unwanted plant material in the moss, we're going to go ahead and we're just going to discard that. We don't want to be grinding up weeds and inoculating this fresh layer of top dressing with things that are going to be competing with the plant for water and nutrient uptake. Now if there's just a few, we can pull them out with the roots and we can still use that moss. But if they've developed a high quantity or population inside the container, we're going to go ahead and discard of those pieces. So be selective. Okay. So when you start to create this, you've got to be thinking about the fact that anything that's in this moss also has the ability to grow very, very vigorously in the new soil and containerized environment once it's in the bonsai container. And I'm just, as I'm doing this, always keeping an awareness and an eye out for the quality of what I'm putting into this screen and what I'm utilizing to set that next foundation for the root system with that top dressing. Okay. So after grinding, you can see I've got a large quantity. I have moss now collected in the bottom of my container and you can see some of that soil sitting there. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to sift all of the fines out and then watch what I do and watch how I handle this moss in order to be able to separate it from its soil. So I'm going to take it and I'm going to tamp it down to the bottom and I'm going to start to roll it. Now notice how this is taking on this contour. What I'm doing is I'm pushing all of that granular soil down to the bottom of the screen, because it's heavier, and I'm lifting that lighter, fluffier moss up to the surface. So that way I can come and I can remove off of the top of that all of that moss without any soil attached to it. And this is exactly how we separate that surface layer of moss from that bottom layer of organic material, muck, and soil to be able to get just the moss spores and the fragments of the moss that are going to germinate and occupy that container and form that really beautiful covering that's going to facilitate healthy root growth. Okay? So I'm going to take this and I'm going to isolate this into its own bag. Now I reuse Akadama bags because they're very durable and they're very resistant to UV degradation. So I'm going to come in here and I'm just going to lift that top surface off, leaving any soil behind. And I'm going to take this moss covering, continuing each time that I grab another layer to tap, pull that off of the top, and put that into my bag. And this is my green moss. So I'm going to do this as a way to separate off the whole thing and I'm going to take the remaining part that I'm effectively collecting and I'll be utilizing. Okay? And if I see too many soil particles, I'll just dump them back into the screen, take that isolated moss. And after doing this four or five times, we start to get down to total separation of the moss and the soil. So you can see here, where I have more soil left than moss, I'll just go ahead and take my remaining fragments there. And now alls I've got is sort of granular soil. Okay? soil with some small pieces of moss. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to discard that. I don't want that soil and I don't want any of that contamination in the top dressing I'm going to be applying. That goes on the ground. Okay, this is the preparation of 50% of my top dressing. This is the green moss, collected green moss that we're going to be using to inoculate the re-establishment of our mossy covering on our container. Okay, so we've got our green moss taken care of. That's 50% of the mix. Now we're going to start to grind up our sphagnum moss. Now, sphagnum moss is always very dry when it comes in the compressed bales and so I recommend all of you guys having respiratory masks when you do this because the dust will get into your lungs from the grinding process and a lot of times that can cause respiratory irritation. I have no idea if it's carcinogenic or not, but why take the risk? Always smart to just wear some protective equipment when we're doing this to make sure that we don't have any issues, start coughing, etc. Okay, so I'm going to take the same quarter inch screen, same eighth or sixteenth inch screen, depending on what the smallest particle size of my interior soil is going to be and for us it's still the eighth inch. I'm going to set that quarter inch on top of that eighth inch. I'm going to dig into this bale and bring up some of the dry sphagnum moss and I'm going to grind it over this quarter inch screen just the same as I did with my green moss. Okay, so now you can see that really fine sphagnum moss ground up. This is beautiful. This is absolutely stunning stuff. This is where sphagnum has a lot of value to us as bonsai practitioners. Now that I've ground it up, I want to get all of the fines out of this and because it's dry, you're going to see a lot more fines leaving the bottom of this sifting sieve. This is why it's ideal to have it dry. Not mandatory, but ideal. Okay, so I'm going to sift it. Okay, so now we've got the coarse sphagnum ground through our quarter inch. We've got anything smaller than an eighth inch sitting on the surface of this and you can see that's quite a bit of the moss after the grinding. You say, man that feels like a waste. True, but you're going through all of the trouble to sift all of your soils. Find that right particle size for the best development of the finest root soil possible. Create the best bonsai. This is the least of your concerns in terms of conserving or not wasting. This is where we go through all of these painful steps just to set that system to be correct and have the most success with the repotting operation. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to discard of that finer stuff and I'm going to be using the stuff that's left sitting on my one-eighth inch screen here to be the other 50% of that green moss sphagnum moss mix. However, the white color of this is going to be a little bit of a waste. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to go ahead and I'll go ahead and just start on the bottom. Hold your sticks here and I'll go ahead and start by dying off the black sphagnum little bit at that point here first. Okay, so the what I'm going to do right here is I'm going to take this white color, I'm going to go ahead and Now we equally don't want to go so far as to make it black and that's an important sort of line to draw and we're going to explore that line as we're working here. Now I've got a bucket of water here and the more water you put in here the more of this ink you're gonna have to use to turn it black. So if you're doing a large quantity of moss it makes sense to use a lot of water so that you don't have to make the coloring multiple times and get inconsistencies in the color. Now this ink this is a charcoal ink a sumi ink that they use for calligraphy in Japan. This is available on Amazon and if you guys want to know the brand this is Kaimei Shoeki. The thing to pay attention to is the green cap and the gold label here. There's only one brand that's got the green cap and the gold label. I don't know that it necessarily matters but I know that this is the brand that gives me the best possible color with the least amount of ink. So it's got a lot of potency. Now you'll notice that I have a glove on my hand. If you start to try and dye your ink with a little bit of ink, you're going to notice that the ink is not going to stay on your hand. You're going to have a gray or black hand for a week, ten days. It stains your hand and the way that this ink works effectively is staining the moss. It's not a matter of it soaking in. It's not how long the moss stays into the concoction. It's the staining upon immediate contact and so knowing that that changes the way that we handle this moss when we put it in here. Okay so I'm going to start by adding the coloring to get that perfectly gray beautiful tone that we want with that top dressing and I'm going to start off with a fairly generous amount of ink. Okay because I know it's going to take quite a bit of ink in order to get this to turn gray from that brilliant white. I'm going to stir it with my hand. Here I've got my bag of ground-up white sphagnum moss that I've been collecting from the sifting screens. I'm just going to drop a handful into the bucket. You can see that it's floating. I want to make sure that that really gets nice and hydrated by that water and that i don't have any stuff floating dry on the surface. I want to all to be wet now because it's stained upon contact technically I should be able to lift this up squeeze out all of the excess black and that's a very accurate depiction of what the color is going to be when it's close to dry. Now you notice that that's still very very white. We always want to start out with less ink then too much ink because if we have too much ink then we've got to add more. water it starts to become a system where we add more water add more ink add more water add more ink it's better to just go slow with small little additions to ink in the system mix it up stain that moss grab a handful squeeze out the excess and then take a look at that color okay now we're getting closer you notice that it took on another hue of gray I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna break that up again and I'm gonna go again okay small squirts at this point we're getting very very close to the color that we want nuances now okay so I'm gonna grab that handful I'll squeeze out that excess we see that we're getting really close notice how it's just dubbing down that white and you see all of the brightest particles starting to turn gray I'm gonna go one more I think one more should be enough one more healthy squeeze you I'm going to squeeze out the excess and this this is generally where we start to say okay now we're in the ballpark now we're starting to get that gray notice the brilliance of the white is out of the moss now this is exactly what we're looking for now I tend to recycle or utilize the lids of my soil bins because we're repotting anyways and most of the bins are free of a lid I'll just take these lids and after pulling this out and squeezing all of that excess moisture out I'm going to go ahead and take a little bit of that gray and I'm going to kind of kind of just fluff this Moss so it's not in that big compact ball otherwise it will dry as a chunk and you're going to have to sort of spread it out or grind it up again okay and I'll evenly distribute that just one layer thick across the entirety of this board okay so now that I see a big chunk of this and I say that that is the color that I want there's a reason for the gray and we'll come back to that but now that I know that I've got the color that I want I'm going to go ahead and empty a full bag into this and then I'll go ahead and get the first bunch of the gray that we got there's a few and just start soaking it make sure it's all saturated squeezing out the excess and spreading it on these boards when I put these up to dry I want to make sure that they've got air movement across the top of this board so I don't stack anything on top of these to let it dry before we ever utilize it as top dressing for the tree okay this is the sphagnum portion the dried sphagnum will go into its own bag separate of the green moss so that I've got dyed sphagnum in one I've got my green moss in another and that way I can control the ratio and proportion of sphagnum to green moss that I use in the top dressing process for each individual tree this is the first very big basic step as far as establishing that size of the top dressing and establishing the backbone of color and context for that top dressing to be able to generate that first layer that's going to give a big boost to the establishment of our root system in the containerized environment okay so now we've got a full sheet of dyed moss that's been ground up sifted and is ready to be dried combine it with our green moss and utilize it as top dressing now I wanted to come back to the specificity of the color saying that we wanted gray we don't want this white color because this is very visually distracting if you guys are watching right now I would assume that your eyes are constantly going here to this pile of white and that's exactly why I put it here so you can see how distracting this can be and even though it's effort to be doing this portion of it or a visual art form like bonsai it's a very important step in a small nuance of the craft that allows us to elevate the visibility of the tree in the container but I also wanted to talk to you about why don't we go too far why don't we go darker why don't we go blacker and this is one of the beautiful things about top dressing as we discussed in the whiteboard discussion prior to showing you the creation this top dressing allows the water in the containerized environment to even out via capillary action from the bottom where there's a heavy amount of moisture after the water leaves all the way up to the top where that top dressing is reducing the loss of water via evaporation sun wind etc and what that gives us is it actually creates a moisture gauge for freshly repotted trees where when that moss starts to dry out and turn a lighter gray color we see oh that tree might be nearing a point where it actually needs moisture when you're using a heat bed to get rapid generation of roots after repotting or recovery of a tree after repotting that's a very difficult situation to know moisture content in that container but if we've got the top dressing that's reflecting the entire penetration and the quantity of water that's in that system it starts to become a clue so here I've got two of the show heen trees that we've recently reported and you can see the top dressing on the Katsura tree is starting to turn a lighter gray than the top dressing on this rambling rose this is an indication to me that this tree is starting to number one use water and also number two I'm going to keep an eye on it as that top dressing continues to dry out so that once I see that top dressing showing that light gray color where there's a very minimal amount of moisture in it I'm going to come back and I'm going to give it that second watering after the repotting process it's a been allowed to regain that oxygen in the system we've set the stage for that balance to exist that top dressing is now solidifying that soil it's protecting that Akadama during the watering process it's creating that moist dark environment for root growth everything that we want to have in the system is now solidifying that soil and it's a big indicator of all of those things simply by that color reference that we've given ourselves that elevates the aesthetic and also gives us an indication of moisture content in the container so now that you guys have seen this you have the ability to make your own top dressing you have the ability to dye it collect the moss grade it mix them in proportion apply it water it and use it as a gauge to both balance the quantity of water throughout the soil system as well as identify when that tree freshly repotted is going to be needing another watering to regain that balance of water and oxygen you've got everything you need to establish that system that's going to give you ultimate health in the bonsai container 
