What's going on everybody? Wednesday mini-stream. I have to be pretty honest with you. I am overwhelmed trying to take all of this information. I've got two laptops in front of me. This is a lot, right? And this is the extension of the soil discussions, which I am also a student of, as much as I understand to a degree the big broad brushstrokes of soil science. Clearly, you know, we have dug deep into this. But we engaged with an experiment just to catch everybody up. Last year with a compost extract, we applied the compost extract and had not mineral balanced the soil system. And when you apply a really potent amount of biology to the bonsai container, which there is a lot of discussions, we've done podcasts. We've done podcasts with Ian Hunter, with Keisha and Casey and Ian Hunter. We've done podcasts with Gareth Barber and the worm castings. And we're talking about all of these different ways that we add supplemental nutrition, increase microbial activity in the container. And the conversation has gotten quite robust and I would say really confusing. And the product of those applications of compost extract last year was a total, total, total free-for-all, if you will, inside of the containers. And there are reasons for that that I'm going to kind of simplify and break down today. And then I'm going to show you the soil tests. And it's a number of tests that we utilized after we've worked really hard on the mineral balancing of the soils to try and bring this massive sort of imbalance that we created back into a state of more predictable behavior. So we can start to identify what is happening with our trees. And that is the focus of today. I might have some stumbles. We'll see where we get. There are a lot of concepts here that I'm going to try to simplify as much as possible. And if anybody's watching who's a doctorate or a PhD or a master's in this, by all means, correct us in the chat. Correct us by reaching out and furthering the conversation. I feel, and I've said this a number of times, this is part of the Gareth Barber podcast. We also discussed this in the philosophy podcast. But I think the soil system is the next real frontier. And when you think about bone size evolution, well, let me come back to that. I'm going to pause right there. OK, Eve is on the chat with you all. Josh is producing the stream from the eye in the sky afar. But let's begin. OK, so coming back to this notion, I think the soil system is the next frontier in bone size evolution, because we understand the tree, we're developing concepts of aesthetics and techniques around executing those aesthetics. The ceramic, the vessel, the material that we choose to plant this tree on in, et cetera, is another major component that I feel has gotten a lot of attention. The level of the presentation, the display, the stand makers in terms of Austin Heightsman and some of these other Jason Eider. I know there are several stand makers in Europe. Maybe not going as far as I would have thought, but I'm going to take it from there. So if I can see the пост-id onto a little bit of the ground, I'd love to see some of the original far afield as the Western stand makers in North America, but nevertheless making stands that are definitely built in-house. And so all of a sudden you say, well, where does this go from here? And it's like, well, one of the things over the course of time that we've talked about is the impact and the scalability of Akadama. We've talked about the modern bonsai substrate of pumice lava and Akadama, a necessary substrate for this containerized environment or more than that, a shallow gravity column that does not move water out of that. This dictates the pumice lava Akadama structure as a granular structure. This dictates pumice lava and Akadama as a low organic matter soil system because organic matter does have the ability to break down, become finer, increases. surface area, decrease oxygen spaces, hold too much water. We don't have gravity acting on that shallow soil system, and this creates an imbalance of water and oxygen. We know plant health is directly associated with that establishment of a balance of water and oxygen. That is what creates the environment that roots can grow. The roots growing is what gives rise to the production of foliar mass in the upper portion of the tree, right? Needles only come after the roots have grown to sustain those needles. The needles aren't produced and then develop the roots to keep them hydrated, okay? So inside of this, we're setting the system. We understand particle size, right? We have to have a granular particle size. They can't be too small. The smaller the particle, the greater the surface area. The greater the surface area, the more water that smaller particle holds. And it's hard to imagine a smaller particle holds more water, but proportionally, that increase in surface area as that particle gets smaller and smaller has more space in terms of volume to hold water upon, more nutrition as well. But with that water holding capacity and the lack of gravity acting on that shallow column, we do have a lot of water sitting in there. Smaller particles occupy more of the oxygen space, so more water holding capacity, less oxygen, and this is what dictates the 116th to 1 quarter inch particle size inside of the Bouncyde container, that allows us to establish that balance of water. And obviously, this is an important aspect of how this works. We could have a better outside environment then we could have a better outside environment than we would have outside. So we could have better outside water so we could have more oxygen. To get the right quality, we could have a better room for the root. We could have more water for the root. We could have more water for the root. So we oxygen and we know if we shift to a drier climate tree a ponderosa pine that we need to pull that 1 16th out and further increase oxygen spaces and reduce water holding capacity okay so this soil thing that's happening in bonsai right is is interesting doesn't have to be akadama well we haven't found another scalable substrate gareth barber you know proposed hey worm castings as this availability of microbial food plant food the capacity to in that decomposed product moving into the nitrate form of nitrogen having the most oxidized form of nitrogen being the fungal feeding nitrogen can in fact encourage the growth of finer roots and instead of a soil particle causing the scaling like we have in akadama we have this microbial and nutritional component scaling some of those particles and not necessitating that akadama component to be a part of this is this a replacement maybe right maybe maybe it's a replacement maybe it's another way of thinking when we think about akadama and a substitute for akadama we think of another particle that behaves like akadama maybe it's a different approach maybe it's this nutritional approach any way that you go about it we have to further understand the soil science and that's what we're going to dive into today okay so i want to first start out with and i think this is really where it's important i want to first start out with the water analysis report okay because when we start to talk about nutrient deficiencies when we start to talk about plant behaviors before we ever dive into the soil you have got to understand your water and the quality of your water and some specifics inside of that quality of water so we had the water at mirai tested obviously i moved to mirai with the notion that water here was absolutely impeccable and logan labs for anybody in the united states go ahead and take me to that sheet josh uh logan labs is a lab you can find them on the internet i believe they're based in ohio or somewhere in the midwest east coast they do a comprehensive testing of soils of waters etc they tell you what to do they create the forms for you to submit this is what ian hunter and and a lot of the soil food web people utilize in terms of a lot of the soil food web people use and they do a lot of the soil food web people utilize in terms of a lot of the soil food web we found it to be quite effective ourselves so we sent them this water now as as i'm looking through this right we just sent them one simple uh water sample you'll notice the ph this is the obvious value that we're looking for and our ph is 6.6 like literally mirai's water is sitting in a very beautiful uh realm of existence okay uh hardness is you know nothing that i really need to concern myself with i have no idea whether the grains are of issue or not i have no idea when i have this ph um the ph of this and we talk about water hardness and let me just make sure uh and i'm going to kind of um i'm going to kind of break this down in in a a uh succinct way to the best of my ability okay and i said we don't need to worry about water hardness but water hardness will explain some things okay um so you would say that water hardness when we start looking at and i would like to see parts per million water hardness uh levels ppm let's see what we got here okay so we have soft water right ph again ph 6.5 let me just stay on task yet ph 6.5 neutral we drop below that okay we start getting ph in the six in the five five five four five this is very acidic we go above 6.5 we get into the 6.5 and we get into the 6.5 and we get into the 7.758 this is alkaline right now both of these extremities acidic and alkaline do cause certain elements that the plant needs to survive to drop out of suspension to drop out of that solution and become a component that is no longer usable for the plant this is why the 6.5 neutral ph greatest availability of all resources in terms of our water okay now this water hardness here the parts per million right you have soft water and this is basically when we talk about water hardness the amount of bicarbonates that are in the water system bicarbonates are the dissolving of carbon dioxide in water creating carbonic acid right we've no carbonic acid in terms of uh fizz in a soda right so dissolving co2 in water creates carbonic acid and when our water hardness is low we have soft water and this is basically when we talk about water water resource which most water resources are coming from groundwater whether you're using a municipality's water source and it's treated groundwater or some sort of uh river system that's feeding the colorado river hydrates the western uh portion of north america is receiving a lot of its resources and mineral content from groundwater in the form of uh natural hot springs leaking into it creating radical mineral composition okay we have bicarbonates right so co2 dissolved carbonic acid attacks calcium rock deposits and starts to create these bicarbonates or it creates the opportunity with this carbonic acid to be able to dissolve calcium from the soil system in the container so think about water hardness soft water has basically between 0 and 17 parts per million of bicarbonates slightly hard 70 parts per million of bicarbonates and hard water 120 to 180 now when we see hard water of 120 to 180 with that kind of content of dissolved carbon dioxide creating carbonic acid in the water what you see is that significantly dissolving the calcium and creating calcium carbonate which is that white substance in hard water situations that accumulates on the surface of the surface of the surface of the surface of the surface of the surface of the请 god cup of your hose on your shower head it also accumulates on the rim of your patrol or the masses touching that edge right and if you if you're dealing with really hard water in the mister trees you will get white deposit-on for your master daddy's your calcium carbonate again that by carbonates dissolving the calcium and creating calcium carbonate which is essentially polling calcium out of the overall more region on the cat and exchange site of the soil system combining them with the bicarbonates, and now we have calcium carbonate being deposited. This is hard water, right? And that discussion of hard water, the presence of those bicarbonates has a major impact. Some bicarbonates, not a big deal. But the more bicarbonates that we start to have, the more we see calcium carbonate created. Now, why is calcium carbonate an issue, okay? So as we get into this, we see that Mirai's water has a slightly hard, slightly hard. We've got 49.3 parts per million, the slightly hard realm, 17 to 60, okay? And I will see calcium deposits on my shower heads, but I will not see them on my hoses, my trees, or my containers, okay? Now, as we go down, when we look at the water, you notice that there's not a lot of, and typically when we talk about plant necessities, calcium is a macro element. Plants need calcium. Calcium is a macro element in a significant quantity, right? It's a major building block of cell walls. It's a major building block of transportation of resources. And when Ian has been discussing on the podcast some of the deficiencies or issues that we have in the trees, calcium deficiency has been a big one, right? It's been a big one. And most of our plants in the Western world, and this is throughout North America, this is Europe, are calcium deficient in bonsai cultivation. And there's some reasons for this, okay? But the first one is, locking up that calcium and pulling that plant-available form of calcium, which is a cation, a charged particle on the cation exchange side of the soil particle, grabbing that with the bicarbonates that exist in the water from that dissolved carbon dioxide, locking it up as calcium carbonate and depositing that out of solution as that white substance, okay? So you see that I have quite a bit of calcium already in my water here in terms of parts per billion compared to everything else, okay? That is where the relationship of that hardness factor, that 49.3, which is slightly hard, they're acknowledging whether it's tied up as calcium carbonate or whether it is available ionic calcium. There's no way it's going to be ionic in water. It is tied up as calcium carbonate. This is not plant-available calcium. So we look at this and we say, oh my gosh, calcium deficient, my water has calcium. Not so fast, not so fast. And this is where we're going to go through those soil tests, okay? So I've got calcium. Now here's the interesting thing. The magnesium probably is an available resource. In most of our plants, when we start to look at water, if we have anywhere above sort of a 4 to 5, this is a little bit low on the magnesium, 5 to 10 parts per million magnesium as a micronutrient, we're typically pretty well off, okay? Got a little bit of sodium and salt. Salt accumulation. I don't have enough salt in here to be a problem. I don't have enough salt in here to be of concern. Everything feels good. I've got a limited amount of iron in there, which is interesting because the iron is high enough quantity to stain my toilets, even at that less than 0.1%. Okay, now when we look at total alkalinity, this is where we again refer to. Now we're saying, hey, listen, I've got a 6.6 pH. I'm neutral. But we're looking at alkalinity here. Again, the alkalinity associates to the bicarbonate. And again, the bicarbonate, in terms of analyzing water, dissolves CO2 that has the capacity to now combine with the calcium that exists in the soil or form carbonic acid and dissolve calcium to create those calcium carbonate pieces that drop out of solution. Not good, right? Notice the chloride, not bad. Okay, notice the sulfate, not bad. Salt concentration. I'm not concerned with anything that I have here. And we do have a little bit of nitrate, probably just a natural component decomposing organic matter. Everything here looks really good, but there is one standout. And the one standout is because I'm dealing with well water, I have a fairly high bicarbonate level, right? And so having that knowledge, having the knowledge of what a bicarbonate is, having a knowledge of what a bicarbonate does, even though I look at my water and you take a litmus paper, and you do a pH sample, and you see I've got 6.6, my feeling with that prior to this whole discussion and educating myself is that's pretty freaking good, right? That's really, really good. But one thing that I have, and one thing that is common about water being out of the ground is bicarbonate levels opening the door to change the behavior of the soil system as it engages with a plant, okay? So we have a 6.6 pH, awesome availability of resources, but we have a 6.6 pH, awesome availability of resources, but we've got this dissolved CO2 that's creating carbonic acid and has the capacity to lock up nutrition that we otherwise would think is available, okay? That's all I need to know. I've got the ability to lock up nutrition with my water, but I have good availability as the pH stands, okay? So let's go ahead and let's take a look at the soil system now, all right? Because what we did is we took a very two cups of soil to perform one of these tests. In bonsai cultivation, that is tough, but when we're doing the vacuum methodology, we were able to pull out enough, okay? And this is the first thing that comes to my attention as I'm looking at the soil test. pH of the soil, 7.3. 7.3 is the pH of the soil. I have a 6.6 pH of the water that I'm dumping in. How do I get a 7.3 in that soil? When you analyze the Akadama pumice lava, you're gonna get a 6.2 to 6.5 pH of that soil system. You're gonna have phosphorus in abundance, you're gonna have potassium in abundance, and you're gonna have a very minimal amount of other components inside of that. Roughly, Akadama, as a soil that has organic matter, 8 to 10% organic matter. Look at my percentage of organic matter here, 15.2%. 15.3 if we wanna round up. Where is that organic matter coming from? The addition of organic fertilizers. This is good. Now, we recognize organic fertilizers break down, they form smaller particles, greater surface holding, but we need that organic matter. That is our cation exchange sites, that is our resource, that is our cation anion. We put on that dry fertilizer, it breaks down through microbial activity, and that is where that added organic content. Akadama as a particle, boom, clay particle. We understand tubular structure has an 8 to 10% amount of organic matter inside of that. Volcanic activity with mineral content, or organic matter, locks it up, 8 to 10%. An additional 5% coming from percolation and decomposition of organic matter over the course of time. But I have this pH, I have this pH of 7.3, and this is really where we have to, again, go back to this notion of the water, and the water having that 6.6 pH, but the high bicarbonate level, slightly hard. Because that high bicarbonate level, all of a sudden, we have to go back and look at the amount of calcium. And when we start to look at this, look at the amount of calcium compared to phosphorus, compared to sulfur, compared to every other component that we have here, a ton of calcium. And again, if we're saying, listen, calcium is a macro, we need a lot of calcium. Potassium is a macro, phosphorus is a macro. We have these big, huge values. We look at calcium, we start to say, man, calcium is in abundance, it's the greatest amount of resource. To base saturation in the soil, and we look at this 60 to 70% as calcium, the soil is primarily calcium. And we're sitting here saying, well, or at least in terms of what the soil is holding, primarily calcium. And we're like, oh my gosh, this is amazing. How would I have a calcium deficiency when I have this much calcium? We go back to the water report and we say bicarbonates. Bicarbonates are now pulling that calcium off of the cation exchange site. And in the calcium being pulled off of that cation exchange site and locked in to form calcium carbonate, it is no longer available to the plant. So we have an abundance of calcium, and we're looking at this and we're saying, an abundance of calcium in my plant is calcium deficient. This soil test cannot tell you that. The water test can only hypothesize that that is what's happening by the high concentration of bicarbonates. The pH is saying we should have availability. This is where the next soil test matters, the saturated paste report. Because now what is happening is we're saying, listen, saturated paste is what is the plant responding to? What is the plant interpreting? We aren't just talking about this soil as an inert medium. We're not just talking about this water not having interacted with the soil. When the soil and the water interact, in that action where the plant now has water as a transport mechanism for the cations and anions that exist on the surface of that soil, what is happening? Notice the pH is at 7.0. Not bad. Not the same pH as the 7.3 that exists in the soil report. Not the ideal intermediate pH of 6.5 in the water report. The meshing of those says we have a 7.0 pH. What that means is we are being impaired by, but not completely debilitated by, the calcium carbonate concentration or those bicarbonates reacting as we water every single time. We've got a lot of solubility in our salts. We've got some chloride present, but notice the high quantity of bicarbonates. 115. Now this is where, again, if we go back to what is the bicarbonate breakdown for soft water versus hard water. We said, listen, Mirai in the water test, we had a, what do we have in the water test? Stay right there, Josh. I'll be right back. Just one second. No. Here we go. The water test, the bicarbonate was, oh, we had a 6.6. We had a hardness of 49. Hardness of 49. Okay. That is saying that we have a slightly hard water. Now we're talking about bicarbonates in the 115 parts per million. This is almost completely hard water. By the time the soil and the water interact, the chemistry of this system is saying you're using hard water. You are getting a massive amount of calcium being tied up and in those bicarbonates dropping out of suspension. Ah, geez. So my calcium is deficient. After all of this, it is deficient, and the cation exchange sites where calcium existed is being occupied by phosphorus, by potassium, and it's also being occupied by sodium, right? We're applying fish emulsion. We're applying kelp. These two elements come from the ocean and have a high concentration of salt, and sodium starts to occupy these sites. Boom, calcium removed. No longer do we have calcium cations on your soil surface. Sodium, potassium, phosphorus, okay? Now, phosphorus and potassium, plant is going to use them if it needs it. It's going to leave it if it doesn't. They're just occupying that space so that magnesium can't be taken in, right, so that calcium can't occupy that site, so that nitrogen, most readily washed out of the system, isn't available, and we start to say, oh, my gosh. Just by looking at the water, just by looking at the characteristic of that water, and by looking at how the water interacts with the soils that we have, we're starting to see where the deficiencies are created. This is amazing. Okay, let's keep going. Now, when we start to look at sulfur, okay, sulfur is the way that we decrease the pH of our soil system, right? And this can come in two different forms. It can come in elemental sulfur or it can come in the form of gypsum, which is calcium sulfate, right? And gypsum is an element that I've never heard of using in bonsai, that I've never thought of using in bonsai until speaking with Ian, but if you look at crops and crop science and the behavior inside of a massive field growing operation, gypsum is one of these components that walnut growers in California have to use gypsum. They cannot get enough calcium and they cannot get enough sulfur to maintain adequate and acceptable soil system pHs from a paste report for walnut to thrive in the Central Valley. Gypsum is a miracle worker, okay? It also does something besides supply calcium. When you put gypsum into the soil, the calcium and the sulfur separate inside of that soil system and the sulfur starts to lock up those bicarbonates, okay? So when we talk about elemental sulfur or gypsum, the use of that sulfur to lock up that bicarbonate, right, all of a sudden now removes the component that creates the alkalinity and starts to decrease your pH. Now when you decrease that pH by sulfur removing those bicarbonates and removing the alkalinity, all of a sudden you open the door to calcium that's locked up in suspension, now having the ability to occupy those cation exchange sites. Sulfur scrubs that cation exchange site of phosphorus and potassium that have accumulated in excess. Sulfur is like this free radical, right? It's like it's floating around in there and it's just latching on to all of these things that have accumulated in abundance. Bicarbonates, right? These deposits starting to free up calcium, taking phosphorus, taking potassium, right? And all of a sudden all of this starts to drop out of that container when we water because now those are components that are dropping out of solution, no longer available to the plant, freeing up the cation exchange site. And again, allowing that pH to drop so that we have a solution that is more characteristically hospitable for fungal growth, increased microbial activity, and freeing up availability of other resources. This is where gypsum and elemental sulfur are a really big component. Now is that the solution? I've got an alkaline pH system. This is what I'm going to do? Not necessarily, not necessarily, right? And this is where we can also talk about sulfuric acid. Sulfuric acid is a very common acidifying agent to correct a high bicarbonate or a high alkalinity, a high pH in your water system, okay? Because sulfuric acid now still has that sulfur, has the capacity for that sulfur to now interact with the other components that are clogging up exchange sites and creating this higher level of alkalinity. And sulfuric acid is another solution in an injector system, okay? We can go farther than that. We can say, well, look, there's a little bit less toxic solutions to being able to change the pH and also have this scrubbing effect inside of the soil system, citric acid. Citric acid is one of the, I would say, more organic, newer forms of hydroponic acidification to adjust bicarbonate quantity, change alkalinity, and have more of a control over our pH. These are options. I am not recommending you to apply these things. I am telling you, here are things that can offset what we are learning, but we do need to have more information. This is the beginning of your research of how you would go about addressing these. And again, you know, as much as the compost extract did not fix things at Mirai and, in fact, caused a major meltdown, Ian Hunter and his knowledge of soil, uh, he's gone through these test results with me. We've talked about all of these figures and stuff. He knows what he's talking about. He knows, we now know compost extract is a tough thing to apply to bonsai, but Cure Soil Consulting, he can help you with this. And I'm not plugging Ian for any business. I don't have any association with it. I can't break down these figures. I can only take the figures and have the help of somebody who knows to be able to create a plan for Mirai, and that's what I'm sharing with you. Okay, so let's continue with the saturated paste, right? So you see that we do have some sulfur. We have been, um, I would say, you know, through just the general water content had sulfur. I do believe, let me go back and see here if we have any sulfur, uh, sulfate, a little bit of sulfate, uh, which, you know, uh, isn't exactly enough to really offset. We have sulfur. We have some phosphorus. Um, calcium. Here we see calcium again, right? And this is soluble calcium. Now, I want to go down to percent, okay? Because here you see the percentage of calcium, 40%. So we had this ultra-high quantity of calcium that was present in the soil. Yet when we start to talk about percent calcium, we have a much lower figure here in terms of what is actually available and what is usable, right? Now, there is a, there is some positive, uh, aspects of what's happening here. Notice that calcium, magnesium, potassium, these are starting to have a relatively, uh, close proximity in terms of where they could be on the scale. Notice that boron, iron, manganese, copper, zinc, these are all in real close proximity. Kind of a, a high amount of nitro, or iron, that's fine. Plants love iron. They need iron. That's a really good iron figure. Notice that aluminum is the outlier here, okay? Aluminum is a problem. This is a big problem. And aluminum typically, uh, I, I do believe aluminum, I'm trying to think where, like, I'm trying to think where aluminum piggybacked into the soil system. Uh, I'm not totally sure. This is a bit of an issue for us, though. This is an issue for us. Having a high aluminum concentration, and I would even go as far as saying I probably created this concentration of aluminum. We talk about, uh, we talk about, uh, fighting off water molds. Uh, and aliette is, uh, is a drench that we use to fend off water molds and protect roots. Well, aliette is, uh, a fungicide drench whose primary active ingredient is aluminum. And when you take aluminum and you put it inside of a system that has bicarbonates and has a lot of instability, suddenly aluminum can accumulate and occupy a lot of sites. Aluminum can combine with different components and become very, very, uh, uh, impairing of root growth and nutrient availability. So when we are looking at this, note that I have good mineral balancing. When I look at my trace elements, I'm not upset by this. There's iron in the water, uh, and iron is necessary for a plant, not in a toxic level. We're good. Aluminum is an outlier. Calcium, magnesium, potassium. I've got plenty of available, but I need to be, or excuse me, I've got plenty present, but I need to make it more available, right? And then we look at others and we start to say, oh, interesting, okay. That is kind of the core of our soil system. So we have a water, we've got bicarbonates, we've got calcium carbonate and calcium deficiency. We have a ton of calcium present when we look at the water and the soil test, but saturated paste, we have less than 50% of that available to the plant. Wow, got it. Okay, we've got a lot of magnesium, maybe even too much magnesium. Nice to know as we start to look at this. And now we go to Ian's suggestion. Okay, so all of this is just information, all right? This is Ian's suggestions. He's broken this down, okay? We're gonna go soil characteristics first. So we see the pH is 7.3 as acknowledged, right? We recognize in the saturated paste that 7.3 with the water interaction of 6.6 went to seven. Here's your organic matter, 15%, right? And he even breaks it down in terms of what types of soil, sand, silt, clay, organic matter, all right? Now, this is a really beautiful aspect of this because what I was considering doing with my soils was moving more to the David DeGroote recommendation of not rapeseed, but cottonseed meal. And he was saying, listen, in Japan, they use rapeseed meal in abundance. It's primarily nitrogen, low phosphorus, low potassium. He has experience with high phosphorus, high potassium. We see that we have high phosphorus, high potassium. And so what he's saying is, I'm gonna go to the Japanese model. My trees are looking great as a result of this. That's where I was thinking about going. Look at this anion section of this. Nitrogen, present, right? A tremendous amount of nitrogen. A tremendous amount of nitrogen. Not a level of nitrogen that we need to be trying to add to if we're going to avoid this massive fluctuation of behavior in the plant, right? We want a consistent, moderate amount of nitrogen when we are applying nitrogen. Now, inside of this, we have heavy, moderate, and low fertilizations. You're dealing with nitrogen levels that are below what you're looking at right here when we talk about heavy, moderate, and light. Don't try to mix the two. We're just simply looking at what this soil is holding. It is holding a lot of nitrogen right now. I don't need to be doping it up with more nitrogen from this soil test. Good to have the soil test. You ought to have known that, right? But for the sulfur, when we start to look at the sulfur, where we see the nitrogen in terms of its quantity here, right? We see this in nitrate, but there's a lot of nitrogen release here. We want more. We want more sulfur. Notice the phosphorus value, 1576. Notice the sulfur value, 91. Nitrogen value, 128. This is where we start to recognize, wow, if we boosted that sulfur concentration, we could effectively reduce some of the phosphorus and some of the potassium concentration, and that could be really beneficial. But in addition, if we boosted the sulfur concentration, we could make this calcium figure down here. Notice the cations, right? We're talking about positive charged cations, negatively charged anions. Notice the 4,114 cations of calcium, right? By adding more sulfur, we can tie up the bicarbonates of the water, and we can open up this calcium that is being locked up to less than 50% availability to create a greater availability of calcium, which would decrease the calcium deficiency our trees are experiencing. And this is where, to the degree, when we go down to the lowest column and base cation percentage, right? You see this down here? We have a 60%... Excuse me. We have an ideal range of 60 to 70%. Well, guess what? We have 77%. The calcium is in the system. It's just not available. It's being tied up by the bicarbonate concentration, right? When we look at the ideal magnesium, 10 to 20% found value, 11%. We don't need to apply any more magnesium. Magnesium is right where we want it. We could apply a little bit more. We'll talk about Ian's recommendation, and I'll walk you through it. We're not quite ready for more magnesium right now. You look at potassium, 3 to 5. Look at what we have, 5%. You look at sodium, 1 to 3. Look at what we have, 1.1. Slightly low. That's good. There are areas where we were saying we're developing a bit of a sodium accumulation from the kelp and from the fish, and we don't want to continue adding it because sodium is occupying the sites. We need that available cationic form of calcium. We're kind of holding there, but we recognize sodium, we still have some fudge factor. In terms of hydrogen, this is that bicarbonate, the hydrogen cation availability. When we start to talk about occupying calcium carbonate and you have a bicarbonate, when that bicarbonate links up with that calcium, it releases a free hydrogen into the soil system, and the free hydrogen is what leads to acidification or a drop in the pH. We're watering with a 6.6 water. We have a 7.3 soil, and when the two combine, it gets us to 7. How do we acidify that? Either occupying that bicarbonate and scrubbing the surface with sulfur, or, right, when we start to talk, talk about that, and when we are scrubbing that surface with sulfur, we free up a hydrogen, which is going to open the opportunity for acidification of our soil. That's simplified. There's more to the chemistry than that. I understand that. But just understanding, when you look at this base cation percentage, hydrogen you'd like 10%, and we have zero, that's where it's coming from. The bicarbonate tying everything up, and there is no release of hydrogen, to be able to acidify that situation. Okay? And so, in a very, very complex way of going through the reading of this, and seeing, I have the calcium, why is my plant deficient? Right? My magnesium, my potassium levels are where I want them. Why is my plant deficient? We start to recognize, I'm watering with the pH. That is appropriate. Why is my system alkaline? We start to recognize that you have that water hardness engaging in that, and that is where the bicarbonate concentration changes the behavior of the soil system. Okay? And if we understand how we neutralize that, and again, this is that sulfur, whether it's elemental sulfur, or whether it's calcium sulfate, gypsum, this is the recommendation. So if we look at these columns, the yellow, and I'm right here in the middle, in the cations, and the product right here. Okay? And we start to see Diamond K gypsum, product application rate in pounds, product application rate in grams, 16 grams. Now, Ian asked me, what's the average size or volume of soil in your bonsai containers at Mirai? I guesstimate between the big and the small and all the intermediate between two gallons. Two gallons of soil per container at Mirai, I believe is a very accurate guesstimation. He developed this application rate of 16 grams per two gallons of soil. Right? So when you start to think about the, when I start to think about the number of trees I'm going to be applying this to is going to be how much gypsum I would be adding to the water. And I would be watering thoroughly an amount of water to thoroughly drench the number of containers that I have created the gypsum quantity for. So say for example, five containers and I apply a gallon of water per five containers. But we've developed the gypsum rate on two gallons of soil per container. My gypsum rate of 16 grams is 16 grams per container. I have five containers, which means I'm going to have 80 grams of gypsum in the water that it's going to take to water those five containers. Now what Ian went through and what we talked about in the use of this gypsum for my specific situation having looked at the factors that exist is that applying the gypsum all at once is going to be a bad move because the gypsum is diluted in water. That water is going to leach out of that container. A lot of it's going to run out. And we will have emptied our bag of our usable quantities that we can measure and observe in one single watering. So he suggested we go eight grams per two gallons of soil dissolved in the water it takes to thoroughly saturate that two gallons of soil and do that every seven days for two applications, right? So we do it at the beginning of the week. We do it the same time next week. We've applied 16 grams of gypsum to two gallons of soil via the vehicle of water. And this will provide the sulfur as well as the available calcium. Okay? That was his recommendation. That's why it's in yellow. Okay? He also has MagnaGro Epsom salt. Now when we look down here come back to the base cation percentage and we look at magnesium. We are in the wheelhouse. We are very much in the wheelhouse for magnesium. Okay? There is some discussion that when we apply the gypsum that that could potentially remove some of the magnesium and that we may need to add a little bit of magnesium because we're already on the lower end and we may decrease the magnesium content. That is not going to be my first move. I'm not going to start with that. Okay? Because I want the sulfur. I want the calcium. And I want to free up all of the excessive. I want to get rid of the bicarbonates and I want to free up the excessive phosphorus and potassium that we have in the system. Okay? So when I start to look at that that is the recommended behavior of how I would continue the mineral balancing process offset the pH discrepancy of soil to water to the saturated paste knowing that they interact and I want that down at that 6.5. I want water at 6.5. I want my soil at 6.5. I want my saturated paste at 6.5. That will never ever happen. That will never happen. There's too much chemistry. There's too many characteristics I would have to constantly be tampering with and honestly the tree doesn't need that. It doesn't need that. But what the tree does need is it does need the soil's pH and the saturated paste pH to drop below where they're at at that 7.3 and 7 realm. Get me into the sixes and I'm good. Get me into the sixes in terms of the acidity and the balancing to make available the things that exist. Get rid of the bicarbonates to a degree so I can open up calcium availability. Let the plant have that over the fall season where it's going to be doing the most accumulation of resources for vascular production and over this fall season by abiding by this applying those two applications allowing the plant to function I do feel like we are going to potentially sit inside of a realm where we're going to hit mineral balancing on a level we have yet to experience. I think this is amazing. Now you're probably sitting there if you haven't fallen asleep or cut out already you're probably sitting there and you're probably saying what the hell do I do with this information Ryan? Like this is your water report this is your soil report this is your saturated paste report you applied a compost extract you got craziness all over the place fertilizing with different things I'm not using those. The purpose of this is not to say this is what your soil report looks like. The purpose of this was to show you that if we are going to dive into soil on another level that elevates our bonsai practice that this is the information we need to start developing a comfort level around. We need to have conversations. We need to inform ourselves through research and education. Googling water hardness levels. Googling bicarbonates. Where do they come from? How do you get rid of them? How do we free up? What are the acceptable ranges for desired plant growth of a conifer, of a deciduous? Using references like an Ian Hunter and keep this in mind. Farming practices of the modern era namely factory farming has destroyed the soil system. And in order to reconcile this we are moving back towards a more holistic approach. And that holistic approach that used to exist in the heirloom soils of our great grandparents and of our grandparents pre-World War II era those practices are coming back because with those practices slow, consistent, sustainability, right? Of the soil system there was a very high quality of food being produced and a very high production of food being produced. And the soil system was where that existed. In bonsai we started out in bonsai with chemical fertilizers. This is what we want to do. We've moved to organic fertilizers. This is better. We went from not understanding microbial activity to knowing beneficial fungi and bacteria are necessary. These are the elementary kindergarten level elements aspects of soil. And now we're taking that next step. Well, how do we create a soil system that supports beneficial fungi? Well, we need to have a slightly more acidic soil. How do we get a more acidic soil? Well, our water source has a high level of bicarbonates. Bicarbonates lock up calcium. They raise the pH and create alkalinity. And that's not how you get beneficial mycorrhiza and beneficial fungal symbiotic units to exist with your tree. Oh, okay. Gypsum is a tool. Is gypsum going to work? I don't know. I don't know. I've never put gypsum in a bonsai container. I didn't even know this was a part of the practice. Yet now all of a sudden, that is the solution to change what my perfect water is not able to change on its own based on its bicarbonate content. And this is how we go about it. This is the next step and that's it. So, we will continue to enhance. I'm going to apply the gypsum to five trees. I'm not going to do the whole garden like I have. Five trees. I'm going to test the results after giving it a week to sit and understand how that changed the system. And then Ian and I are going to continue to work on this until we see optimal ranges achieved. But I did want to bring you into this conversation. I wanted to make you aware of how these are read. I wanted to make you aware of what's going on. I wanted to further the discussion around pH and this sort of water hardness factor that's been floating around that now we're starting to grab onto. I haven't perfectly defined it. I don't completely understand it, but we do understand it better than we did before starting this and we will continue to refine that. All right? Don't be deterred. Don't be frustrated. Don't feel overwhelmed. This is the beginning and believe me, by the time we are done with this, we will understand this very, very well. But thank you for being a part of the journey. I would encourage you to get your own soil test and begin to form your baseline and this is going to help you start to understand how you cultivate your bonsai at a higher level if you choose to go this deep. All right? Good luck. We'll be here. Let's talk about this further. We will continue the process and continue growing ourselves. All right. Thank you, guys. Have a good day. 
