So, tis the time to revisit some of the air layers that we performed last sort of late spring, early summer when those trees got back into that energy positive state. And before we dive into the nuances of the different air layers and talk about how all that happens, I just wanted to come back to the basic concept of air layering in terms of what exactly are we doing, how is it working, and what is the vascular system that is actually producing the roots, etc. So, let's start off first with just the exterior backbone of our tree, the trunk or branch, doesn't matter, vascular structure being the same size of the vascular structure, obviously being different between a trunk and a branch. When we're performing the air layer, actually let me go back, let me go back, let me go back, I'm jumping ahead, I'm excited about this, I want to see if these air layers actually worked. Interestingly enough, air layers are a very tricky devil when you get into them. To try and get exactly what you want in terms of root production. Okay, so let's talk vascular structure. We've got our exterior bark, we've got the interior of the tree where we've got the xylem, okay? Now, the xylem runs up the core, xylem, and the xylem is transporting water, H2O, okay? So, we have water transport occurring through the middle of that central core of the vascular system. Between the xylem and its exterior vascular tissue, we have this single cell layer thick, and this is the cambial layer. Okay, now the cambium, cambium, is meristematic tissue, which means it has the capacity and does cellularly divide. This cambium is what produces xylem and produces phloem, so this gives rise to our xylem and phloem, okay? And then on the exterior of the cambium, we've got phloem. Phloem is what transports sugars and starches that are produced during the photosynthesis. Phloem is the photosynthetic process from the foliar mass to the other vascular portions of the tree, okay? Phloem, P-H-L-O-E-M, sugars, and starches. Okay, now we know, and if you guys have seen both of the streams that we've been doing the air layering on over the past year, you watched us do this process. Understanding the vascular tissue and how it works is the most important aspect of being able to understand, apply, and have success. Okay, so when we take this and we make that incision for the removal of the bark, the pieces that we have to focus on removing are the exterior bark, the phloem that is transporting the sugars and starches, and the cambium layer that is allowing cellular division to take place to regenerate the vascular system or expand the vascular system depending on which operation we're performing. Now, in the air layering operation, if we left the cambium in the vascular system, in place, it would very easily generate new vascular tissue in terms of the phloem. We still have that connectivity of the xylem. We don't want the generation of phloem because then sugars and starches could flow freely and there's no reason for there to form roots. Now, when we get this air layer performed and we remove that cambium, we remove that phloem, and we put something around this air layer, for us, a lot of times it's moss, in the phase of the hornbeam, and in that situation, we used a container and we used Akadama to be able to facilitate that situation and scenario that would encourage root growth, but we're using a medium to be able to deliver water to the area. Now, here's the key to air layering. As we have photosynthesis occurring in the leaf mass out here on the tree and those sugars and starches move south, they start to accumulate here because we've cut off their transport to move further south below this area where the air layer was, um, applied, okay? Those sugars and starches build up and they start to feed this cambial layer. So this cambial layer, which occurs all the way around this in a circumference of that trunk, starts producing callus based on that excessive amount of sugars and starches stimulating cellular division. And if we strike, and this is the important part of success with an air layer, if we strike a balance of H2O and O2, if we strike a balance of water and oxygen, the correct answer to every question I ever ask you guys, if you strike a balance of water and oxygen with all of that callus, with all of that sugar and starch production being driven down by this flush that is hardened off, we get root production occurring. And we have to allow that root production to accumulate to the point that it's capable of facilitating the support of that canopy that exists above it. Okay? So inside of this process, a few nuances, you must remove the phloem, and the cambium completely for an air layer to be successful. You must be in an energy positive where you have the first flush of growth out and hardened on the tree so that it's reaccumulating energy and delivering the sugars and starches to that location. And you must strike a balance of water and oxygen in the medium, whether it be moss, whether it be soil, that you choose to utilize around that air layered location so that it encourages the production of roots that thrive and survive in that medium of soil. Now obviously over the course of time, the more roots that accumulate, the more water is going to be used, and you're going to see that medium dry out quicker and quicker. Okay? But we never want to keep that overly saturated, and to avoid this, we always make sure to make incisions in the bottom of the bag, or make sure that we have those drain holes in the bottom of the container, so that we allow water to freely exchange and exit that situation to achieve that balance of water and oxygen. So now that we've taken a look at just that basic sort of review of what you guys have seen applied in real time, let's go into the nuances of air layer, in terms of a conifer, a deciduous, a branch, and a trunk, to see how those different situations dictate our decision-making process and how we execute those with success. In order to be able to understand when we separate an air layer, we need to first look at what is the difference between deciduous and conifer, right? And when we talk about differences between deciduous and conifer, we're looking at leaf structure, we're looking at root structure, and we're looking at the amount of water and resources moved to the foliage mass, and the amount of sugars and starches produced from that foliage mass feeding those roots. Okay? So when we start to look at deciduous, we're looking at deciduous knowing, hey listen, deciduous trees, number one, they use more water, use more H2O, okay? Using more H2O means they move more H2O. And you say, oh, that's very simple. Yes, it is, but not necessarily intuitive, okay? As a result of moving more water and using more H2O, right, they produce more sugar and starch. Okay? And this is very, very important because this starts to play into our strategy and theory. Now when you say, well, move more water, how do you know that they move more water? Well, when we look at the leaf formation of a deciduous tree, you have a large surface area. It's very thin. Cuticle is very thin. Meaning it transpires very rapidly. Rapid transpiration or loss of water means water has to be replaced. And the good sample, or indicator of this is the fact that you can prune several species of deciduous trees right at this moment in the spring. And the water will bleed out of that stem itself as it's moving sugars and starches up to that growing tip. Now you're saying, okay, they're not in leaf yet. Yes, I know this, but they're preparing to. And that's the amount of water it takes to not only produce it, but keep it hydrated until it hardens off. Even then, thin, thin. Thin leaf, thin cuticle, large surface area, rapid transpiration and loss of water. Rapid transpiration and evaporation. We're producing, or we're using more water. As a result, we're producing more sugars and starches, which means roots form faster. Roots form faster. Here's what else it means. We have to have the root system built to a point where that root system is capable of supporting that foliage mass prior to separation. Okay, and what this means is, if we cut that air layer when that tree is in leaf, now we may be separating from the parent root system that is still feeding the hydration of that, and the root system that we sever to may not be as capable. Now this is going to be different than a conifer, because when we come back and we look at a conifer, we say a conifer uses less H2O, produces less sugar and starch, has smaller surface area and thicker cuticle to prevent that moisture loss. As a result, produces roots more slowly. All of a sudden now, when we start to decrease surface area, we start to increase the thickness of the cuticle, and we start to talk about a tree that can resist water loss in the more arid parts of the vast landscapes of the world, these trees can't generate the same amount of energy. They function more slowly. They photosynthesize less. They use less water. They create less sugars and starches. They build roots at a slower pace. Now, as a result, they're more resistant to being capable of tolerating that separation and that shift from the parent root system to the air layered root system. As a result, we're going to use that parent root system in the spring to feed that water and resource, expand that foliar mass, get that sugars and starches produced to expand the root mass, and we're going to separate these after the first flush hardens one year after we air layered the previous year. Okay? So, holding back on our conifers, we're going to be separating our deciduous prior to that new growth flushing in the spring, conifers coming after that new growth is flushed and hardened as the two different times that we separate an air layer based on the differences of deciduous and conifer. Okay. So, before we can talk about how we know it's time to separate an air layer, we first got to look at what type of air layer and what type of commitment have we made to generating this root system. And that comes down to the major differences of did we choose to air layer a trunk where we're removing the entire foliar mass from the tree or virtually all of the foliar mass from the tree on a very girthy, large amount of vascular tissue, or did we air layer a branch where we're simply taking off a much smaller diameter, much less significance, much smaller foliar mass from the tree because these two things matter. Now, when we start to talk about a branch layer, because we're dealing with a smaller amount of foliage, we're dealing with a smaller amount of volume. We're dealing with a smaller amount of water utilization. We're dealing with a smaller amount of sugars and starches. We're dealing with a younger vascular tissue. Consequently, when we're looking at a branch, we're looking at how many roots do we have in that bag compared to how much foliage is it supposed to be supporting. Now, for us, when we start air layering smaller diameter, and I'm going to say anything from a thumb-size branch lower, we're talking about three months to be able to generate the correct amount of roots to be able to fully separate that branch. You might be saying, three months, that's quick. Yes, it is. Now, the caveat to that is the same success for any air layer. Did you establish a balance of water and oxygen? Did that balance of water and oxygen and the performance of the technique properly give you the productivity of roots? The only way to know is to visually look at that bag, maybe slightly open it if you used a dark bag, see the roots on the exterior if you used a clear bag, and gauge how many roots do I have in this and is it enough to be able to separate this from the parent material. Now, the good thing about this is, because it's just a branch, a lot of times we can say, man, only a few number of roots is going to be enough to support this small amount of foliage. Cool. Three months later, we're separating it. We may choose to pot that or even just leave it in the separated air layer bag for the rest of the season and handle it in the spring of the following year. We're looking at the quantity, though, when we start to decide are we going to separate, okay? Now, when we look at the trunk, the trunk is a different issue altogether. We know for deciduous trees, because they move more water through their system, we are more capable of generating roots more rapidly, and as a result, we don't need to have a branch below that layer keeping these roots fed and alive as we generate that new root system. As a result, we're going to be using that foliage mass and we're going to be looking to see over the course of the year, is this parent root system in the container starting to demand less and less water each time that we're applying water to the tree? If it starts to demand less and less water here to keep this foliage mass hydrated here, it means that we're producing roots at our layer site that are starting to take over the hydration of the foliage mass, okay? Once we get to the following spring to verify that we do in fact have that transition, we can actually repot this tree first, see if these roots are still active. If they are still very active, we can then inspect the quantity of roots inside of the actual air-layered space, and if the quantity of roots is not sufficient, if they haven't developed, or if we see that these roots are still playing a significant role in the hydration of that foliage mass, obviously this is early spring, so it's not out yet, but we know what happened last fall, okay? So we're seeing this system, we're checking in here, we know the quantity of roots, it's not enough, they didn't develop, this is still very active, we may choose to go back in, reinitiate that air layer, and try again this season. However, if we notice that it stopped using as much water over the fall, we come back in early spring before this leaf's out, we take a look at this root system, and we notice it's either dead, or there's very few roots in there, we inspect the quantity inside of the air-layered state, and we say, wow, this is an abundant amount of roots, then we're going to separate the air layer before it ever pushes leaves, okay? So when we're talking about a branch, we're simply looking at how many roots are in here, is it proportional to the size of foliage? Yes it is, we separate. On a trunk, how's the root system behaving of the parent plant? What is the quantity of roots present in this container? Enough roots in the container, lack of function in the parent material, or parent root system, we're going to go ahead and separate. Not enough, we redo the layer, okay? These are the differences when we start to talk about a branch versus a trunk that we've got to be inspecting, and ultimately looking to as guidance and indicators for separation. Now that we know the differences in terms of indications for a branch versus a trunk, we need to dive a little bit deeper into what are the differences in terms of nuances of a coniferous trunk versus a deciduous trunk. Okay, so we already talked about the fact that if we see the parent root system starting to use less water or in fact deteriorating entirely, it's a great indication that that layer has probably produced enough roots and taken over the movement of water to hydrate the foliage mass. However, we need to understand a few things about this root system and its sustainability to be able to properly gauge whether or not an air layer is capable of succeeding after separation, right? Now with a deciduous tree, moving more water, producing more sugars and starches, it's very easy and effortless for a deciduous tree, if technique is correct, balance of water and oxygen is achieved, to regenerate a root system that will be able to hydrate the canopy. This is one of the reasons we can separate prior to leaf push in the spring. This is one of the reasons we can separate within, say, six to nine months of first layering the tree. This gives us a faster, more rapid productivity of roots and because all of the sugars and starches from photosynthesis are being focused here, the decline in this parent root system is based on starvation of that root system from not getting those sugars and starches via photosynthesis. Now, with a conifer, all of a sudden we have this trunk and we're saying in order to air layer any portion of this trunk, we have to, have to, have to have a branch below that layer. Now we talked about the fact that conifers smaller surface area on the needle, thicker cuticle, move less water, produce less sugars and starches, it takes far longer to generate the root system here to be able to support this tree and oftentimes the time that it takes to produce this root system is longer than the time it takes for the parent roots to starve to death as a result of not having those sugars and starches, which is why we need this continuing to feed that. Okay, and this is a major nuance because now we're saying, listen, because this continues to feed that, whereas in the deciduous, this is no longer feeding that, we don't have branches below that, but it's producing roots much quicker, so we're going to cut that before this leaves out in the spring. This has been built up enough, we've seen this die back or we've seen it stop using water, cut, this supports that, boom, transition, done. With a conifer, we're saying, listen, this takes far longer to produce roots so long that I've got to leave a branch here to keep this root system alive. I know this root system is pumping water up into that through the root system through the xylem that's still attached. I'm going to use that because we need more time, because we need longer to produce that root system. I'm going to use that water and nutrient uptake that's still present from the air layering process to further expand that foliar mass, which generates more sugars and starches and produces a more robust root system before we separate. So we're saying with deciduous, we're going to separate this before this leafs out in the spring. With conifers, we're going to wait until this root system facilitates the expansion of the foliage mass, solar panels go out, harden off, now it's resistant to moisture loss, reaccumulates energy, that's when we come back in and we separate that air layer. Deciduous trees are not very adaptive once their foliage is out to changes in the root system. It's why we don't repot deciduous trees and leave. Conifers, more adaptive, particularly the juniper, to being separated after we've got, well they've always got foliage, right? And so they have to be adaptive to that. We play on that strength, we play on the fact that the root system is supported by our nuance that we understand, and we use that energy and that resource to build this up knowing it takes more time and they're adaptive to that separation process later. So we're saying separation early spring before leaf push on a deciduous trunk air layer. On a conifer, we're saying after first flush hardens and root system expands because they need that extra time and we can use that parent root system to further drive success in the layer. I hope this helps. Let's go take a look in the greenhouse. Let's separate these, let's make some decisions, see these different indicators and be able to make the best possible decision. Okay, so now we're in the greenhouse getting to see all of that information that we put on the board and I want to come back and just talk about a few of those concepts that we talked about. Now we discussed the fact that a branch air layer is going to give us different indications than a trunk air layer and that a conifer is going to behave differently than a deciduous trunk air layer. Let's see those nuances actually in play. So we're going to start with this branch air layer and really developing sort of the concept of how do we know when it's ready to be separated. Now this branch air layer, as we pointed out on the board, happens very quickly because it's a small amount of foliage that only needs a small amount of roots proportionally to support this foliage and we're saying this is maybe a three month process to get this to produce roots. Now the indicator that allows me to see that I want to be separating or can safely separate this from the parent tree is the presence of the roots on the bottom of the plastic and I'm just going to roll this over and show you guys what I saw that encouraged me to separate this last fall when I removed it from the parent plant. If you look here, you can see an abundance of roots that were formed from the air layer which is right in the center of this moss mass and you can see that there's quite a few roots on the bottom portion of this air layer which you would expect because from the top where we left the opening for water to enter, we were watering here, we had drainage holes here, we struck that balance of water and oxygen and within three months, we had a production of roots that told me I could separate this safely from the parent material. Now in separating this branch, obviously there were other branches attached to the parent material and I didn't see any shift in the behavior of the roots. I was simply basing my decision to separate on what quantity of root mass did I have in this bundle of moss that could support this foliar mass and for a juniper, this is plenty of roots to be capable of separating and having success and again, this was separated last fall three months after it was air layered. So I've been cultivating this air layered mass just in this mass of moss since last fall. We'll be potting these up into very small containers and this is how we produce our grafting stock to be replacing the foliage of say junipers that have not so attractive or difficult to work with foliage with a more compact, easy maintainable foliage. But as it stands now, I actually could leave this as is and graft with it and it wouldn't be an issue. It would just be hard with this very small amount of mass to be able to cultivate the kind of health that would allow a graft to be successful. So we'll go ahead and pot them up, get them a little bit stronger and then use them as grafting material once our junipers have hardened off after that first flush. This is going to be set aside for now and let's talk about the trunk layers. As far as the trunk layers are concerned, we've got a deciduous tree here and we talked about the nuances of deciduous versus coniferous in regards to knowing whether they're ready and the things that we've got to do to have success, air layering off a significant portion of the foliage mass and air layering on the trunk itself. Now for the deciduous tree, we air layered this right at the base because it had an inferior nebari. There's no branches below the point where we formed the air layer. And what we're seeing over the course of the fall while this tree was still in leaf is that this soil mass was no longer utilizing water. But inside of that, what we're seeing if we compare and we come in close and we take a look is that the bottom of this container where it joins the native root system, we're starting to see small little roots protruding from this base, this bucket of soil that we've used for the air layer into the native soil mass which tells me that we probably have a large quantity of roots already accumulated here. We're going to come back in and we're going to remove this from the container having seen that reduction in utilization of water, having seen those new roots be produced to make sure that we can safely separate this. I'm assuming we're going to separate this today. Now when we turn our attention to the conifer, a little bit of a different situation. We talked about the fact that they have less water being moved, less sugars and starches being produced, and what we're going to see when we take a look at this root system is we're going to notice that we have the presence of a lot of root growth inside of this bag of plastic that we can see moving through the moss, but we don't have an abundance that would say this is going to be safe to separate. And beyond that idea, we know that we can use this parent material to push out water and resources to this over the spring season because of the fact that we've left this branch below the air layer to continue feeding this root system. It absolutely is still alive if this branch is still alive. So it's going to feed the next flush of growth. We're going to use that water and that resource to expand this foliage mass. We're going to let that foliage harden off and push all those sugars and starches into this root growth. And at that point, where we see all of those sugars and starches delivered in here to expand the root system, we're going to come back and separate this. And because the juniper has such a thick cuticle that can reduce transpiration, at that time, late spring, early summer, post-hardening of that first flush, it's still going to be able to adapt to the loss of this water transport because we've expanded the root system and because of the structure of the foliage mass. That'll be the ideal time to separate a larger coniferous area from an air layer because of that process. Okay, so coming back to the deciduous, which is the focus at this time of year, we notice that the buds are really starting to swell almost at the point where they're going to be leafing out. This is the very best time to be separating an air layer because it means that we're getting water movement. We've got distribution of sugars and starches to the independent areas of the tree. We've seen the indications over the fall of decreasing water utilization here. We've seen the presence of the roots growing out of the air layered container here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to pull this parent root system out of the container. We're going to pull this container off of the air layer and then we're going to inspect both of them and go about the process of properly separating the tree. So I'm going to dig in real quick. There could be some grunting, probably going to be some sweating because the hornbeam is a very hard wood. Let's see what happens when we pull this out. We can inspect the roots and then go from there. Just because we think that this root system is no longer really supporting the tree above it doesn't mean that we get to proceed with any kind of reckless disturbance. We've got to be calculated because if for whatever reason we're seeing roots coming out of the air layer but it still hasn't produced enough, then we're going to want to save this parent root system to be able to refresh the air layer and push that root growth from that trunk again. So I'm going to be trying to value and handle this parent root system with the kind of care as if I were going to be using this still for the tree. Anytime we get into these operations where we're really sort of inspecting and sort of walking this line of stepping through each process not knowing exactly what we have, we need to exercise technique and caution because if we have to lean back on this that's totally okay. If we think we're just going to discard of this immediately then we could do damage that we can't recover from and potentially lose the tree or lose portions of that tree. Just as a side note, as we're removing this sort of layer between the wall and the root system, this container has a slight inward lip on it. A lot of people say, oh I hate those pots that have those inward lips. They're so hard to get the tree out of. Now if you watch the way that I use the comma, you'll notice that I'm always taking say a 45 degree angle of approach. Let me go ahead and get that out of there so you guys can see this cleanly. I'm going to take a 45 degree angle of approach on my comma just to create a space along that rim and then I'm going to come back in and go straight down. What that does is it allows me to clear out all of the soil between the edge of the container and the root system. If we just go straight in, what we do is we create a width the blade of the comma and we aren't able to really remove a lot of the soil. You see all of this coming out. That's all the matted root against the wall of this container. This is what we've got in order to be able to safely extract this root system without pulling it apart. Just a little technical thing for general repotting that you guys ought to know. Proper comma use this is a comma proper comma use is an important part of extraction to maintain health in this parent root system. You'll also notice I've got two sizes of comma that I'm always leaning on to be doing this work. This longer comma allows me to go deeper but also say for example in the case of this root system it allows me to reach where the smaller comma can't because of the blockage and the obstruction of the container or sometimes what is the blockage or obstruction of the trunk or the roots or the branches. So having two tools that give you a lot more opportunity and freedom of movement is a really smart and really efficient way to repot with the best possible technique. One more little tangent that I want to focus on for you guys and that is watch how I'm not digging this in and dragging. I'm slowly scraping. When you slowly scrape what ends up happening is you're cleanly cutting with the serrated edge of the comma you're cleanly cutting those roots instead of grabbing them pulling them and tearing them. A lot of people dig in and they act like that's good technique but what happens is when you grab roots without this sort of cutting action of that serration you can grab it pull it and it's actually disturbing and damaging the roots inside of that root mass which causes further trauma to the tree. This is a big part of successful repotting and gives us sort of one of those areas of opportunity to have a higher level of success without damaging that root system. We don't want to do that. We don't want to do that. We don't want to go in and cut. We want to go in and we want to slowly use this serration to clean out that space and allow that serration to cut those roots as we draw it out of the container. So I know that I'm done using my comma when I see this very beautiful space between the native root system and the edge of the container all the way down to the bottom of the container. That means we've cut all matted roots off and the adherence of that root mass to the inside of that container has now been completely separated. So I should be able to freely move my comma through that soil without bringing out any more roots or any more soil from the mass. This kind of space is what tells me that this container is going to work without damage. Now that I've cleanly removed that soil I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to pick this container up and I'm going to cut any tie down wires. Now a lot of times people remove those tie down wires first and then in the action of starting to tilt this up and try to extract it they lose control of the tree or the root ball falls apart. Only after I've separated that root mass do I tilt this up and cut those tie down wires. So let's see what we have here. And I'm going to be careful of the branches. Now you'll see I've got two tie down wires here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to cut those, separate them so the tree has nothing holding it to the container. So I want to make sure that I have a good holding point on the tree where I'm not damaging the bark, I'm not damaging the branches and I've got leverage to be able to support the weight because there's a chance that when I cut these the tree and the container will separate. So when we cut these tie down wires we're going to be able to separate that root mass to the wire. Unfortunately, if we do that we leave this hook of wire that we can never fully remove and when that gets dragged through the container it catches a lot of times. When it gets removed from the root mass it can drag and tear roots. So what we like to do at Mirai is we like to cut that center point of the wire, we fold these straight to take that hook out so that we have a nice clean line of wire and then we come back and cut that point where the hook exists from the root system itself. Now that the wires have been removed I can go ahead and extract the tree. So I'm going to find that holding point here. I'm going to have one hand on the container and I'm just going to apply. Let me get to a favorable point with the branches. I'm going to apply the leverage that allows me to remove this from the container. Now if I have any points that haven't been properly cleared I'm going to have some resistance. On this back side where the container exists I've got a little resistance where I wasn't able to access it. I need to come back and just clean that up a little bit more to safely remove this from the container. So I'm going to set this back down and go back to work with my comma. So now I've come back. I've readdressed that area. Let's go back up find that leverage point. I'm again going to move the branches so that they don't experience any damage. And now we see that that root mass easily pops out of that container. So now that we're here I'm going to go ahead and just separate the root mass and then I can safely extract that root mass from the container. Now we've got an independent root system we can work from. So now before I dive into the actual air layered portion of the tree I want to come back to these roots and just start to tease and pull and dissect this native root mass with a chopstick to see what we're dealing with. We'll come back we'll remove this container after we have a little bit more information here. So I'm going to take a nice sharp chopstick you guys know how to make these now and I'm going to go ahead and pull this soil away and see the state of these roots that existed in the container. Now I'm assuming because these roots in a layer was so close to the base of the tree the base having these big ugly obnoxious roots and a really poor nebari I'm assuming some of these are moving into this system. I'm not super concerned about that I don't want to be too rough around the edge of this container but the majority of the roots that are inside of this container so I feel pretty free to go ahead and be able to tease out the extent of this native root system and what you can see here the roots are not totally dead and in fact still very alive so I want to be sure that we've got good productivity from that layer before I go ahead and separate. I'm going to tease this all the way out knowing that I may need to save these if the air layer was unsuccessful just seeing that tells me that I do need to be careful having teased out the surface layer of roots I notice that there are definitive pockets where I still have roots there are definitive pockets where I don't how many of these roots are associated with the roots generated from the air layer is something that I still am not totally aware of I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to raise this root mass up and I'm going to work from the bottom to further free up the roots to be able to dissect this from this native root system so again I'm going to find that place where I can hold I'm going to come to the bottom of this being very careful of the branches and I'm going to go ahead this feels pretty stable I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to pull apart the bottom root system by removing one singular layer of matted roots so that I have the freedom of mobility now on the bottom of the container all of those roots matt up and become this very firm thick mass so getting through this and removing this layer of matted roots is going to be a lot easier for me because I'm going to have the flexibility to be able to organize the roots from the layer that potentially have grown into this root mass now bear in mind as you guys are watching this that this is very much the way that we handle an established root mass on a deciduous tree I never would be applying this kind of mat on a deciduous tree and so this is one of those sort of opportunities to be a bit more aggressive based on the nuances and techniques that differentiate conifers from deciduous doing what we got to do ok so you can see I've got this beautiful mat that I've been able to work off of it I'm just going to go ahead and finish it off always being aware of my branches take a comma and I can just kind of separate that last little bit ok and now we see that beautiful sheet that we've taken off of the bottom that's given us a lot more flexibility to work with our root system I'm going to go ahead and discard this container and see what we have inside of it this is like that moment of truth ok so I'm going to take out the original hooks that I put in for stability to hold the container to the system I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to remove this container and see what we have inside of it this is like that moment ok now I'm going to separate these pieces that are holding that container together from the front so that we can open this up and pull this apart the moment of truth ok not too shabby not too shabby ok so we can see that we've got quite a few root tips in here really nice still has some flexibility in the root I'm going to pull this top back and I'm going to see what we have on the surface once we get down to the point where we air layered so we can inspect how the callus was formed and what kind of root production and distribution we've got inside of the tree now one of the interesting things to note here is the presence of the microbiotic activity that was associated with the root mycorrhiza is the association of this fungal activity with the root mycorrhiza is a discussion of the relationship between microbial fungi and the root system of the tree so we're going to come back and we're going to pull this back and see what happens here okay so I'm going to very gently work my way down to the point where we removed that ring of bark the phloem and the xylem okay and I'm just going to slowly work this down trying to keep this intact to the best of my ability because if we need to replace the container put this back into a bonsai pot and allow it to continue growing so that's what's happening as I'm teasing out teasing out the soil look at all of this beautiful fine rootage that we've got that's a really good sign so we're kind of having this discussion with ourselves of oh I see that it doesn't have this big matted solid root system but boy I sure do see that these roots are awfully beautiful and it's looking like where we took that ring of soil so look at that okay so this is our aluminum wire right here okay I'm just going to scrape off some of that soil mass this is our aluminum wire right there and notice how the callus from the cut rolled down and this just rolled all the way up and it bridged started to bridge right here there's a bridge right over the bottom of the plant so we're not really sure if it's still living we do have production of roots from other locations we don't have a full 360 degrees this gap here is a bummer okay and this is just education for us ah look at this that's very interesting okay so let's continue to sort of see what else we have in this system we know that we've got one area where we didn't have a lot of success so one of the interesting things and I think one of the best parts about Moriah Live is each of these projects that you see us undertake at Bonsai Moriah is going to show sort of bonsai in its truest form and that is that bonsai doesn't always do what you want it to do it's not always perfect right and air layering of deciduous trees particularly when we get to a trunk is a challenging thing to have total success with get the roots evenly distributed all of those things that we hope for it has its limitations it has its nuances and sometimes it works and sometimes it doesn't but it's a challenge now we dug into the root system and we found where we had roots properly emerging from the point that we wanted and I want you to come in here and take a look because we've got four sites that we have roots emerging from now we originally performed this air layer to get an even buttress around the entirety of the trunk and take away sort of those three the triad of roots that originally supported this tree at the base and created a very faulty base for a very beautiful canopy on a deciduous tree now we've got four points where we've got roots from that that to me although I could separate it in this quantity of roots would support this tree I want to come back and I want to get all of those areas and all of those roots to the best of my ability filled to achieve what we set out to achieve and so we're gonna go one more round with this now when I was at an apprentice in Japan mr. kumar Rheus to air layer deciduous trees to plant them on rocks and for most trident maples and really rigorous deciduous trees like a hornbeam like è an oran enabler and that actually had enough labor proved its worth but each tree they had to flower which were trees so tends to grow Japanese I think trident some forms of beach it's very common to have to go back in and open that air layer back up readdress sort of any areas where the callus was able to close the gap and now we have an opportunity to show how we continue moving the air layering process forward to get exactly what we want one of the things to pay particular attention to though is we preserve this native root system and did it the same way we treated it the same way we would treat a root system of a tree we were just utilizing that root system for repotting for this exact reason we just did not know a lesson for all of us to learn that's valuable to conserve that even though we saw a reduction here because we've got an abundance of roots here i don't have the base that i want to have to fully separate this tree i'm going to go back in and we're going to give it one more try over the course of this next growing season to see if we can't in fact perfect this root base and really establish something far better than what we started with okay so if you want to come in here i'll just show you the four different ways that we can use the root system to preserve this native root system we're going to go back in and adjust it and then we're going to put this back into a container put the container back around the air layer and continue moving it forward letting this tree do the work to give us what we need so as you can see in this area here we got the swell we got the formation of the callus but the vascular tissue on both sides were able to close the gap and sort of overwhelm the wire grow past that and you'll notice that we don't have roots in this area at all on this side of the trunk now if we cut this and separated this chances are the root system here and the root system here would move laterally and feed the branches that exist above that there also may be some form of connection from this wound up in the trunk that might prevent that i want to give it the best chance possible because it was capable of producing callus i'm assuming it's also capable of producing roots i'm going to come back in with a chisel and i'm going to re-wound this area and really clean up this callus that's formed and we'll focus on getting roots here okay i'm going to rotate the tree for you well notice here we got some nice nebari nice thick roots developing we've got some nice nebari and nice thick roots developing here and we have another gap in this area we're going to have to open that back up and see if we can't get roots distributed through there when we move to the right side of this we see that we also have another significant gap again a beautiful buttress a beautiful formation of callus and we just closed that gap it was something that was really difficult for me to able to heal over that so we're going to go ahead and rewound this area with chisels and we'll go back in with soil fill it in and re-establish the layer when we move over to here we have another one of those situations and then getting back to this original area so we have one two three four points that roots are emerging from we're going to try to get as much of a radial distribution of roots as we possibly can it's never going to be perfect and even but we can get more than four sites to create the root base that and helps it to be a quality bonsai. Okay, so what I've done is I created some space underneath each of these points where the roots emerged so that I could get the soil out and have access with a chisel. Now I'm just using a very mild radius spoon chisel to be able to go in right at the top of that callus and go actually physically into the trunk itself to create a greater distance, more separation, and with the edge, the sharp edge of the chisel, cleanly wound the callus that has formed so that I reopen it up to further callusing, further buttressing, and the production of roots. So now that I've gone all the way around sort of the hard parts that are difficult to execute, I'm gonna show you guys how I handle this on this front part so you can see how we reopen without damaging the roots that have been established, the rest of the vascular tissue, reset the system, and further give us the opportunity to perfect the air layer, okay? So I'm always gonna be using the sharp side of the chisel with sort of the spoon up against the callus and I've gotta be aware of that wire there. But I'm just gonna go ahead and I'm gonna be cutting through with the sharp side of the chisel. I'm just gonna be cutting through some of that callus to re-wound it so that I open it back up and give it the ability to produce new roots, okay? So I'm gonna do that first, just above the wire. Okay, now I wanna save that buttress as much as I possibly can. So you'll notice that I've got my chisel just sort of angled out with that angle down so that when the roots emerge, they're gonna be protruding out. And this is a really wonderful way to be able to control how the roots emerge and what they're gonna look like when they do emerge. Okay, now notice that I'm going into the trunk a little bit just to be able to further take away, hopefully, the ability and the opportunity for that callus to roll. Now, once I've done that, I can come in from the side and I can cleanly excavate underneath that really beautiful cut side. I can cleanly excavate where I've cut with that sharper chisel above it. And this allows me the opportunity to just come back and clean up that line up. So I'm just gonna clean up that line one more time in order to be able to generate, hopefully, a new location for roots to form. If I just did that, what would happen is the callus would immediately roll and bridge that gap again. I'm gonna come back with my bigger spoon chisel and I'm actually gonna take out a fairly substantial amount of vascular tissue. Again, making sure to not damage the places where my roots have originated, but really taking out some of that vascular tissue so that instead of just having that clean trunk, I actually go into it a little bit to decrease its ability to produce callus and roll. Okay, so I'm gonna be fairly aggressive about this. And this is what I've done throughout the other portions of the tree. And I'm gonna be going underneath these sites where these new roots have emerged from and connecting this removal of this tissue in this more aggressive, aggressive fashion so that we're able to set ourselves up to have the highest chance of success possible. Okay, and this is all part of cleaning off that space below those sites where the roots emerged from so that I've got the room to move and not damage what has been produced to this point. So I'm pulling out these chips to make space for soil. I don't wanna leave any of that. I want that to be clean, but notice, the girth of my trunk is here. I've actually dug into that fairly significantly to remove as much of that as I possibly can so that it can't bridge the gap. Now, if you look at the structure of the wood here, you see this white layer that exists here and you see this more sort of tan layer that exists here. This white layer is the phloem. Sort of that, there's like a very minty, sort of a really light mint-colored boundary there. That's the cambium. That's what's producing the tissue that's allowing the callus to roll. So I wanna be getting through that phloem, that's the white, the minty layer, that's the cambium, down to the tan layer, that's the xylem carrying water up in order to be able to disconnect. And you notice that I'm creating a fairly deep, fairly deep channel that I'm cutting out of this. While I'm also increasing its width from the original air layer, just to make sure that I make it more challenging for this tree to bridge that gap. And the reason that I can come back and do this kind of damage now is because I already have enough roots to support the tree. That's not the concern. The concern now is just making sure that I get radial distribution of those roots when it produces foliage this season. There's that big root. And it doesn't problem over it. I think I've still got my drums ready. So now that we've come back, we've assessed the situation, we didn't quite have exactly what we wanted. And listen, we could've separated this. We could've had four points from nabari to originate from, we could've had a space in the front where we didn't have nabari. Did we get beyond where the tree already was in terms of the production, of what we needed for this tree to be truly exceptional no we could have separated it we could have taken it we're not really willing to settle we've already gone through this much labor we've already got the beginnings of a very beautiful root system we went ahead and we did what we needed to do to get what we set out to accomplish right so we've gone through we've removed that vascular tissue down to the xylem again we've re again reformed and re-wounded that callus at an angle that's going to give us great root production what we're going to do now we're going to put the parent root system back into the container properly repot it same fundamentals for repotting as we would use for any tree where we weren't trying to air layer and we were just creating a system for the parent roots because if these parent roots aren't thriving with health then we're not going to get as much foliar production and if we don't get as much foliar production we're not going to get as much sugar and starch production so we need to treat these roots as if we were trying to get them to grow with as much sugar and starch production as we were trying to get them to grow as much robust vigor as possible so we have to do a quality repot there here we're going to reattach the container we're going to go ahead and fill in these portions very delicately chopstick in soil around the roots that we have fill this back up top dress it and then we're going to put it back outside and let it function through this year hoping and assuming that we're going to come back next year and get a better product that's going to give us exactly what we set out to accomplish being able to come back in and see where we're getting something but not exactly what we wanted is what allows us to make the adjustments that we need to make to truly execute bonsai on a higher level and this exact situation as cool as it would have been to have opened this up and have this perfectly radial distributed roots emerging from this air layer that would have been great it wouldn't have given you guys nearly as much guidance on how we handle an air layer and how we set our sights and intentions on the highest level of bonsai productivity from technique I'm really happy that this is what we got to encounter so that you guys could see this and again I want to remind you that a lot of the air layers a lot of the experiences that I had in Japan dealt with confronting these situations where it wasn't as ideal as we would like it and coming up with the technique and the solutions to be able to properly execute that next level to get that tree to that point where it truly becomes a fantastic bonsai this material deserves that kind of attention and dedication and what we just did is execute that higher level of technique to get it where we need it to go I hope this helps you guys understand the air layering process I hope it helped to see this done to come back readdress it to tease out this look for the indications timing for the the period when we come back and readdress re-establishing the air layer without damaging these roots putting it back into the container and again setting our sights and getting done what we're trying to accomplish thank you guys very much enjoy good luck with your air layering whether it's successful the first time or not you now have the techniques to come back and make it successful again and again and again until you get exactly what you want out of that this is bonsai on a higher level 
