This one, this one, and this is the most important. This is so exciting. Air layering is this technique that I think a lot of people typically tend to assume has to be applied to a tree that's already in a container. A piece of nursery stock, a field-grown piece that's already been dug, a branch off of an already bone-side tree. But one of the things that I got to see during my apprenticeship in Japan was how the Taiwan Chinese bonsai professionals utilized air layering in the field to remove shohin, super world-class, high-level shimpaku, or junipers, off of field-grown, much larger trees and take a lot of the value derived from the field and from the strength of a tree growing in the ground to create wonderful, smaller-scale, air-layered bonsai stock. When we talk about separating an air layer off of a deciduous tree, there's a few things that we have to understand. Number one, did it produce roots? Number two, did it produce roots in a radial distribution around the air-layered site? And number three, did it produce roots that are visible enough through our air-layered plastic setup, or via teasing apart or aside the soil of okodama if we used a container, to be able to facilitate and sustain the tree? As we look at this piece, each of these bags is transparent. We use sphagnum moss as the medium to cultivate the roots in. Balance of water and oxygen. And now, all of a sudden, we're able to very easily gauge that each of these pieces has radially distributed roots and has enough roots to sustain themselves. It is now time to separate these pieces as the leaves drop in that mid-to-late fall season to be able to harvest those air layers, allow them to continue to cultivate roots over the winter season in a protected greenhouse environment, and then we will be potting them up next spring. One of the most important things about creating an air layer is to make sure that they're in good condition. The most important thing about creating an air layer is choosing the correct site. Interesting movement, an interesting conglomeration of branches that can form a clump, or potentially a linear run of branching that all originates off of one side for a raft. These are things that I start to clue in on. When we wrap our air layers, we do use containers sometimes, but I prefer the clear plastic because this allows us to really take good solid stock of how much root we have produced through the air layer and whether it can sustain the tree. Now, as I just kind of pull this piece apart. What we start to notice are big, thick, vigorous roots, and a plentiful number of them on the exterior portion of this air-layered wall. The sun heats up the clear plastic, and contrary to popular belief, these roots do move towards that light because they're trying to get to that warmth. We see on the 360-degree circumference of this root mass that we have roots visible around the entirety of that base. As far as our first piece of criteria for whether we would consider separating or not right now, we do have enough roots to sustain this tree. Criteria number one, check. Even though we see that it has enough roots to sustain itself, and we see indications that those roots are distributed evenly, I need to go back in and I need to just take a look at that base because this tree will have a much easier time generating the kind of root mass that we need while still on this parent stock if we don't have that circumference covered by even distribution. So I'm going to be very, very gentle. I'm going to be very, very gentle. At this time, but I'm going to tease away this moss, and I'm going to get down to that point, which is right around the midsection of our air layer that that callus is forming from the removal of that bark. And immediately what I see is I see callus formation, and I see new roots. Now I want to be very, very gentle as I kind of work along the circumference of this, but I notice that I have beautiful callus formation all the way around this point of the tree. I have wonderful callus formation and root production around the front point of this tree. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take a look at the backside, make sure we've got that distribution. But assuming that the same consistent results are true on the backside of this, I've got that beautiful distribution and criteria number two of having that callus form roots radially distributed would be met. Now we've confirmed that we have enough roots. We've got radial distribution. As far as success, this piece living when we separate it, I have no concerns. But there's one more consideration prior to separating an air layer from a piece of motherstock. That is looking at the health and strength of the internal buds and the internal branches. And when I start to think about this, leaving the air layer on for another year if the interior branches are weak, selectively pruning the outer canopy of branching around it to prioritize that exposure, we can piggyback on the strength of the motherstock and really evolve an air layer over one more season of growth. But as I look to the interior here, I see each small branch tip has multiple buds at that tip. I see that a majority of the internal branches are alive. And this would lead me to believe that once I separate it, the interior growth has enough strength to maintain itself and take over as the priority of the canopy. Now before I separate, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to reduce some of these exterior outlying pieces to reduce the amount of energy that this tree is going to require in the spring at a point where it can compartmentalize as well as to reduce the overall weight and the sale effect. Because we are going to have a very solid tree. We're going to have a very soft, fleshy, small root system that's going to be holding this tree in the pot. I'll go about that conservative structural reduction and then separate the tree and we'll finally take it down to the greenhouse and show you how we maintain this over the course of winter. Now in separating the air layer, there really is not an advantage to leaving a significant distance of stem below the cut. I don't want to get up into the mud. I actually have some roots that are poking out of the bottom of the bag that I don't want to damage. So I'm just going to leave enough of a stub to be able to preserve those roots and give myself a little bit of structure for this tree to sit on over the course of the winter. I don't want to cut it up flush, put the pressure on this root system because we're not repotting right now. We're going to allow the tree to go through its natural process post-leaf drop that it would if we were just pruning the branches, but we're looking now to reduce and remove that piece from the parent stock. Now, I also want to be considerate of the parent stock. Are there branches? Is there water flow? Is there a region that I need to preserve in the separation of the air layer to maintain viability in that branch and help this piece continue on to potentially become a very dramatic transition of taper in another air layer that could happen below this piece, right? And so I'm thinking about all of this, but as far as this piece is concerned, I've got little buds. I've got a nice transition down here that I'm going to piggyback on. I'm going to get right up against this. I'm going to give myself a little structure for this tree to rest on when we set it in the greenhouse, not putting pressure on the root system, but also not leaving myself an excessive amount of length. Now, as I finish this cut, much like any other broadleaf deciduous cut with a saw, I want to be very careful to not tear the tissue. I want to reduce the power of each stroke, and I want to be relieving the pressure off of that tissue by holding the tree and starting to take it down. So, I'm going to go ahead and do that. I want to take support. By having that clean cut now, we have an area that can heal very effortlessly on the motherstock and hopefully take over a piece of growth that gives us another area to air layer in the future. I don't need to patch this, and as far as this piece, as long as my cut was nice and clean, I also don't need to be reducing this or cleaning this up at all. Part of the reason that we take such care in that saw and the way that we handle that separation. Now, what you'll notice is I've just put, you know, half of the container filled with three-quarter open gravel. It doesn't hold moisture, it's clean, but primarily I'm trying to weight the bottom of the root system. I don't want to chopstick, I don't want to damage the roots, okay? And I want to keep this at a level that I can continue to water this over the wintertime. So watch what I do here because I don't want to jam this into this, I don't want to destroy these roots, but I do want to try and settle this so that I hold the position to be watered. I'm just going to hold the container and the tree together. And I'm going to sort of shake this. I'm going to shake that, which brings the gravel up around that root system. It's imperfect. It's not meant to be the equivalent of chopsticking. It's just here to solidify that position so I can set this on the ground, have it hold that position over the course of the wintertime, and it's not going to fall over. Now, the last step here to preparing these for the process of winter in the greenhouse is going to be to just use some liquid cut paste, Eilean on Calismate, and give a really liberal application to this cut tip at the end here. So I'm going to get that dollop, and I'm going to go ahead and I'm just going to liberally apply it to that, making sure that I have contact with each edge and having a really nice healthy dose of it at the tip, make sure that we don't have any opportunity for the Calismate to shrink and to expose that tissue. Now that I've cleaned that up, now that I've closed that up, now that it's stable inside of this container with some weight at the bottom so it doesn't tip over, I'm going to set it in a place where I can control the amount of moisture that lands on that root system. And really focus on a balance of water and oxygen. Over the winter season, I suspect that these will continue to produce roots for another three, four weeks, and we'll have an expanded root system when we come back and we repot these as the buds swell in the spring. This coming spring, we're going to put these into bonsai containers and really start to cultivate their bonsai-able root system. But for now, we're going to pay close attention to the balance of water and oxygen, and we're going to let these recover from the separation process. And prepare for that next step as a bonsai subject. 
