what's going on everybody ah yes super tuesday babe bad we got our on the mic what's up hey Zeus producing the live stream from somewhere out in the ether and Josh sales on the detail cam main cam and third cam for all you folks Wow to can like a hundred and five degrees I think we I think we check the temp in here it's like 108 right now in this physical studio it is so hot too hot don't touch this this is a tree that I feel like you maybe have seen or has potentially maybe we've even tried to work on this I think we had this do up for a stream earlier in the year and we had like a major ice event or something and we're going to do the reporting of it but this is all guy you're a saint totally spaced it but this is one of these beautiful boxwoods much very similar and of the same origin as the Rodney Clemens boxwood that came from shanty bithy which was a bonsai facility in Connecticut right on the border of New York and Connecticut written near New Haven that was just such an instrumental back cover of bonsai today very fun fundamental incredible institution for North American bonsai and they had these these boxwoods in the field for like 60 plus years what what Rodney hypothesized as maybe the oldest and largest Kingsville boxwood that he had ever seen the one that he worked on the stream this has always been my favorite boxwood this has been my favorite boxwood because it reminds me of a true blue oak and most importantly not just any oak but it had those sort of nuanced notes of the Angel Oak in Charleston South Carolina and you can see this branch that comes out of the trunk here it's self-layered in the field it has this really nice root system it's got an abari of its own I could separate it there's no reason or way that I would because this starts to build that defining character in the tree and so as I started looking at that and we repotted it I put some in ground wire uh uh tie downs that I could bring these branches that were occupying and you can see the hole that it left moving those branches out of the way but I brought these branches down at a point in time where boxwoods are very flexible in that early spring season tied them with rubber over the top anchored into the soil beneath the sphagnum so hopefully they do root and very similarly establish themselves but with that major move now we've got to be bringing down the rest the rest of the party right we've got to kind of reset this system do some Branch selection and really kind of try to piggy back on the inspiration of this very very iconic Live Oak that exists in South Carolina and if you haven't seen the Angel Oak we've got some pictures that we'll bring up in a little bit but I'm first just going to kind of go through and start to apply structural wire this tree's been cleaned and pruned a multitude of times there are some structural flaws we're going to have to kind of address uh as to work through this but putting the structural wire on it to pull these pieces down into place this tree is all about the structure there will be secondary tertiary wire for sure that we're going to have to do to redistribute for your mass etc but as far as like pivotal steps in the process of making this tree the best possible emulation of an oak that it can be getting this structural wire dialed in taking advantage of the funky interior branches that exist not necessarily trying to abide by and this is one of the interesting things that we started experiencing when we were doing the mariah in the wilds out in the native environment as i started recognizing i'm going to go ahead and i'm just going to kind of break this branch off right here we started recognizing that when you're out in this environment and landscape and you're starting to emulate the natural form of trees they do not follow and i'm not saying that we discard of the conventions of bonsai the concepts of structural flaws etc but you start to recognize that the natural environment doesn't care about the formalities of the traditional model now there are certain horticultural components to that there's structural integrity and sustainability to those concepts of bonsai creation but there's also a a fudge ability if you will and when we start to look at the initial styling of a tree like this even if we do have some branches even if we do have some branches that are not necessarily the most structurally sound on the interior here because we do we have some pieces where there's threes and fours in certain areas i'm going to go ahead i'm going to get rid of some of these shoots along these interior junctions this is a big part of both boxwood but also a big part of the apical nutrition is just getting copious quantities of vigorous interior shoots occurring on literally every species of tree that we're working with on junipers all of our broad leaves are budding back very profusely with the apical nutrition anyways i'm just going to start to work this but i want to be very clear that if you see branchings with threes etc if it is not forming an immediate structural flaw this will not be the styling in which i'll be engaging necessarily with fixing you know or adjusting or removing threes now if there's a structural flaw i'm going to have to confront those areas and there are a few areas some swellings taking place right in here maybe where we've got a little bit of a knot and whatnot and we're going to have to reconcile things but i like the informality of this piece i like the branches coming from odd areas overlapping other branches if you look in here let me just show you this josh sales go ahead and bring me in tight there jesus okay you see this piece it comes from the inside here it comes between this crotch here this is a pivotal branch in the design of the tree because we dropped everything down and secured it into the in-ground environment this piece is one of the only pieces on this side of the tree that has any sort of merit or branching to occupy some of that space that informality would be an automatic removal of a traditional or a a fundamental bone size styling and yet in this styling we're not going to be touching it okay so i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to start with some of the the structural wire and just tearing off this piece now that we actually have a branch we always want to see what is our threshold for bending pretty flexible right now right obviously they will tear their living tissue has solidified greatly in terms of its adherence to that central uh that central piece of tissue you see it doesn't strip very easily these are all good indications that allow us to recognize that we can really rock out let's go ahead and see if we can stand up these pieces that are in the ground and let's go ahead and see if we can drop these pieces that are above these pieces in ground and between the two of them we should close this gap and start to establish a very beautiful uh understanding of this interaction of these branches dropping down on the live oak up and out up and out and then the weight down down down down and then boom hit the ground and then you come back up and that's really where we're trying to execute some concepts of inspiration from that pivotal live oak the angel oak in south carolina okay so we're just going to go ahead and start right off the bat right off the bottom to see if we can get it some upward orientation now i've got these tie downs and i've got a root system that i want to be very very careful of but i'm going to use the tie down as a little bit of a securing mechanism here right because i'm going to go between the branch and the wire that is holding it in ground in order to be able to secure my four gauge right there where i've inserted it yeah perfect okay so i've got this rubber pad here i've got my my steel wire i went between the steel wire and the wood i'm holding it but there's a couple things i have to be careful of down here between the branches and the wire that is holding it in ground in order to be able to secure wire right there so that way even if my foregauge starts to flex because the root system is not dense enough to necessarily support it I've got that steel wire which is taught and holding this piece really embedded in the ground to be able to support and secure the foregauge knowing that there might be some force applied to it that could potentially cause it to do some damage in the roots and anytime that we insert a wire into the root system of a tree we have to be absolutely accurate with the way that we utilize that piece in order to make sure that it doesn't just sweep through our containerized environment and cause tremendous damage to the finer roots now if you've ever repotted a boxwood you know that box would have sort of that really fleshy soft root system so it goes without saying that we've got to be on point with the way that we handle that wire going into the soil system I want to go deep I want to give myself that anchor that stops that wire from moving and I want to try and hit some sort of solid root system that can hold it if I don't have that root system I've got to be even more accurate with my application of hands trying to find some sort of capacity to anchor and this is the most challenging way when we start wiring you know very rarely do you ever see me anchor a wire into the soil system of a tree because historically we're kind of working on trees that have trunk shape we're working on trees that don't necessarily need that kind of fundamental initiation of trunk creation where we would go ahead and find it to be fruitful or favorable to anchor into the soil but because we've pulled these branches down in order to emulate that Live Oak style this is where we get to pull on some techniques that aren't historically used in this fashion but definitely have similar techniques to fundamental bonsai application to be able to execute the aesthetic okay so I'm going to carry this up into here I'm working with natural bins natural bins on each piece here to try and follow the boxwood because we do recognize yes they're flexible until they break once they break there's really no saving a broken boxwood branch they don't respond to that well they don't take that kind of breakage well in fact in the tree sale the the Oregon White Oak inspired shanty bithy Kingsville boxwood is going to be in the tree sale which is really both exciting and also bittersweet for me because I love that but we've got so many exciting boxwoods now that it's time to pass that one on so that one will be photographed tomorrow and we'll be a part of that okay just keep working here for a moment cool okay now when I'm getting and this is true anytime that you put movement into a trunk where you anchor into the soil you really got to decide how far out am I going to carry my wire right because if you stop your wire short when you're trying to create trunk movement or if you if you haven't gotten to a point where you have the ability to pass off that transition that can be a real limitation to the kind of creative capacity you have inside of that piece and I'm going to go ahead and go big on this four gauge yes nice cool okay so I want to be sure go ahead and come in tight here for me Josh I want to be sure that when I get that four gauge right I'm getting on to smaller branches my thicker branches here I certainly don't want to hop in front of this crotch because I'll split this right off of that Center I've got a thinner branch here and I'm dealing with four gauge of course I want to stop this short of course I want to transition but my four gauge is the acting structural piece now notice how I take that branch to the wire okay let me show you that again I've got this thinner branch here you see that space I'm going to take that branch to the wire and I'm going to go ahead and tighten that wire around that branch that I've taken to that wire okay that's how I close that gap when I'm dealing with those thinner pieces now I can come back now I can go ahead boom remove that okay and in removing that now I have that upward orientation now let me show you what this looks like when we sort of spin this piece around because now you're starting to see those branches coming up out of the ground right they're no longer oriented downwards we've got a couple more pieces that we want to bring up and then we can start to arrange these in terms of secondary tertiary just getting these things up they go down down down and then boom just that tip comes up and acts like that same up out up out kind of behavior that's what we're aspiring to achieve as we continue to work on this application that's going to give us control of these things, okay? So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to get this dialed in, and then I'm going to move over to the secondary piece. Once I have these pieces off the ground, then I can start to work on the aerial pieces coming down to meet these branches that kind of create both the defining branching system, but also the defining character, if you will, right? We talk about satiata as a defining branch, but you have this notion of a character branch that gives the tree that unique piece of interest. This is probably not going to be the longest foliar mass from the symmetrical canopy on the tree, but it certainly is going to be the branching system that gives the greatest representation of nature and miniature and starts to really emulate that live oak style. So this is a character branch. If we don't have these, we don't have an emulation of the angel oak, okay? I'll open it up to questions as I kind of work on this structural piece, see where we're at. Gary's got a question. When's the last time you've had a tree branch? When's the last time you've had a tree branch? When's the too late to do this work on broadleaf evergreens in North America? Yeah, so the last time that we talked, and the entire month of August is dedicated, we call this the broadleaf bonanza this year. We're dedicating ourselves to these broadleaf evergreens because again, last time that we handled the boxwood and we did the branch elimination, we said, you know, doing this kind of work is something we can do on broadleaf evergreens because it takes them just a little bit while longer, especially if you're having a cold spring, which a lot of North America did. It's given way to a tremendously hot summer, which all of us, I think, you know, hold our breath each summer as things get hotter and hotter. But if you're having a long spring, it means that it's going to take these trees longer and longer to harden off. So what is the time frame? What is the time limit? How late can you go? I think we're looking, you know, sort of that August as the cutoff for our broadleaf evergreen. As well as a transition point between foyer and vascular growth. Now, when I broke that branch off and we talk about broadleaf evergreens moving a lower quantity of water in terms of their water mobility is less than their broadleaf deciduous counterparts. So when we start to look at that lower water mobility, that means that it takes broadleaf evergreens longer to get to a point of energy positive. It takes broadleaf evergreens. Longer to even out that sugar starch distribution across the roots, trunk, branching and foyer mass of the tree. And that's really where we're looking at that connection point of that tissue, its ability to continue the cambium to separate from the xylem. Because if it's still slippery, then that means that we're still very much in a in a foyer production phase. Now, I'm not saying that we want to have a slippery cambial layer on top of a highly hydrated central core. Of xylem and that that is any way a desirable or identifiable metric for whether or not you have the ability to work these. But that certainly does give us an indication of whether the tree has hardened off, quote unquote, gotten back into that energy positive and has started to create the kind of system that would allow us to work on the tree or not. I still felt like we had some malleability in the in the cambial connection to the xylem. It wasn't totally solidified. It wasn't totally stable, but it was relatively stable and certainly far more stable than our work that we did on the original boxwood stone planting. Okay. And so what that tells me is that we're in transition. But as long as I have that malleability, I have the opportunity to continue working these trees. Knowing that they're still in that foyer growth phase. Now, I don't expect boxwood to produce a tremendous amount of growth for the rest of the year. Right. We are definitely at that point. We are definitely at that tipping point in August where we start to see daylight length shifting. How do we know that? We know it because our ponderosa pines start to shed their third year needles. We know it because this is when we can go back in and do that late summer pruning on a Japanese black pine and not get a second flush. There's a lot of indications to this time of year. We're entering the phase where our dug firs are no longer handleable. We're entering the phase where our coastal redwoods are not prunable. Like we're right around the corner from that. We're in that sort of fall shift and species really taking on a different sort of behavior where we have to change our conduct to be able to elicit a positive, a very positive response. And so when we start to think about that, that is where our lowest water mobility trees start to gain some of their greatest workability. Right. Because where other trees that are higher water mobility are starting to take on a shift of behavior. Our lower water mobility. Our water mobility are just getting to that point of energy positive. Right. And that's what we see with our broadleaf evergreen. Very, very thick, rigid leaves. Very, very thick cuticle. That's what allows them to exist inside of the cold, the hot and the drought ridden environments where broadleaf evergreen species really thrive. And as a result, we do see this work being capable of being carried out on broadleaf evergreen far. I would say. Far later into the year. And I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to use just a little guy wire. I've got some got some stubs here and this one's going to be pretty stubborn unless I get a guy wire. I don't think the four gauge is going to hold boxwood so rigid, so incredibly rigid in terms of its wood. So let me go ahead and set this up. And that's a 414. That's too thick. That's too thick. That's too thick. That's too thick. That's too thick. Anyways, hopefully that answers your question, Gary. We're nearing the end of it for sure. But we're still we're still at that point because we still see that vascular malleability. Okay. Treebeard Steve, are tonight's lessons also applicable to other species of boxes? Yes. Yes. As a broadleaf evergreen. This tonight's discussions are definitely applicable to other species of boxes. Mark's up next. I have a boxwood that I cut back to any interior shoot with confidence and have it live from that location. I have a boxwood, not a Kingsville, that I cut back to and the shoot died. So I think that depends on health of the tree, foyer mass of the tree. Because here's the thing, right? What I see with a lot of boxwoods is I see a lot of people pruning their boxwoods, heavily reducing their boxwoods before their boxwoods have ever really hulked out and gotten super strong. And any time that you have a tree and you say, oh, my gosh, it's, you know, it's a maple. They can take anything. Or, you know, you can prune them at will and they'll push out. That's the mentality that gets you in trouble. Right? That mentality gets you in deep, deep trouble. And I see that with boxwood all the time. It's like this, you know, this species that's thought to be, let me just see if I can get this real quick. It's like this species that's thought to be, you know, sort of bulletproof in terms of its behavior as a bonsai. But it's not. It's not. And any species, when you start to tap into the highest level of its handling as a bonsai, you start to recognize, to achieve that higher level of aesthetic, you've got to be nailing the timing. You've got to be thinking about the physiology and the horticulture. You've got to be doing your homework to max out. To max out, I'm just pushing this down farther, which is going to extend. Beautiful. I love this. Okay? It's so good. Check that out. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Okay? You've got to be doing your homework. You've got to be cultivating a healthy tree. So if you're sitting in the mediocre range of bonsai action and activity and you're like, dude, these are boxwoods, man. You just crush them. You can just wire them. You can wire them at any time. Prune them however you want. And it's not built up and it's not strong and it's not healthy and you cut back to a bud in the interior, of course it's going to die. The tree has to have a critical mass of energy to be able to respond to any action that we perform. The timing's got to be right. The execution's got to be right. The strength and energy distribution's got to be right or else the tree is going to suffer. Okay? So from that perspective, maybe that answers your question. Can you cut back to any bud on the interior? Not necessarily. If you have a healthy, strong tree, healthy, strong bud. That has access to light and we're reducing other parts of the tree at the same time. Come back to that 70% mode that we talked about. Where you say, listen, any action that you're going to perform that's going to heavily reduce the photosynthetic mass of the tree. I'm going to decandle a pine. I'm going to partially defoliate a broadleaf deciduous tree. I'm going to reduce the elongating shoots on my juniper. If you're not performing that major reductive action to at least 70% of the tree. The pieces that you perform that reduction to are definitely going to get weaker and potentially be shed by the tree. So if you're like, man, I've got this great boxwood and I'm going to cut this one back to an interior branch. And you think that that branch is going to grow and keep up with the rest of the tree. That's not what happens. That's a dead branch. Because the tree says, oh, all of your photosynthetic sugar making battery's gone. There's no more draw of water from transpiration on the leaf mass. I've got the rest of the canopy to do that. Yeah, I'm good, right? I'm good. But if we cut back the whole thing, and this is where Peter Warren talked about this with the Japanese maple. You want to be applying these concepts of reduction. You want to be applying these concepts of scale and development on broadleaf trees. And this is evergreen or deciduous to as broad an amount of the canopy as possible. Now, that doesn't mean that we can't come back and make adjustments. Doesn't mean that we can't in the future eliminate big branches. Doesn't mean that. Doesn't mean we can't in the future develop branches where we lost something, need something, need that branch to continue to evolve. But we do have to give that branch energy and the capacity. Which means we're partially defoliating and pruning other parts of the tree. And we're letting that branch grow. I've got a boxwood I want to cut back to an interior branch. Okay, when I heavily prune the rest of the canopy, I'm going to be allowing that piece to grow unpruned. To gain the strength. To gain the momentum. To build that interior bud. Right? So that it starts to have that foliar mass. So that it starts to have that momentum. And maybe it takes two or three years to prepare an interior bud to become a branch that you can cut back to. And make that transition without it dying off. That would be very strategic, sound, and savvy execution of bonsai. Okay? Alright, I got these two bottom pieces. And again, let me just go ahead and give you that. Right? They were hanging down. They were actually pointing down below the container. Oh, I love this. I love this. Look at those little trees coming up. Now they will definitely... Good. Yes. Now they will definitely be detail wired. And it's almost got a little bit of that raft vibe like we had on the hornbeam. Which again is doing very great. We'll probably circle back to that in the spring. We thought we were going to do it this spring. And it didn't quite work out just in terms of timing. And the roots that we wanted to see on the piece that was being turned into a raft. But there are definitely roots. And it is definitely evolving over the course of this year. But it's got a little bit of that vibe. But not that vibe. Because we want that branch coming up. That's the vibe that we're looking for. That's the live oak style. And as I kind of work into this, Jesus, let's go ahead and let's just take a little bit of a look at the live oak style that we're talking about. We put together some inspirational images of the angel oak that Jesus has queued up while I'm wiring these out. And this should give you a much better impression of what we're trying to accomplish. Go ahead and bring us into that first image. This is a beautiful illustration of the live oak. of the overall tree's structure as it exists. Now notice all of these branches on both sides of the tree dropping down, but notice the upright branches in the middle and upper canopy of the tree. Okay, this is the diversity that I saw in terms of branch shape, origination, and the potential when I first, this was the first boxwood I've ever fallen in love with because I saw this tree, the angel oak, and I saw the structure having just a total mirror reflection of nature and miniature to be able to start to work on this. And when we repotted, we could set up that internal infrastructure to be able to put the guy wires in place that allowed us to truly take that risk because it is a risk, boxwood is brittle, to bend those branches down. Now this is a fantastic illustration of this up and out style that obtains this weight and length. Look at the lower right corner of that image where the branch dives into the ground. I mean, this is exactly what we're trying to emulate. Now look at the curvature of the base of the tree, the trunk, and the proportions to the length of the branch and the canopy. Okay, go ahead and bring us back into studio here, Jesus. Okay, now take a look, now take a look at this, right? Look at that, look at that. That's the tree, that's the angel oak. It's like, it's uncanny, it's crazy. Now is, is, is one side better than the other? This is what we really, and this has some, there's some serious mojo over here too. There's some serious mojo. I don't know how accurate the drop of these is. It's a little bit more of a diagonal drop like we see over in this. But I do think that we can, in the small containerized environment, utilize this to start to begin to tease out that aesthetic. Maybe they soften over time once we release those guy wires, et cetera. But definitely sort of inspired by that elongated branching, system and how that branching system continues to evolve over the course of time. So let me just, let me just back into this, right? Because we've talked about this in a number of different ways on conifers. You have this aesthetic sense of age that exists in conifers, greater degree of asymmetry, right? The apex farther off center, the branches farther away. On a juniper, we have the live vein. On a pine, we've got the base that supports that asymmetry. The farther away we go, the smaller and smaller, the greater the space, right? The farther off of that asymmetrical system, the apex gets, and that's how we achieve that increased 1,000, 2,000, 3,000 years of age, okay? When we start to talk about the broadleaf concept, this notion of up and out, up and out, up and out, you see these acute crotches. You see this narrow silhouette. You see this rigidity in the structure of young broadleaf trees, okay? We see this in aspens. We see this in stewardias. We see this in all, all manner of young broadleaf trees. But as a broadleaf, and obviously, there are certain broadleaf trees that are much longer lived than others, right? You say the flowering cherries of Japan kind of max out at 80 years and start their decline of branch drop. They replant younger trees around them, and eventually, they replace them, right? So we have these timeframes for longevity in the native environment before they reproduce, before they sort of shoot their wad of their stored energy with all this flowering or fruit production, and then they head the other way. Longstanding trees, these oaks, these quercus, these beeches, these faggots, these sycamores, these platanus, right, they come up and out, up and out, and in youth, they're very rigid. They're very here, right? But over the course of time, they continue expanding, and you get this kind of big, expansive, dropping, branching system that is absolutely phenomenal, and we start to see this as a far degree of age representation in the broadleaf form, right? Now, I don't like this big, domed-out canopy. Although it is accurate, it's not necessarily ancient or doesn't have the sense of antiquity that I would love for this tree to have. That's what we have to tackle as we continue to massage and manicure the positions of these branches to continue to execute this aesthetic that we're aspiring to. I'm gonna continue to wire as I continue to answer questions. Repi has a question. Any hope of removing or ginning some of the branches at the top of the canopy to make it look like a tree? Does it look any more ancient, considering the observations from Dan Robinson that the top is what truly, what dies first in truly ancient trees? So, I think, you know, we were on the same page there, Rafi, right? Because I just kind of dialogued about that before we read your question, but you had asked that question before I just went on that discussion of what it looks like to represent age in the broadleaf form. And yeah, I think the big, green ball is not the greatest representation of age. Now, Dan Robinson, you know, when you start to talk about Dan's approach and you start to talk about Dan's ethos, that's applied to coniferous trees primarily. Does Dan have a few Japanese maple that have been there for a long time? Absolutely. Are they carved to look almost like a conifer as opposed to a broadleaf tree? Yeah, yeah. You know, they're not necessarily capturing the broadleaf form in all of its glory and it's not just a representation of age. That's not to discredit the work by any stretch of the imagination. The aesthetic of Dan's broadleaf trees is something truly unique and something that you don't see anywhere else. And so I find value in it nevertheless, but I don't know that it is the pinnacle of accuracy and representation of age. And I don't think that a broadleaf, I think a broadleaf shows asymmetry in its canopy, but I don't necessarily think that a broadleaf's age is completely reflected by the state of that canopy. We do need some more space. We will be opening up a little bit more space and that is certainly something that will enhance the breaking up of that very symmetrical crown at the top of this tree. But I think the real age comes from the shape of those branches having that significant up, out, up, out, and then the weight causing them to drop. That's my proposal to you of representation of age in broadleaf form over the, you know, test of time. Now, there's one more, there's one more very significant representation of age in my mind, and that comes from the creation of hollows, right? The creation of hollows, because you say, okay, well, deadwood in a pine, deadwood in a juniper are expressions of age, the remnants of what was. And we talk about cultivating the remnants of what was, waiting for them to develop that proportional scale and size, and then suddenly removing those pieces and leaving behind that skeletal remnant, right? Well, when we start to talk about that skeletal remnant in a broadleaf tree, that skeletal remnant does not have the resin content to ever last in this canopy over the course of time. So that skeletal remnant is the lack of that presence of tissue or the void that's created when that piece of tissue deteriorates, declines, and eventually disappears, right? And the, the, the spooky, the, you know, aspen from the backcountry boys that we did, that we've worked on a couple of times on the stream. That tree recently just lost a tremendous amount of deadwood in the very, or yeah, deadwood in terms of protruding deadwood or a gin on the front of the tree. Now I was watering it and I saw this gin and then I, and then I sprayed it with water and the gin fell off and fell onto the ground. And I was like, oh, huh. Aspen lost a piece of deadwood. And I went and I looked at where it fell out and guess what's in the place where that gin was? A giant hole. Negative space becomes that execution of age, the lack of deadwood, the void created by the deterioration of that deadwood as a demonstration of age, right? So when we start to look at some of those things, we've got to recognize that there is a difference and there is a situation. And I was like, oh, huh. Aspen lost a piece of deadwood. And I went and I looked at where that gin was. And I was like, oh, huh. Aspen lost a piece of deadwood. And I looked at a style and a consideration to the creation of these components of age as it's represented in these different genres of trees, right? And the broadleaf and coniferous model are so incredibly different in their representation of age through that same concept of asymmetry, right? Same concept of asymmetry. We want informal billows. We want asymmetrical informal billows. But we're not looking to try and push this away. We're not looking to try and push this away. We're not looking to try and push the apex off center of this tree more and more and more. That's not how a broadleaf behaves. We are, however, looking to try and emulate some of that more ancient branching or older branching that has accumulated that weight, that has carried that weight, that has dropped down. That has rooted as a result of that weight that has once again with the support of the ground started growing upwards against the ground and it returned average officially. This is going to that weight with the support of the ground. This is one of the major, major movements in the broadleaf form. Okay, so as I'm working on these pieces here, I'm dropping down and then I'm coming back up and then I'm dropping down and then I'm coming back up and that kind of undulation really starts to give rise to that sense of aesthetic and I love what's happening here. I think this is so incredibly fun. Mark's got a question, no paper wrapping for the copper today? No paper wrapping for the copper because we've got a very thick bark on the boxwood. Now if we were doing this earlier, I would say my work on the boxwood planted on the stone earlier this month was probably right on the verge of needing a paper wrap to take care of the tissue, to pad, to reduce the abrasiveness. There were a few scrapes and scratches as I was working on these pieces here, but I think this is a great opportunity to work on these pieces here, but I think this is a great opportunity to wiring that that felt like, okay, I'm towing the line of where we need to be considerate of the tree and protective of, you know, this highly water conductive tissue that's still a little soft and supple. This one has a lot more rigidity. This one has a lot more stability. I don't feel like I need the paper wrap on this one, so I'm confidently applying far greater amounts of structural wire, right? If you go back to the piece on the stone, that was a branch selection stream where we talked about branch removal and we started that structural wiring, I've actually been letting that tree's vascular system stabilize before I continue that wiring process. It is not finished yet after that work. This piece right here, I have no qualms. I have no qualms of doing the work on. Now some of these pieces I feel like can drop down and can continue to share in some of that real interest. I'm going to show you how to anchor a little bit of a guy wire to the base of this, but let me just finish my thought here in terms of this last piece of 8 gauge. Now I'm oscillating here in the structure of this on these big long branches between 4, 6, and 8. I'm just simply focused on structural lines right now. That's really where, much like with a conifer, that's really where the bread is buttered in terms of design execution. The secondary tertiary I will come back to. I will not be wiring out all secondary tertiary branches. When we deal with the broadleaf form and wiring, we do not want to wire it like a conifer. We don't wire pads, we don't wire every branch, we don't flatten them out. We choose the pieces that we need to wire to open up a condensed and compressed pad. So we take this branch and we open it up here. We move two branches that are stacked on top of each other into their own light, or we create this kind of structural notion of shape and style. That is really where the criteria for wiring a broadleaf tree has to be different than a coniferous tree. It has to be different. Now there are some broadleaf trees, right? We've seen the creation of the linden, where we wired a majority of the branches on that linden. That's what that tree demanded at that point in time for that structure, right? But that is not necessarily how I would handle every broadleaf tree that I'm styling or wiring as a bonsai. And I certainly will not be wiring the entirety or even the majority of the secondary tertiary branches on this tree. I just need to be opening this up so that we get that branching system. And here's a perfect example. Go ahead and pan over here. Bring me back in tight, Jesus. Okay, perfect example right here. Stacked on top of this. Stacked on top of each other. Here's my two-dimensional, right? There it is. You can see. Okay, I'm going to bring this over into here, okay? And I'm probably going to bring this up and into here. And I'm going to create this type of spread. I've got a little branch over here so that I have even spacing between this branch and this branch and between this branch and this branch. I want that even spacing so that they have that same distribution of positive and negative space inside of that positive pad formation, okay? And that's really where my criteria for wiring this is going to ultimately come into play. Ultimately be sourced when we come back to that secondary tertiary model. The big lift on this, though, is all about the structure. All right, Joe's up next. Raising the branches in the ground up, would this occupy the empty space, making the branch coming out of the strange location unnecessary? Well, let me show you. Let me show you where we're at here, okay? So here's the front. You see those coming up. The branch coming out of the awkward areas, right? Here's the front. You see those coming up. The branch coming out of the awkward areas, right? Right here. Right here. You see how much that fits in there. Now, I haven't wired the secondary tertiaries. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to start to fan these out. But that actually sits inside of a very special, very beautiful area. Now, the awkward one is this really sparse piece right here, right? It's just a tip. You literally just see that little tip on it, and then it's a big, long branch line. But there's tons of buds on the interior. Now, look at the upper canopy on the right side, how it looks like the whole canopy is like up like this because we've taken all the branches down, and now there's this great chasm. We have to continue to close that. But I also have this area over here in this layered piece, which I've got to be both very careful of because this is a little bit delicate, as well as probably reduce some of the significant density that exists over here and start to really play on how these branches work through the process. And I've got this piece in the back here that feels like, ooh, let's go ahead and get this piece down. Let's work on that move next, and that'll kind of help transition us around the backside of the tree. I want to get all the way through the apex in terms of branch elimination and wire placement structurally this evening. So I'm kind of, I'm hustling a little bit to make sure that we can get through this process and we can see the fruits of our labor. Now, whenever we're trying to work on a piece like this, I'm always looking for some sort of crotch. Bring me in tight here, Jesus. Okay, now my crotch is right here between these two branches. You see that? Go ahead and bring me into that tight cam. Yep. That crotch right there. Now, I know if I wire over the top of that crotch, I have the ability to use a guy wire through that crotch. And I've got a really beautiful trunk base right here where I've got two roots that are forked, and I've got a space between those two roots. If I've got the room, I can come in behind this with a piece of thicker wire. I can stick my guy wire loop through that little butt crack right there, catch it with that wire, and I can pull against the backside of these roots. All right. So that's what I'm going to work on. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to go with an eight gauge just to, actually, I'm going to go with the six gauge just to get through that, as well as the rigidity to hold that. Now I'm going to do what I historically do, which is I'm going to work harden my wire. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to put that hook on it. I'm going to grab it with my wire cutters. I'm going to grab it with my pliers, and I'm going to rotate this piece to work harden this. This is a piece of six gauge. I'm going to be putting quite a bit of torque on it. I'm also going to be wiring those branches and bending them, which can apply a lot of pressure. Whew. That is hard. That is tough. Okay. So I want to make sure that this is very, very rigid so that it can't get pulled through that crack in the roots. Now I'm going to cut one flush, and I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to cut the other one at a nice, sharp angle so that I've got, see that tip on that right there? That's going to help me move through the root system. Hopefully, that also helps me catch the guy wire. Okay. Now I'm going to grab a piece of 16 here that's going to give me the length. Okay. I'm going to take this 16, and I'm going to fold it in now. Watch closely. Okay. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to put this, go ahead and bring me in tight there, Jesus. Yep. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to put this right on the inside of this, and just see, can I get through that area? And I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to come in from the backside here. Just see if I can find that space to get through that structure in the root. Right here? Yep. Yep. Good. Okay. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. Okay. And let me see, this is pretty thick root right here. I'm wondering, let me just see if I can tease. Yes, there is space in there. Okay. There's my space right there. So I'm going to clean out that space. I'm going to put my wire into that space. There it is. And I'm going to drive my, there we go. I'm going to drive my six gauge right in there. Okay. Take my pliers, push that through. I'm just going to pull this out of the way so that I can work this really quickly. My apologies, but I just have to get this anchored. Okay. All right. So you see my, almost like my dowel of, of copper wire there. Now look at what I got. Look at what I got. I got a taut guy wire that's disguised in there. Okay. That's a super sweet little technique for you to tuck into your little arsenal of how to handle broadleaf trees. Because if you wrap around this, you're going to get a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a mess. It's going to girdle the root. You see so many people tie to a thick root and then you have crappy tubing and it looks even worse, right? But this is a really invisible way to do a completely minimal amount of damage and have a maximum amount of impact. Now I'm going to set this on the crotch right there. I'm going to come back and I'm just going to go with a six gauge because now I don't have to worry about trying to move the mega structure of the tree. I'm just moving the secondaries here. Okay. Now it's still six gauge. Six gauge is nothing to sneeze at when we're wiring a really, really long branch like this, because you've got so much play in the branch based on the fact that we're all the way out here at the edge. Okay. But watch how I handle this shoulder right here. And I'm going to keep my arm up at an awkward position so that I can show this. See how I flirted that shoulder forward right there. See how I brought the wire forward. I brought the wire forward and let me just get this lined up. I brought the wire forward so that I could catch that. Okay. If my six gauge is all the way back here, then my guy wire has to run along that branch line right there. And it's almost impossible to get it to slide along that piece when we're guiding it. Okay. So I slide that forward. I'm going to support this piece here. And then that allows me to go ahead and anchor this piece over into this area right here. Okay. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to carry this out this branch a little ways in terms of several turns, hopefully to a point that gives me stability. Let me go ahead and do the same thing here. I'm going to carry this out. The way that we handle structural wire, how do you get it started? How do you anchor that to the shoulder appropriately? Most people anchor their shoulders too far back, touching the shoulder with the top of your wire right there. Okay. Now, now that I'm here, watch how I do this. Okay. I'm going to put my plier on the piece that's pinched right now. I'm going to lower my branch. Okay. See how I'm using that. See how I'm using my plier to pull. Now don't let go of this. Okay. Because we don't want it to slide back where it's anchored at the base. But now crossing those up, I have the ability to tighten. Now I can't tighten too much because there's no give. This wire isn't sliding that comes up and runs along the bottom of that. Okay. So much like we utilize the pliers as a lever device when we're bending conifers, we have the same lever device as we're bending broadleaf here. Okay. And I can always push down lever that out and then tighten those pieces together. All right. That's how we handle that situation. When we're tying here, there's no way to tie at the base. There's no way to tie at the base. It's embedded in the root system of the tree. Okay. I mean, this is rock solid though. There is, there is no mobility. Now I can come back in. I can cut that eight gauge. Nice and clean or six gauge. I guess I work hard in the six gauge. Okay. And now I've got this beautiful downward branch that again plays into this whole concept of this Live Oak Angel Oak style, right? These techniques, listen, we could spend 20 years together. I'll continue to have more tricks and more examples of how we utilize engineering to hide your work in the mechanics of bonsai. There is a unlimited, infinite number of ways to technically improve your work. Bonsai mastery is when you start developing those techniques that are custom to those situations to maximize function and aesthetics yourself. That's what you should all be aspiring to get to that. That is, that is bonsai on the next level. And again, because we're doing so much bonsai at Mirai because bonsai is my profession and career, because I studied with, you know, the guy that's known as the magician, but let's just be really honest. One of the most profound engineers in the bonsai. Art form, right? Artists, yes. Artistry driven by engineering beyond a shadow of a doubt. Maybe engineering is the root of Mr. Kimura's artistry because he was able to do things engineering wise that empowered him to explore aesthetics that other people didn't have a chance, didn't have a prayer of executing. Okay. These types of moments where we develop these techniques, these are what allow you to continue to expand and push the envelope of your potential aesthetic opportunities inside of this creative endeavor. Kathy has a question. She thinks she understands how you anchored the branches, but I was hoping you could clarify in case she's not thinking about it right. How I anchored the branch? The ones that I think that are rooted, the ones that you anchored into the soil. Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh. We have a perfect shot right here. Perfect shot. Go ahead and pan over for me. Yeah. Bring me in. Oh, you got it. Okay. You see that steel wire right there. You see the rubber over the top. The wires are underneath. They're connected. I got two wires coming out of this hole. I've got two wires coming out of this hole. So they are playing on each other to hold these branches down. Let me go ahead and just cut that nice and clean. Right. I don't need that tail anymore, but now you see the rubber, you see how they're held and you see how they're embedded in the soil system, right? I didn't bury them, but I embedded them so that they have that contact point and hopefully they root on their own. Okay. Mark's up next. Can you walk us through when it was repotted, when it might be repotted again with this kind of work? Okay. So this tree was repotted this past spring. So it was repotted in like March. And again, we were going to do the repotting of this tree because I wanted to show you that anchoring of those branches. And then we had, I believe, like some massive cold event. We might've even lost power here or something happened that prevented us from being able to do that stream, which was unfortunate. But now we get to come back and we get to perform this work. Now, because it was repotted this spring, we want to be pretty careful about how much we remove. Now, this is not the first potting on this tree. This was the second potting on this tree. So we were able to remove a significant amount of field soil. We were able to improve the quality of the root system dramatically, and we were really able to position the tree. It had a slight angle change. I mean, just the slightest angle change, it made a notable improvement in the design of the tree. The big reason that we went ahead and repotted is this tree was almost impossible to water. It was so jammed full of roots. And the native field soil that it came out of from the in-ground environment at Shanty Bithy was very, very, very dense clay. And so we wanted to go ahead and start to work on freeing the tree of that extensive amount of clay that we left in the first time we repotted. In fact, I feel like, no, I guess that was the Oregon white oak boxwood. I was going to say, on the beginner series with Mr. Josh Sales here, I was actually repotting a Kingsville boxwood while he was repotting his Taxus. And I was using the boxwood to show him the steps. That was the Oregon white oak emulation boxwood, which will be in the tree sale. But I thought it might have been this, and I'm incorrect. It is not this tree. Next, a few questions are all kind of similar, but we'll hit them one at a time here. Shoheen Twig, aka Shoheen Stig, I guess. What's the pot? Thoughts on glazed versus unglazed for broadleaf evergreen? Rectangle-ish pot for this tree for life? Yeah, so pot. Very cheap imported pot. Haven't found a better match for this tree. And I mean, I've tried Tambenda. I've tried Mianramandi. I've tried Gulick Slabs. I've tried imported Japanese. I have yet to find a better match than this very cheap and quasi-ugly red glazed container that was bought probably at a swap meet by Randy Knight. And somehow I took it from him. And this was the only pot that I had that this tree would fit in. And then over the course of time, it's sort of, they've sort of grown together. They've like become one, you know, in terms of the aesthetic. Is this going to be the aesthetic for life? I hope not. But you know, it's one of these things where the right size, the right shape, the right details of the indented corner, the green against the red, just all of these things are right. The size is pretty right. I think it could have a slightly larger pot. And, and probably pull off the dropping branch aesthetic a little bit better. But we're not, you know, we've put it in bigger pots during the repotting process. We've really explored the aesthetic a lot. And this is still, this was still the winner. And so currently this is, this is where we're at. For life, I hope not. But you know, it may be one of these odd couples where a higher quality pot doesn't necessarily mean a higher quality composition. I've got a massive Sitka spruce that's in an incredibly cheap pot that has a similar conundrum, right? Just this, this horrific beat up, broken, chipped, giant, modern Chinese rectangular pot could not be better for the tree. Could not be better. Size, details, strength, color, you know, thickness of the walls, rim, feet, et cetera. I'll never be able to duplicate that. I'll never be able to duplicate that. I'll never be able to duplicate that. I'll duplicate that. I'll never be able to duplicate that. I'll never be able to duplicate that. I'll never be able to duplicate that. I'll never be able to duplicate that pot and the aesthetic that it I'll try for the rest of my career. And it's probably never going to happen. So those are some of these odd couples that do form and start to become, you know, sort of marriages that stick together. Now, in Japan, there were a lot of trees that were married to containers and that marriage was like a sacred aspect of that tree. The owners, you know, would maintain that. The professionals that worked it wouldn't dare uh play with that or manipulate that and i remember a few times that mr kimura got ahead of himself and he started altering this sort of like historic relationship of tree and container or he took off the defining branch that was iconic to this particular company you know like big changes that forever altered now with the container you could always put it back into a different container but in the event that he changed out a very nice container chances are he wanted that container for something else and once there was another tree in it and then a client bought it or something happened to it you know there was never any pairing that tree with that container again and so they were massive alterations to a historical image and an iconic aesthetic you know and that's something that is very dangerous when we alter bonsai and you know our ego gets ahead of us a little bit and it's also one of those things that you know mr kimura and his willingness to do that created a tremendous amount of greatness you're never going to hit a home run every time that you step up to the plate but the better you are the more home runs you hit you are going to strike out periodically and he was never afraid to do that and i always very much respected that but you know as i see different bonsai professionals working in collections across north america europe etc and you see the truck that's put in the hands of people with these historical trees and these major collections and the provenance that exists in some of these trees i really do think we need a better system than just uh my buddy is a curator or um you know this guy's traveling and he'll be here so let's bring uh you know him or her in to do this kind of work this pivotal kind of work on this tree or i like their style so i'm going to go ahead and let them completely alter and adjust the state of of this particular composition it's like what if there was some sort of what if there was some sort of big process right and i talked about this in australia because i had had the chance to work on a john naka red pine that he styled the first time he came to australia uh you know i followed john's lead on the tree kind of brought it back into his original image you know several years later another professional from europe goes there completely changes the front of the tree and he's like oh my god this tree is going to be a disaster for the worst forever takes a branch right across does all this you know kind of crappy looking canopy that's all one and then it's just like there's never any getting that red pine back right and that was the moment i was like god this is not a sustainable model not everybody knows how to handle trees with provenance there needs to be some sort of proposal system to work on those historical trees so anyways um all of that from your question about the red pot uh jeff thanks a bunch no i'm just going to kind of move on and i'm just going to give you guys a little bit more detail here um so we have a problem here um this one just has a little bit of a stress there it's just a little bit of a structural flaw here and i've got some coarseness out at the tip now we recognize there's an awful lot of density here so i'm just going to go ahead and i'm going to take these ring me in tight here jesus and i'm going to go ahead and rip those off right where i have a stump right here and i want to leave that stump right there because i had both of these pieces growing out of that same area now i only need a very minimal amount of eight gauge here to be able to alter the position of these pieces do i want to drop this down if i continue to drop and think about this if i can just drop it down i will get the shape and if I continue to drop the entire canopy down on both sides what ends up happening to the very top of the tree I butt cut that thing right I power line right through it just move you know I got a spread spread spread spread you get to the top and all of a sudden you pull that apart and you got Billy butt-cut right down the middle that's not effective so you don't want to get into this rhythm on a broadleaf tree like we do on a conifer defining branch on a conifer second branch on a conifer third branch on a conifer defining branch sets the angle sets the angle sets the angle this is not where we're at on a broadleaf form remember informal billows which means some go down some go out some go up that's what creates the informal billow I've got a I've got a pace myself on this sort of what can you say patternized bandwagon when dealing with broadleaf trees so that we have the capacity to be able to maintain the character of the tree that we want to be able to maintain so that we have the characteristics that make it look like a broadleaf otherwise we're gonna start to wire this into a coniferous form and that is not that is absolutely counter that would be a paramount destruction to the natural form of this tree if we end up making this thing look like a pine that would be devastating in every way shape and form and if you don't know what makes a pine look like a pine in terms of that consistency of angle of drop then it's very very likely that in the the runaway train of momentum that you do end up making this look like a pine because you don't know when to stop you don't know when to change the the approach right so where I'm at here I'm not going to structurally bring this down I brought down the one below it the one in front of it is lower than it already this one being up this is a perfect position this is a perfect natural representation and position for this branch and just by spreading these pieces and giving a little bit of space I got to be careful of those crotches I start to build out a little bit more now I'm gonna have to do more work in these areas where I'm not necessarily relocating as much that's okay I'm not I'm not afraid of the work I'm not afraid of having to wire what I'm most afraid of is taking what's special out of this tree okay all right here we go so these pieces are gonna need to drop down just a smidge I've got two here let's just work through some structural wire strategy two big pieces two big pieces two big pieces two big pieces branches here I've got two big branches up top now most of us are gonna say ooh I'm gonna wire these two down below I'm gonna wire these two up top that is an absolute no-no okay when you've got two down below and you've got two up top here I'm gonna wire the farthest to the farthest the closest to the closest that is your structural wiring strategy here okay farthest to farthest closest to closest that is how you make the most sense out of this branching system now I'm also gonna establish hierarchy in my wire which means my first wire going on if i've got the branch girth to support it is going to be a four farthest to farthest should be biggest to biggest okay and if it's not we can adjust that to go biggest to biggest but you're going to have to think harder about that next wire coming in if it's not farthest to farthest closest to closest farthest to farthest closest to closest is a motto in structural wiring and a motto inside of secondary tertiary branch linking that will save you a tremendous amount of excess wire being put on your tree okay but i'm going to go farthest to farthest here because it also happens to be thickest to thickest fire away all right chuck's got a question what about a wider pot to accommodate a less acute drop to the ground contacting branches yeah followed up by saying the main point of this question is whether a less acute branch drop would be more desirable and what you think about that yeah i mean so the the biggest issue with a wider pot is that it's not going to be as thick as the ground contacting branches is that the root system cannot facilitate a greater reduction of depth and so you can go with a wider pot but you can't go rubber band theory now i think there's an argument to be made that this pot is slightly too too small for the tree ultimately right but i also after and and this is why i was so excited i've been looking forward to this stream for for a long time right because i've been thinking about this in fact i i wanted to to see if maybe if there was a way to make the tree look a little bit thicker you know in a different world when you're not building an app and uh when it's not several hundred degrees at mirai consistently and you know when uh when you're all caught up on your mirai in the wild projects so you're you're green lit to film more in all of those scenarios i thought gosh man when we take the covered wagon across the country next time let's go ahead and let's pack this tree let's get down to south carolina let's go ahead and film a project in the angel oak and let's and let's do this tree total justice. So that was where my ambition was, right? But until I design the tree and I understand the canopy width with intentional design, not based on sort of the root system, but based on what I aesthetically want out of the branching, I think it's going to be tough to know how big or how small we want this containerized environment to be for this tree. So in a lot of ways, this is the move right now that allows us to kind of tease out the eventual container size that this tree needs to have to really max out its aesthetic quality. All right, Negative Phil is up next. Forgive the ignorance of a conifer guy, but assuming that those ground branches take root, does that eliminate the option to downsize the pot in the future? No, I mean, I could always cut them off. Or, you know, adjust their presence in the design for sure. Now, do I think it would give you pause? You know, because you're like, all right, now I got these things that are rooted. This thing looks exactly like the image, you know, that we used as inspiration. Like we kind of did our job. We won, you know, we won what? We won the game of bonsai, which is, God, it looks like a big tree in a miniature form. Boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. That's exactly what we did. That's exactly what we were striving for. You know, it would be tough. It would be tough to undo that kind of success in the design process. If you nail it, if you hit it, it's going to be tough to undo that, I think. You know, and so from that perspective, if those root and all these things go according to plan, you know, is it going to be tough to downsize the container? I think it's just going to be tough to undo the multitude of very challenging things because it's not going to easy to get a branch like that to root. You know, this one rooted, but that one rooted on its own. That's a different story. That was in the field that was growing with a tremendous amount of momentum. It's very easy to get ground layers to take in the field when a tree is growing with unchecked vigor. Now we're in a bonsai container. This is a different situation entirely. This is not as easy to get a branch to take. Okay, I'm going to push this one just because it's kind of uninteresting. If it breaks, so be it. There's not much on it anyways. There we go. But I would love, I would love the opportunity to continue to evolve that concept and really build on that design because I think those branches rooting would be insane. I think it would be insane how cool that would be. All right, Chris is up next. Ryan, what type of pot and glaze color could you see this tree being repotted in? Ah, dream pot. Dream pot. Dream pot. Okay. Dream pot is orange. You know, I think, I think the, I think the green, obviously green is complimented by red, which the red is what makes this evergreen green really stand out. And I, and I just realized in, in my big, long overdrawn conversation of showing Stig's question, I didn't answer the glaze versus unglazed. So let's do that now. Okay. Um, so I think the, the red causes it to pop, which is probably why it created a really beautiful marriage. Tree stands out. When people come into the garden, everybody sees this tree because of the tree container combo, right? Complementary colors. They do cause a visual energy, visual excitement. They're really, uh, uh, interesting, right? It's this is, this is where the Coke food model. Listen, if you want to win a Coke food prize, put a tree with a big green canopy in a beautiful, uh, red pot. Okay. Because that, that is what boom stands out. Um, but I like the orange because I think the orange is more subtle, right? I think the orange is more subtle. We tried it in a dark blue, which would be a natural concept for, you know, the masculine nature of this tree. Dark blue was blah, super blah, light blues, too delicate, too light, too dainty. Uh, we tried it in a green. Now you have analogous colors. The tree disappeared, tried it in a yellow, and a cream way too light, way too, uh, elegant, definitely didn't match the tree's spirit and character and also formed analogous colors with the trunk. This is where I think you need to stay in that red orange. And I'm talking like a burnt orange, like a deep hue orange, like horse Heinzel writers, orange glaze, kind of a vibe, right? That would be dream pot. And in fact, a horse Heinzel writer rectangle with an exaggerated in inset corner, uh, that was powerful and strong and beefy. Uh, unfortunately, horse does not do any sort of commission pots. He is a artist first, and he and I's deal is that I can have global distribution of his work if I never ask him to make me a specific pot. And I am, I'm all for it because what horse is making the next shipment that's coming this fall is, is going to blow everybody's mind, everybody's mind. Um, so anyways, we'll fall on that grenade. Uh, don't get to ask horse dream pot, uh, rectangular horse container with horse, very, very famous and very, uh, minimally produced, really beautiful orange glaze. Uh, I think it would cause this tree to absolutely explode in visual interest. Okay. I love, I love this down here. I love this. Look at how sprawling the tree is becoming. Look at how almost South Carolina that right side is. It's like, you can see the Spanish moss hanging off of the live vote kind of a vibe. Now, obviously the mess that's in these bottom branches, when we clean it up is going to be far, far more interesting, but this piece right here, that's naturally rooted. This is the piece that started everything. Look at the movement of that coming off the trunk, the unpredictable lines. Look at it coming up here. Oh, just, just absolutely spectacular. Okay. So broadly evergreen, let me answer show he and Stig's, um, question because I think it's an, it's a, it's a really important question, uh, glazed or unglazed for broadly when you have such a profound, and let me just, let me just, let me just say, when you have such a profound sense of newness that comes with the broadly form, whether it's evergreen or whether it's deciduous, obviously deciduous goes through a greater shift over the seasons, but even in a broadleaf evergreen form, you have this big, large leaf service. You learn leaf service surface. You have this color palette. You have this opportunity to piggyback on the aesthetic of the broadleaf, uh, evergreen, uh, aesthetic, and you dub it down through the use of the muted. And I would say not uninteresting, but let's just say less than exciting unglazed form. It's not wrong. It is an aesthetic. It's a pursuit. Satsuki azaleas have long been put into gills on unglazed pots, primarily for his front to back, uh, accommodation of the Satsuki Navari than anything else. Right. But you lose an opportunity to take advantage of the op of, of the tremendous design moment of color theory. Right. And when you go to the unglazed, it's like you lose values in a sense of age insinuation by the texture, by the finish, by the sheen, by the crackle, by the handling of the feet versus the walls versus the rim. And all of this nuance that exists inside of the glazed form on top of the shape that only the shape is duplicatable in the, in the unglazed container. Right. So I just think you have this tremendous design opportunity. And if you cultivate enough conifers, you start to realize, well, I've got a lot of unglazed pots, and this is an opportunity to do something pretty special for me. I seized that opportunity. I went unglazed with most of my broadleaf, for the first six to seven years at Mirai, and I got burnt out board. The trees did not stand out. I started going into glazed containers and I realized, oh, this is the advantage of color theory. Okay. So that's my, that's my sense of things. All right. I've got this big branch coming towards the front. Now you guys talked about, are you gonna open things up? I don't necessarily want to hide the front of this tree. Right. And look at what happens. Now, let me show you where this sticks out in the profile. This is all the way here. I'm sitting at the front of the tree. This is like up in my grill. I'm having a hard time seeing the structure. And what we noticed about those pictures of the Angel Oak is you can see through it. It is a transparent tree with age in the broadleaf form. The growth moves out to the tips. The interior becomes rather clean. That's probably exacerbated on that tree by people climbing on it and knocking off the new growth, I'm guessing. But I see this piece right here and I recognize, okay, if I get rid of that, I have this piece here that can shift over and occupy. And create. Now look at what happens here. Notice this sort of formality. Watch the breakup of that piece. Watch. Look at that. Look at how that creates space right here. Now you see boom. Now you see boom. Informal billows. Bing. Bing. Not just one big. We'll see how that occupies that space. More. You get rid of that. You move that. Oh my gosh, there's the break. There's the break. Yes. Informal billows. And so we come back to this. And we say awesome. Let's go ahead and let's get rid of that front facing branch because that was the key, is the key, to being able to accentuate. Now look at what we get. Yes. Yes. Yes. Age. Interest. Look at the shape of the branches. Good golly, great googly moogly. That's amazing. Amazing. Okay. Now I'm going to take off. Another piece here, which is sitting on top of that branch. This gets rid of a structural flaw that is starting to swell. We said, Hey, listen, I'm willing to deal with quirkiness in terms of the structure of this tree. But if we have anything that's taking away from the quality, we got to go ahead and get rid of it. And my priority in terms of choosing lines inside of this tree is maximizing the most interesting changes of direction, curvature, organic movement. I don't want to try and take away beautiful movement. I want to try and whip this branch off. Look at how straight this branch is. That is not a really interesting boxwood branch. Look at the kind of branches that I have in this design right here. Right. I want to be maximizing the quantity of interesting branches, minimizing the quantity of, you know, normal or, you know, otherwise sterile looking branches. And in doing so, we tease this age out of this tree. We pull it out of this broadleaf evergreen form. Foz has a question. When would you propose to come back and wire the secondary and tertiary branching? I'll be doing this as soon as the tree sale trees are done. Yeah. So, you know, right now in the workshop, I've got like five project trees and then like 50 some tree sale trees. And we're just kind of working through them. Now, the project trees are some big time junipers. I've still got the boxwood from the branch elimination stream that I want to be wiring so that I get it headed in the right direction and I don't let it sit on that abnormal structure too long. Right. When you do these kinds of moves, you don't want to wait to be organizing the foyer mass in photosynthetically efficient ways. So this will definitely be done as soon as the tree sale is over. I do have some obligations. I do have some obligations in life that we're taking care of this year, and then and then I'll be coming back to this. And we're caught up on questions right now, folks. Cool. Yeah, very cool. This is fun. This is really exceeding expectation, which whenever you're working with high quality material, you know, every once in a while, one out of every 10 trees that you see it and you're like, oh, my gosh, this material is to die for. Incredible inspiration. You go to make the tree and it's less than you expected. And you say, OK, so this is one of those trees that didn't necessarily have all the pieces in play to maximize its elevation as a bone size subject on the first go. That's fine. That's that one in one in 10, one in one in eight trees, depending on your material selection capacity. How good is your material selection? That's one of those trees that we're going to be building. We're going to build. Build the foyer mass. Build the continuation of shape and structure. We're going to we're going to have to work at it a little bit. And interestingly enough, you know, that's an unpredictable outcome. That's an unpredictable outcome for me still. So like the species that that happens the most with is ponderosa pine, where you say, God, this is just an insanely hot ponderosa pine and. It's going to be unbelievable when I'm finished with it, and then you finish it and you're like, oh, my God, this is just an insanely hot ponderosa pine. And then you finish it and you're like, yeah, OK, maybe not so unbelievable, but like it'll grow into something special, you know, and you do the work on it. And lo and behold, it typically does grow into something special. But it takes time. And you say the material is worth a squeeze for the time. So it is what it is. But I did have anticipation that this would be more special. That happens, you know, one in every 10, one in every eight times. The other seven to nine times that that that that doesn't happen, the product exceeds expectation. That's exactly what's happening here. OK, so now you start to see that opening. Now you see that informal billow. Now, I haven't worked on the upper portion of this tree at all yet. Right. I haven't worked on this at all. I mean, I'm just starting to get into the ability to decision make up here because to this point, we've really been focused just on trying to close the gap and really drive home this notion of the angel oak. OK, let me give you a full rotation here. You can start to see what's happening. And you see that dense upper canopy. Now, I want to come back to the right side of the tree over here, because you see, I have not reconciled that part of the tree. Let me go ahead and pull those down. I see what I want to see here. I love what's happening. There's definitely some branch selection. There's definitely some wiring considerations. There's some things that need to happen inside of this area over here to maximize the quality of what we get to show. And I'm going to take out just some uninteresting branching. I've got a little piece that's sticking up here. That's a trio that I'm going to take out. And I'm going to take out a little piece that's going to have to go ahead and reconcile. Do I take off this piece off the bottom? Small little branching here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to leave the piece on the bottom. I'm going to take the piece off the top as challenging as this is because I love this piece. I'm going to go ahead and just take that out, okay? And that creates a little bit of space up in the canopy right there. Just gives me a little bit more informality. I'm cool with that, okay? But I'm going to come back to the right side of the tree now. Let's see if we can go ahead and alter the state of the branching over here to start to give some of that age that Rafi spoke to, that Dan Robinson was referenced for. Let's see if we can crack that code a little bit here, okay? I'm going to take out a little bit of knuckling, which is going to open up some more visibility in here. Okay, and notice that I'm tearing. You might be asking, why are you tearing? Why are you tearing, right? This comes back to what Rodney Clemens talked about, with boxwoods, which if you cut boxwood, you get a perfect spherical wound that forms when you make that cut. But if you tear it, it starts to look more like an oak. And I just want, go ahead and focus in right here on this torn piece there, Josh. Yeah, and bring me in, Jesus. Okay, look at how natural that looks. You see the callus forming around this side of the shoulder? This was just a broken off big branch right here. That's what an oak looks like. That's what an oak looks like. That's what a damaged oak branch looks like. That's how they tear. That's how they break. That's how they compartmentalize. I love that. Now, Josh, can you just pan up to these two fresh pieces? Okay, so you see here, and let me rotate. I've got these two areas. I ripped these off, right? This was a trio right here, and this piece was coming out. This piece was right where we have these two sort of fusing right here. I'm not going to upset that fusing. I don't mind that fusing. That's actually quite natural for a tree of this size and representative of age as well. That just shows you how it starts to work out, okay? Oh, my gosh. This is fantastic. Fantastic. I haven't been this excited about a tree since the last juniper I adjusted and took out yesterday, but it's nice to have some exciting stuff happening. The ebb and flow of work at Mirai, when it comes back in the fall, I really find fall to be, you know, and you're saying, well, it's summer right now. Yes, it is late summer. Let's just be really clear. In the Pacific Northwest, by the third week of August, I'm going to smell fall in the air no matter what temperature it is. This is the beginning of fall as far as trees are making the transition. We're about ready to head into vascular growth, and the daylight length has shifted dramatically in the past few weeks up here. So, when we start to get into the fall and you think about your bonsai practice and the bonsai process, fall is when you really have the chance to come back and make trees. Initial stylings on your conifer. Obviously, this late summer sort of handling of broadleaf evergreens. This is when bonsai becomes fun again because you're sort of hopefully past the heat and the stress of summer and watering. You're into a point where daylight length and temperatures are decreasing. You know, obviously, the farther south in North America you go, you've got a little bit more time to wait, but that reduces your burden of watering, and you start to say in the spring when in doubt, water. You start to say in the fall when in doubt, hold back. And we get to that point where we don't have to check water as much, and we get to let our trees be a little drier because we know they need that oxygen in the root system to be able to cellularly divide and respire and produce that new vascular growth. And so, those things are all empowering to your bonsai design process because now when you're not worried about the horticulture of summer, and you're not worried about the refinement of mid to late spring, partial defoliation, decandling, candle pinching, et cetera, right? We're just in fall where it's like, okay, vascular productivity, great time of year to be doing some pretty substantial work, great time of year to be designing, great time of year to work almost every coniferous model, particularly elongating species, but also our pines, also our junipers, as long as we're clear that the more foliage mass that we reduce, the more we're going to have to think about protecting once we get those freezing temperatures. But this is a bonsai creation time of year. And so, I always find getting past the responsibility of summer, which we're still very much in, don't get me wrong, 105 yesterday, 102 today, it's going to be 100 degrees tomorrow, and then I think we drop into the 90s and start to cool off. This is like the make or break for the horticulture of trees in the garden. Okay, now you see that down. Let me go ahead and show you. Notice where the branches are at. By bringing them down into that space, we start to close some of that distance, okay? Now, I obviously need a little bit more. I'm going to bring some of my bigger structure up in here down to create some space up in the canopy, as well as to close some space on the right side that's a guy wire. I've got my tie-off that's holding that branch in the ground. That's a great anchor for a guy wire coming back up. That's what I'm going to use. Just finding these little instruments of efficient bonsai design in the process of wiring. And again, not necessarily something, not the tactic I would take with a conifer, okay? This is broadleaf. Broadleaf styling and design is such a different process. It's such a more bohemian styling process, right? Because we're sort of like, I don't know, you know, free love. I can anchor onto anything I want as long as it's invisible and it doesn't cause any harm. Where a conifer, it's a lot more rigid. It's like this angle, and this angle, and this angle, and this pad, and this pad, and the bottom is flat. And we break this up, or we unify, you know, it's like in a broadleaf, it's like, yes! Feels pretty good, you know? That's good. All right, Gary's got a question. Is the crown of the tree much more dense than other parts of the tree? No. No, it is not. It just has a lot more branches that are sticking together to create this false sense of density. Yeah, but no, it's not more dense. Actually, the crown is sparser than the other areas of the tree. All right, Treebeard Steve's wondering what your aftercare will look like for this tree. What my aftercare will look like with this tree? Um, it'll go back out under the shade cloth, especially because we're... experiencing some pretty intense heat. And boxwood in general, I would say, does not necessarily respond super well to... to being in Full Sun and intense heat. So it'll go back... it'll go back under the shade cloth for the foreseeable, for the foreseeable future of the heat spell that we're in, which will be a couple days. But even when we get out of it, you know, if we're still in the mid-80s, I don't want to be testing... tolerance and the horticultural limits of this tree. It's too good. I'm opening up interior branching. We talked about this last time. That boxwood has stayed in dappled sunlight. It doesn't even get full morning sun because it would cook the interior of that boxwood that we did the branch elimination on. This tree too will be very much put back under the shade cloth and probably have some south-facing shade. If you've seen our Mad Max, you know, metal shade structure that we built at Mirai, those big pillars have actually become a phenomenal environmental control mechanism. I was a little bit worried they might be a little too big and create too much shade. Turns out they're spot-on. Absolutely phenomenal for creating a little bit more diversity of the environmental offerings that we have. And for trees like this that are heavily pruned, if we set them on the north side of that five foot wide column, they just get this like glancing dappled sun that comes through the shade cloth, but they're not carrying any sun that's, you know, penetrating directly through the shade cloth. And for boxwoods in particular, that's been super, super serendipitous. Japanese white pine also can just really execute a stunningly blue color under those kind of light conditions. I'm not saying it's going to give you the best back budding, but I am saying it's going to give you the best color for sure. And we're caught up on questions again. Tree Bird Steve did mention Charleston, Charleston, South Carolina is going to be knocking on your gate to get their tree back. Haha, that's great. I like that. I appreciate that. Come on. I shorted myself on the guy wire. Imagine though, if you'd never seen bonsai and you're like, you're like from South Carolina and you're like, oh my gosh, that's the, that's the Angel Oak. I know that tree. It's like, yeah, yeah, we did it. Okay, let's see what we got here. Now we're getting close on the structure. Probably a few more pieces that need to be adjusted and eliminated. Okay, here's where we start to evenly distribute, right? Look at how that filled in that hole. Look at how that also gave us space up in the canopy. You see that space right there. That's what we were looking for, right? And there's again several branches up in the canopy here that are trios that we really probably need to look at thinning out to be able to accomplish the best possible structure. And I'm just sort of taking an assessment of where we're at right now. No structural issues on this, but this piece right here feels really awesome and also unfortunately tied to a trio. I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to pull out the sparsest of these and leave the best. Okay, and just get that nice wound there. That gives me a little bit more space and you see that space sort of permeating. Now you really see that's where that branch just came out of. So now we can start to work to orient and put branches into those spaces as we open them up and start to adapt. Now the interior of this tree after a working like this is just going to explode, okay? And it should be said, if you didn't watch the nutritional lecture, you need to watch the nutritional lecture for this to have any meaning. But hey, this kind of working in the form of a tree is going to be a lot of work. And it's going to have a lot of to maximize its health and start to or continue to do exactly what we wanted to do as a bone size subject, right? This is the moment where we get these samples after a big working like this. The tree after we prune it, the tree after we wire it, is absolutely hungry for calcium. This was a This is something that has evolved even since we did the lecture with David. He's been watching us prune and work on these trees and stuff. And he's like, man, do you realize the amount of calcium that it takes for a tree to compartmentalize that cut and start to initiate callous roll? He's like, this is a perfect time for you to be applying calcium after pruning, or loading a tree up with calcium and then pruning, to see it respond in a positive way to the application of wire and the reduction of branch mass. And I was just like, oh my gosh, this goes deeper. It gets even deeper. So we'll be testing after and during this summer heat. And again, if you haven't seen the lecture, this is not going to make sense to you, because this flies in the face of common nutritional bonsai knowledge. But during this heat, we're watering a lot. We drenched everything prior to the heat, not necessarily for the heat, but the timing worked out. And it was very serendipitous that we did, because we are watering a lot. And we found that after five days, the drench had washed out of the system of the tree in conditions where we were watering one to three times a day. And the trees are transpiring. They're pulling a lot. When trees are pulling a lot, they're taking in whatever kind of nutrition can piggyback on that water that's coming up through the tree. And so this is one of the things where, if we're using a high salt content fertilizer in the heat of summer, that's when we can really see a competition for water intake in the roots, and we can see a tree burn. So common bonsai knowledge is, hold off in the summer. Trees are dormant anyways. Well, it turns out they're only dormant in really high relative humidity areas, like Japan, where they can't cool themselves. The temperatures are extreme. This would be the same in Florida, if you're dealing with temperate trees, which isn't really something that happens in a majority of Florida unless you're super far north. But that summer dormancy is a different consideration, because trees are not moving a lot of water. They just fully shut down, since there's such high relative humidity. But if you're in an area that has low relative humidity, your trees are moving tremendous amounts of water, because it is very hot. That watering must be supplemented with nutrition. And that's important. And that's one of the times where you can get really off on your nutritional system in your tree. And if you've ever seen trees experience intense heat and then have problems, what I'm realizing from the things that I've seen over my time doing bonsai in the Pacific Northwest, where it's not supposed to get hot, it's not supposed to get too cold, and unfortunately, it gets really hot and really cold, is that I've got to be fertilizing over those intense heat spells, or else I will start to see nutrient deficiencies in the tree. There we go, starting to patch that hole. But notice the airiness that we're starting to get in that canopy. I've got one major, one major, major reduction of branching that needs to take place up in the canopy. And it is existing right here, right smack dab in the top of the crown. I got a grouping of three. That's really, really causing a structural issue at a smaller grouping of three there. But I've got this grouping of three right here as the peak of my tree. Now, this is one of them. This is one of them. And then this piece off to the side here is one of them. It feels to me, if I'm adhering to the concept of the most interesting movement in the branches, I'm going to keep these two pieces here at the peak. And I'm going to go ahead, and I'm going to get rid of the most uninteresting branch, which is this. This is the third one right there. Now, look at what this does. It opens up more informality, quite the bald spot that comes into that piece right there. But now, look at how that's broken up. That's what an oak looks like. That is what an older oak looks like. Notice the spacing. Now, I'm not done. I'm going to restructure. I'm going to open things up. There's more branches to be pruned, blah, blah, blah, blah, right? There's a lot more work that has to go into this tree. Just on a structural level, we have absolutely crushed tonight. Look at that freaking tree. Look at that tree. Hey, Zeus, do you have pictures of that angel oak again? Oh, the photos. If there's issues, yeah, show me that one. Just show me that one. And if it doesn't, yeah. Look at that. Look at that tree. OK, now come back out into studio. Yeah, yeah, the images are where we're screwing up, OK? So you get to see that contrast there. Now, I do agree the branches on the right side drop too sharply. I still think it's an interesting execution of design. And structurally, we absolutely got exactly where we wanted to be, much older. Now, is the high point centered over the trunk? Still a little centered, eh? We can do a little bit better to take that off center. We're going to pull that this way, towards the defining branch. That's a real easy gesture movement here. But I am really, really happy with the way this turned out and how that entire thing came together. All right, we do have a couple of questions here. At the end, Miss Mel's asking, will the wiring help kickstart extra budding? Certainly, both the opening up of the canopy, as well as the reorientation, as well as the branch reduction, which causes an imbalance in the root to foyer mass system, all will contribute to a spike of growth, probably in this early fall period of time. I did not remove, let me just gather what I removed here, just so that you can kind of see. I did not remove very much. That's a very minimal amount compared to the quantity we removed last time. So the tree kept so much of its photo system intact. Any time that you play with the foyer to root balance, it certainly causes the behavior of the tree to shift. And obviously, a tree that was repotted this spring doesn't really recuperate its root mass until it gets through the fall. So if I did a heavy reduction on this tree, like I did on the last boxwood, I could have an issue with the tree sort of regaining itself and getting its feet back underneath it. I don't have any apprehensions of there being any issues with this particular piece. And it looks like Jesus has got to queue up the before and after. Bentley, Mary Ann, and Bill's Bayou all had questions about what we're using for calcium. And Bill followed up with, what form, and what about CalMag? Yeah, no, not CalMag. Stay as far away from CalMag as you can, because you don't want that magnesium in your bonsai container. It's almost impossible to get it out. The feature piece of calcium. The content on the nutritional drenches will be coming in the early part of September. We're working into the app beta launch. Once the app beta launches, then we'll be delivering the apical ag nutritional system feature content, which is already filmed. We just have to go through the editing process, and we're preoccupied right now. In that release of that content, all of the products that David Rex, as a consultant, and a crop advisor, will be provided as a blog post supplement to that. And it is, I just have to tell you, it is a monstrosity of a list. It is a tremendous amount of information to digest the fact that we have gone through the effort to do so and are going to avail that to Mirai members. It's like, you have no idea how much value you're getting out of that one single piece of feature content is probably worth five years of your subscription to Mirai Live. I'm not kidding. And so that'll be really exciting to put that into the public so that you guys can all start utilizing the apical system. Right now, we've got probably a dozen, maybe two dozen, students using the apical system. Every single one of them has said, man, this is transforming my trees. It just is. It's the way it is. It's a superior nutritional methodology. So that'll be coming. It's coming. It's coming. A little bit longer. Just be patient. And that's all the questions we have. But we've got the before queued up if you want to oscillate between that and where we're at. Yeah, show me the before, Jesus. Yeah, so I mean, we're seeing visibility. We're seeing branch lines. We're seeing the elevation of the right side. We're seeing the closing of the gap. Go ahead and bring us back into studio. Notice the shift in the canopy, the informality of the billows, everything that you could want out of aging a broadleaf form. Now, is it the same radical transition as ginning an apex, pushing everything off center, using rebar to compress? Splitting a live vein? Wedge cutting a trunk? It is not. It's more subtle. And again, it's a lot more bohemian in terms of, yeah, it's about enough. It's about enough. It doesn't have to be this angle, this angle, this angle. It's like this here, and this here, and this here. And yeah, it feels like an authentic form of a broadleaf tree. I like it. Good. Good. But the shift, the change, the transition, notable. Market improvement. And when we come back and we have this finished and you see the before and after, it's going to be night and day. All right? Angel Oak, everybody. I'm glad we got through the technical issues. It's hot in here. It is hot. I'm going to go water 8 o'clock at night, last watering, right before dark, so that tomorrow I can actually sleep past 730 and not worry about the trees dying. OK? I love you guys. Stay cool. Stay hydrated. Enjoy this part of summer. This is the dog days of summer before we enter fall. This is the time bone size starts to come alive again. Get yourselves ready. App beta is coming. Nutritional application is coming. We got all kinds of stuff on the horizon. Love you guys. Mwah! Woo! Woo! 
