Super Tuesday, everybody. What's going on, guys? Got a real treat for you guys tonight. Peter Warren is in the house from the UK. We were able to abduct him on his travels across North America. Wanted to pull him back into the Mirai fold and really sort of dig deep into the repotting practice for Satsuki Azalea, something that Peter is a foremost expert on in the Western world. And so we're super honored to have him in studio. Tonight is a pre-produced stream. We're going to be sort of taking you through the steps and process. Peter's going to walk you through how he handles Satsuki Azaleas in their entirety over the repotting process. If you guys are on the forum, good. If you're not, then you need to check it out. The forum is happening and happening in a big way. Check out the podcast, iTunes, SoundCloud, Stitcher. Peter Warren will be enlightening you with some more of his knowledge beyond what he's already given us. And for any of your Bonsai needs, check out Bonsai Mirai's store, goods.bonsaimirai.com. Lots of interesting stuff on there for you guys right now. But I'm really looking forward to digging in tonight. I'm going to hand the floor over to Peter Warren. Enjoy this. Really dig deep into your Satsuki knowledge. And we'll see you guys on the other side. Super Tuesday, everybody. Well, it's Tuesday at least anyway. Yeah. Wow. Super pumped tonight to have Mr. Peter Warren in the house, Mirai Studios. Here to share his expertise about the repotting process with Satsuki Azaleas and the nuances of how we've all screwed them up to this point and how we go about fixing them. We've already had some follies today in terms of what we thought Mr. Warren would want versus what is actually appropriate. It's been highly educational. This guy's the man when it comes to all things Satsuki related in addition to his skills with the deciduous conifers and all the things that you guys have gotten to enjoy. Peter working on here at Mirai and in his travels around the world. So we're super pumped to have you here, man. As am I. Can I just get a little... Don't you ever do that to me. Don't you ever do that to me. E.T. Yeah, right. No, it's an honor to have you here, man. It's an honor to be here. Very, very pleased. I've missed you. Likewise. Yeah. Okay, well, it's an honor to be here. And we're working on this azalea. It's the first time I've ever met this azalea, so I'm going to need a little bit of background on the tree before I start attacking it. So could you give us a bit of a rundown on the tree? What you know about it? So the tree comes from the Pacific Bonsai Museum south of Seattle, and that's what I got for you. Okay. Do we know any more than that? I could do a little digging with Aaron if you would like me to. You want some information? No, no, it's fine. Okay. I was just hoping you might be a bit more prepared. Clearly. Listen, man. Listen, I wasn't ready for the azalea. I wasn't ready for the azalea repotting in its entirety, so I'm just learning as we go. Okay. Well, that's fine. Well, basically, I mean, I can glean most of the information that I need from just looking at the tree. We can see from the leaves, we see all these lovely sort of bright green new shoots that are pushing. This is a sign that the tree's waking up and growing. It's come out of dormancy and it's starting to grow. If it gets any further than this, then how we would deal with the repot and particularly the aftercare, would change. The window of opportunity for sort of repotting azaleas is quite wide. We could start in January. Particularly, that's a good idea for anything that's going to be really sort of quite a serious repot. So, when the field-grown trees are sort of dug up, they get dug up sort of the last part of the year, December, sort of end of November, December. They get sold in that sort of period, early January, and then they will be completely bare-rooted. So, have all of the field soil taken off. There'll be no fibrous roots on it whatsoever. Serious roots pruned. You're sort of really getting into it. And it's possible to do that because the tree's at its most vigorous because it's come out of the ground. So, it's pumping full of energy. There's lots of energy within the tree and so it can recover from that. So, that would be the only real time that a real serious repot of an azalea would be done that first time. And at that time, the underside of the trunk, so directly underneath the trunk, under this nevara, will be completely washed out. So, there won't be any field soil left on it. And at that time, it's absolutely essential that soil gets put, so good quality canoma soil gets put up into all of the holes, into all of the crevices and packed in there so that it starts to create that sheen that Ryan often talks about. And once that gets created, we never want to get in there and start messing around with it. So, that's going to be one of the big points about repotting the azaleas. We're going to be working a lot on the surface roots and not touching underneath the trunk at all if we can help it. There will be times, particularly with trees that may not have been repotted correctly in the past, where we may need to get in and sort of attack that area directly underneath the trunk. And so, in that sort of situation, you'd be looking to try and do that earlier on in the season before these new shoots come out. So, that then the tree isn't going to sort of collapse on itself. It's got a chance to sort of recover from that serious repot before it starts pushing the new growth. If we do have to do like that type of repot today, which I don't think we will have to, just looking at the tree and knowing where it's come from, then the aftercare would be to make sure that it does not lose any moisture at all. So, it would be kept in a greenhouse, in a polytunnel and misted very, very regularly. But we can talk a little bit about that. But for a standard azalea repot, which is hopefully what we're going to find today, you can sort of do it any time from February on to the end of April. Traditionally, in Japan, there used to be a lot of post-flowering repotting done. So, in sort of end of June, sort of time when the trees get cut back quite hard after post-flowering. Traditionally, that was quite a normal time to repot trees. And I did that in the first couple of years of my apprenticeship. But what we were finding and what other azalea growers in Japan were finding was that those trees just were not able to then cope with the summer heat as global warming, as the temperature across Japan, as it became more and more covered in concrete, in particular, as the temperature was rising up, the trees were just not able to cope, even if they were kept under shade and things like that. And so, the, hardly anybody now does sort of post-flowering repotting unless it's absolutely essential. So, really, what we're looking at is sort of anywhere from February to the end of April, ideally before these new shoots start to push too much. So, this is around about the best time to get it done. And so, what we're going to do is look at how we can take this tree forward and how we can, sort of how the repotting process is going to be part of that. The other thing that I would say that is perhaps a little bit different, from other repots with other bonsai, except for perhaps deciduous trees, is the frequency of repotting. And so, realistically, you should be looking at maybe a three-year cycle for most people. For those people who have trees which grow a lot slower, so in sort of colder climates where they're perhaps not growing as much, then maybe that would go on to four years. For people who just, who really push their trees, fertilise very heavily, that could come down to two years. Some species, some varieties of azaleas, in particular a variety called Yatano kagayaki, is almost suicidal in that it has such fibrous roots which tangle a mat on the surface that if you don't repot it every two years, it will literally just sort of choke itself to death. And so, they need to be repotted a little bit more frequently. And that really sort of ties into the point about what's the most important aspect. What's the most important aspect of azaleas when we're sort of looking at the repotting? And that is this surface layer of roots. Because we remember that an azalea isn't a tree, it's a shrub. Okay, so it doesn't have the same kind of root system that say a maple does or any of the other deciduous trees that we're working, that we usually work with and that it doesn't send down roots deep into the pot. So what we might find when we take this out is that this bottom layer of soil in here will hardly be, there'll hardly be any roots growing into it. Everything will just, just be kind of like sort of compacted or, you know, sort of growing in this top area. And so particularly if you use a lot of kind of like solid organic fertilizer, particularly if you sort of water very, very frequently, we get this buildup of roots on the surface layer, which will map together the organic fertilizer. If it's, you know, sort of a solid, breaks down, gets in all of those gaps and we start to sort of lose the ability for water and oxygen particularly to sort of penetrate in and the tree essentially just ends up sort of choking itself. And so we will mainly be working on this surface layer, making sure that it gets cleaned out. And one of the things that we'll do is we'll end up washing that off, which is something that is perhaps a little bit different from a lot of the repots and a lot of the repot theory that Ryan's been talking about. Just to make sure that we get rid of all of the junk and all of the sort of the compacted soil from that root. From that surface. The root structure of azaleas is very, very fibrous. We have some sort of the woody roots, the nabari here. One of the things that azaleas don't like is when these become too exposed or if they get too close to the edge of the pot. Okay. I talked about it in the stream in June, July last year when we were looking at post-varying pruning. Basically the pot choice for an azalea, we need to have, we need to think, we need to think of like sort of temperature control, particularly in terms of these sort of woody roots. So we don't want these woody roots to be pushing up tight up against the sides of the pot. And so generally what I sort of tell people to look at is to always try and make sure you can get like sort of two fingers in between the edge of the pot and where those woody roots begin. Okay. If they're too close, then these roots are going to start to burn and we'll start to see some damage. Okay. So as long as your fingers aren't like massively, you know, Troy-sized thick fingers, we can, you know, just a two finger sort of separation is a good kind of like guideline. If you don't have that ability, like for example, you don't have that pot available and you're in a very sort of hot environment, then something that you could think about is putting some in the heat of summer, putting some aluminium, aluminum foil across, you know, anywhere where the roots are going to be very, very close, or covering that area with sphagnum moss, just to try and, you know, get some of that sort of heat away from, or, you know, add extra moisture to that area, reduce the heat sort of retention in those places. But generally what we'd like to try and do with azalea pots as well is have something quite deep. So why do we have quite a deep pot if the roots don't grow down into it? I've been talking about how important those surface roots are and how the tree is just so dependent on those surface roots. So why do we want to put it into a deep pot? I've asked lots of people in Japan and they don't really know. They're just like, well, it's just what you do. If you don't, the tree suffers. And so my theory is that it's basically kind of a heat sink, okay? So they are very sort of heat, sort of intolerant with the root systems. This is one reason why you never see a satsuki on rock, never any sort of satsuki on rock planting where it's not in a pot. You know, so just on a rock by itself, as opposed to over a rock in a pot won't last very long at all because the roots just get burnt and they don't like it on there. And so really acts as a, in my opinion, it's acting as a heat sink. So, you know, there's the cool water down there, you know, in the bottom of the pot, which helps to absorb some of the heat over the day and acts as a water reservoir as well. So this pot, we're going to put it back into the same pot. This is a good size pot for the tree. Currently the front of the tree is somewhere kind of around here. And we're going to look at maybe just tweaking the front around just to, so that we see the best line of the trunk and the best line of the nabari. But we're going to put it back into the same pot. This is pretty much a, you know, sort of an ideal sort of size pot and depth pot for an azalea. So this is going to go sort of straight back into there. The soil mix that we're going to use is going to be mainly based on Kanuma or Kanuma soil, of which we have a sample here. Now, the big difference between how we're going to sort of, some of the techniques, we've got a close up there, big sort of difference between some of the techniques that we'll see today, as opposed to some of the other repots that you may have seen on Mirai Live and that you've done in the past is, we're going to go down to the sort of the structure of Kanuma soil. So why do we use Kanuma soil for azaleas? We all know that, well, we all should know that azaleas are quite acid-loving species and the pH of the Kanuma soil should be somewhere around about 5.5, which is quite acidic. So it's sort of perfect from that perspective. But azaleas will also grow in Akadama, okay. Some Satsuki growers, particularly those who were looking for bare rooting and then exporting to China over the last few years, have been growing azaleas in Akadama. And the trees were doing fine, but the reason why they were doing that is because the roots of the azaleas wouldn't sort of penetrate into the Akadama particles. And so when it came to bare rooting, it was much, much easier to separate the soil from the roots. And so the reason why we do tend to use Kanuma soil is, is so that the fine root system of the azaleas, like hair-like root system, which we'll see when we get out, can penetrate into this very, very soft soil very, very easily. It's very, very water absorbent. There's lots and lots of sort of tiny little holes, micro holes in there, which suck up the water. Just touching this now, I can feel all the moisture coming out of my hands. If you do sort of repotting, if you have to repot a number of azaleas or even just one, I'd seriously recommend using some gloves. Unless you have, you know, shares in O'Keeffe's hand cream, and you want to increase the sales there, because it's going to dry your hands out immediately and the ends of your fingers are going to crack and stuff. So using gloves is going to be a very important part of doing it. But the big thing that we have, I mean, just having put that on, put the soil sieve, this is pre-sifted soil. Just having put that on the bench there, we see all of this dust coming out. And one thing that we'll see when we're actually sort of preparing the soil is that you can sift and sift and sift and sift and sift, and there'll always be dust coming out. Okay. It breaks down very, very easily. Okay. Just a piece here. Just touching it like that breaks it down. There's hardly any kind of sort of structural integrity to this soil. It breaks down so easily. And so when we're actually sort of working the soil in, you're going to notice a huge difference in the amount on the sort of the pressure that's put onto the soil when we're working it in and just sort of how much we sort of get, we work that soil in. Hopefully what we'll find is we're going to have a pretty consistent root ball. So there's not going to be, there's going to be no big gaps. We'll sit the soil, we'll sit the tree, the root ball on top of a bed of soil, pour some around it, work it in very, very lightly, and then water it. We don't need to sit and work it in really hard and hammer it in because all we're going to be doing is just turning it into dust. Okay. So one thing that I've noticed with a lot of clients throughout the world, what I've been doing recently is adding about sort of 20% of pumice, which will then sort of help to kind of alleviate some of those issues where the soil really sort of breaks down either under the weight of the tree. This tree isn't going to be too heavy, but what you sometimes find with big, thick, heavy trees or trees that are on rocks is that the, all of the soil directly underneath the trunk will break down under the weight of the tree. Okay. And then that sort of hinders drainage, hinders aeration of the soil. And so we can end up with some issues there. And working in the soil as well, if you work it in too hard, it just turns to dust. And so adding something such as pumice at the same sort of particle size is going to sort of counteract some of those problems. It's going to add a little bit more sort of stability to the soil. And so over the last sort of five, six years, that's what I've been doing with all of the azaleas at home, with other clients in the UK, with clients in the United States. And so I've been through sort of two cycles of sort of repotting that. And we found that the root health is slightly better. The soil consistency, the soil sort of integrity is a lot better when we come to take it out. And it makes for an easier sort of repot, you know, the second time. So sort of breaking down the soil, the root ball, sort of raking out the older soil becomes a lot easier because there's these sort of solid particles that haven't broken down in there. Obviously sort of pumice retains some water as well, which helps for the, you know, helps the water-loving azaleas. But it also sort of aerates, you know, it adds those sort of solid, it has those sort of solid pockets in there for when, for example, you have too much rain in the UK and things could become waterlogged, which is very, very difficult to do with an azalea because they are quite water-loving trees, brushes. So that's going to be the sort of the biggest differences really that we're going to see with the repot. Obviously we'll talk a little bit more about those in detail as we're sort of going along. But first things first is to kind of, we're going to get this out of the pot and just sort of inspect the root ball and see what we have to deal with. And then we'll take the tree outside. We're going to wash the trunk. If you sort of get a close up on the trunk, the trunk that you can see here is very, very green. Okay, this goes all along the branches, okay. And on a sort of a close inspection with the branches, they're very sort of lignified all the way out to the tips. Okay, and so if you remember back to the post-firing pruning stream that we did, I was sort of saying about the importance of trying to rejuvenate the tips, making sure that the tips are all kind of like, can we get a close up on that branch there? You know, this beautiful, youthful, light brown, flexible, so I can move that around, no fear of it snapping off, because that is all kind of just pumping full of moisture and energy backwards and forwards, as opposed to these sort of wood-filled lignified branches. Okay, so this tree will start to suffer a little bit in terms of health. If we don't start to try and think about rejuvenating some of that. So we might do some pruning once we've got it into, once we've cleaned up the branches a little bit, try and thin some of those out. But one thing that the cleaning up of the branches will do is it will make it a lot easier for new shoots to start coming out adventitiously. So coming out along the primary branches and coming out along some of those. When they're covered in all of this green and lichen and things like that on the branches, it makes it a lot more difficult for them to, for the new shoots to sort of come from those branches. So cleaning the trunk up is going to be an important part of this repotting process. So we're going to get it out of the pot first and see what we've got. So first things first, we'll cut the wire underneath. Okay, so this is quite a nice pot for an azalea. There's a lot of drainage holes. Underneath that. Get a close up of the bald spot there. Okay. Now we can use a cammer, a root saw, to work our way around the edges. If we had these sort of woody roots quite close to the edge of the pot, then I would recommend not using it. But because it's all sort of very fibrous roots, then it's okay to sort of go in with a root saw and even a root claw, which is something that Ryan would never use. Doesn't even have one on site. He's never used one in his entire life. That's not, that's not true, but I. But it's, I would never use one of those really, for a conifer repot. I very rarely use one for a deciduous repot either. Unless you're taking something that's, you know, from a massive pot and you just want to get rid of a lot of soil quite easily. But for an azalea where essentially what we could do is just literally cut out the root ball that we want, pop it out, you know, as long as you know what the root ball was like, that would be fine. But just if you have these sort of big woody roots that get close to the edge of the pot, be super careful with how you use the root saw. Come on, so we're going to go around the edge of the pot. I try and angle it so that it's not going sort of into the root ball. What we're trying to do is kind of like separate the soil from the edge of the pot. One tip that I always taught the younger apprentices is never put your hand here when you're using a root saw, because all you're going to do is come in and cut through your own hand. So always make sure your hand is ahead of the root saw. For younger apprentices that I didn't like, I didn't tell them about it and just wait for them to cut their own hands and then just laugh at them. What a senpai. What a senpai. What a senpai. Hey. Pain is the greatest teacher. Pain is the greatest teacher. Dang it if that wasn't true. So we can see just from cutting through that the previous repot used quite a fine grade of Kanima, which is great. It's not really broken down too much, which is another good sign. So realistically, we want to be trying to use the sort of the shogun-sized grain of Kanima soil. The smaller the grain, the sort of the larger the surface area of water retention we've got, the easier it is for the finer roots to sort of go through and penetrate. So for a good, healthy tree, particularly in a sort of a normal-sized pot, then using a small grain is ideal. If you've got like a sick tree, then maybe using, and we're looking at perhaps trying to get a better balance between the moisture and the oxygen in there, then maybe using a larger grain. But small grain soil is the absolute best. Okay, so we'll just try and get some of that matter out. Try and get it out so we can pull it out of the pot a little bit easier. No. I feel bad for making all this mess inside. Don't worry about it. I do it every week. Yeah. Yeah. You don't have to clean it up either. I feel like I do though. No. No, you can let that go. I mean, you can clean it up if it just like really makes you feel better. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. It will be. Yeah. Yeah, okay, thank you. So I mean like when you start repotting a Satsuki, you kind of have to shift your mode of thinking at all, or is it just such an easy deal? transition for you to make between Zatsky and like say a pine or a juniper? For me, absolutely. Because I repot maybe 150, 200 a year. And I have done every single year of my career. The entirety of your Boneside career. And so it's not like a huge difference. The only sort of shift in thinking is when sort of dealing with recently imported trees and so one of the places that I work at quite a lot, they're sort of importers areas and they're bare rooted. And so sometimes you're sort of dealing with trees that don't have a sort of consistent root ball, maybe a little bit weak. And so the kind of like the level of which you're repotting, you know, the aggression, the level of aggression of soil removal will differ. But yeah, for me, it's not really a there's not really sort of a shift in thinking. But for most people, I would definitely sort of advise kind of being particularly with the way in which you're working in the soil. The rest of the repotting I don't think is going to be it's going to be too different. But the way in which you sort of work in the soil is definitely going to have to sort of like just not go as aggressive as you would do with a plant. You're going to be like, is that all you do? Because otherwise you just end up turning it to dust. That's the big thing. Big difference. But I mean, there's also talking about the way you handle the surface. You know, obviously you break down decomposed surface soil and get rid of the organic fertilizer, moss, etc. I'd say it's a lot closer to like a deciduous repot than it would be like a pine. So if you're working on a deciduous tree where you're actively looking to create the nibari, and you'd be looking to, I mean, a lot of the the the the deciduous repots that I do will end up being complete, sort of bare rooted, because I'm looking to most of the trees I'm working on are ones where the nibari is still a work in progress, and you're looking to really kind of to place individual roots in certain positions and to be looking to actively prune specific roots rather than working with an established root ball. And so, yeah, an azalea repot is much more like a deciduous repot in that sense. OK, if you have to push too hard at this sort of situation where you where you are getting the tree out of the pot, then then stop and remove more soil. OK, you don't want to be sort of forcing the tree out and sort of damaging the root ball. OK, so. OK. So there we go. Root ball pretty much still intact. OK, now we do have roots. Put that down there so you can wash it later. Now we do have roots that go all the way sort of down to the bottom. OK, but that will only be really realistically kind of like around the edge of the pot. If we start breaking that down, there'll be a lot of kind of soil underneath there that doesn't have a whole lot of roots in. OK, so first things first, what we're going to look at doing, working on that soil surface. OK. Now we can use a root hook, which can be a very aggressive tool. OK, ideally, it shouldn't be too sharp. This is quite nice and blunt, so we're not going to do too much damage. We're just going to be working from the centre outwards. Just get rid of some of this moss. OK, the soil surface, I can tell you already, is not broken down too much at all. OK, so this is going to be quite an easy, OK, so this is going to be quite an easy, re-pot to do. OK, anywhere where you're very sort of close to the woody roots, the nebari of the tree, just be super careful with how aggressively you put the rake into the soil. I think re-potting has been one of the kind of like the most difficult to learn techniques from books because you see people using these tools. You see people working the soil in, you see it in magazines, you see it in books and things like that, but you have no idea of the amount of force that's used. And so it's one of those kind of real difficult to kind of gauge sort of techniques. And I've seen people being really super aggressive, you know, hammering it in, pulling it out. And, you know, that's just going to end in tears. What we never want to do is kind of like pull it so hard that chunks of root, you know, are coming away, OK? OK, so we never want to be pulling chunks of root away. Here we've got some that have been sort of cut through. OK. This is a super healthy root ball, so well done whoever's been looking after it. Previous repot was on point, watering has been good, fertilising has been good. The only reason why this tree perhaps isn't doing a little bit more, a little bit more sort of better up top is because of the age of the branches. All right, so just sort of catching on a surface root there. So I want to be careful of that. I'm not pulling too hard on it. I'm not pulling too hard on it. I'm not pulling too hard. OK. Just carefully kind of raking it away. Particularly careful around the base of the trunk. Don't want to be digging those metal prongs into the wood. What we're starting to see is quite a dense area of roots. This is where it's starting to get a lot denser. We're getting a bit of black soil around here as well. We're going to have to get into that. We can just come in and cut through that root ball. We know we're not going to get any big, thick, woody roots this far out. We could even just come through and just cut that root ball there. Not a problem at all. Do you have a reference margin that feels safe? Between the roots and how much rootage can you cut with the sickle? Basically, the fibrous roots are going to start here. If I really wanted to, it would be stupid, but you could cut through all the way to there. You're not going to do too much serious damage to the actual woody root system of the tree. All that you're going to be doing is reducing the fibrous root system of the tree and its ability to then uptake water immediately after this repotting. Realistically, what we want to do is try and keep as much of that fibrous root system on there as we possibly can. What we're really looking at doing is just sort of refreshing that top layer, refreshing the circle around the root ball, and just a little bit on the underside. Removing the mat on the underside and refreshing the bottom? Yeah. So this is based on the assumption that this tree was handled correctly? Yeah. From the field? Yeah. Is that what you're saying? Well, in this case, it would have been handled correctly on its importation process into the United States. Okay. Because unless it was grown here, it would have been bare-rooted on import, which is essentially the same as lifting from the field. But yeah, it's the same thing. It's been correctly handled throughout its history, basically. Gotcha. Okay. And what are some of the biggest things that you see when azaleas are mishandled? If you looked at this and you said, this has been mishandled, what would you see? Well, we would sort of particularly tend to see that once we start getting underneath it. Okay. Or big patches of black soil around where roots have died off. They've either killed themselves off through matting, or poor application of fertilizer, poor application of fertilizer. Yeah. So bad watering, it's dried out and the roots have died, and then matted together and formed a crust, and those areas start to kind of like stagnate, and you get that funky smell of sort of roots rotting away, and water, sort of stagnant water that's not been allowed to drain away. Right. So this sort of black area that we see here isn't of concern. That's just basically sort of broken down soil. If we smell that, it smells ugly. Yeah. Take a bump of kanuma there. That's a nice smell. Some of that bark. That's a nice healthy smell. If you smell it and it looks black, and you've got black sort of woody roots, that's when you know you're in danger. But that's just basically sort of broken down soil that needs to be cleaned out. So that's what was going to happen. And this is kind of like, it's obvious that it's going to sort of happen around here, because this has been closest to the edge of the pot. And so this is where a lot of root activity has been happening. The roots are sort of growing out there, closest to the edge of the pot. Maybe some of those roots have died off because of the heat, and you get a little bit of breakdown. This will have been where, for example, on the previous repot, a person's been working it in a lot harder to try and get soil in that gap. And maybe that's broken down a little bit quicker. Hmm. So the heat causes the roots to grow faster in that area, but also can cause more damage, or... Yeah. Yeah. So basically, like you had said last time, and I know in some experiences dealing with some Satsuki repots that you and I have collaborated on for some specific people, you've said the distance between sort of the woody roots and the edge of the container needs to be X amount. Yeah. What is that X amount? I spoke about that earlier. About two fingers. Yeah. Okay. Two fingers. Okay. As a rough guide. I just wanted to come back and make sure that I... Yeah. Yeah. So here... I feel like I just got reprimanded by my teacher or something. We already talked about that, had you chose to listen. Had you not been on your phone. Wow. So at the back here, there's been a lot more space. So that's been a little bit better. I mean, but even here. I mean, there's two fingers here, and we've already cut off another two fingers there, so to speak. So there's been plenty of room in here. So there's not really been anything to be too worried about. But I've seen some very, very big azaleas where... The roots are right up touching against the side of the pot. And as long as they're kept like in semi-shade, out of the absolute sort of heat of the summer, and maybe that part of the Nibari is covered in sort of rough sphagnum moss, just sort of loosely sort of packed around, there's not been too much of an issue. Maybe needs to be repotted a little bit more frequently, so every two years as opposed to three years. But it's possible to put them in tighter pots, but you just then end up with other issues to consider. More frequent repotting, summer care, aftercare, you know, that sort of thing just ends up being a little bit different. The older varieties, the older the variety, the stronger they tend to be. So for example, those trees with the really big Nibaris, things like Shiryunomai, which is like a 400-year-old variety, one of the really old ones, they're pretty much, you know, as tough as nails. The more kind of... Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The hybridised versions, a lot of the newer versions can be a little bit weaker, and so you have to be a little bit more kind of delicate with those. So there is a bit of kind of sort of variety considerations that we have with the root system. Okay. So again, just not being too aggressive with the root hook. Just kind of working... We're starting to see like quite a compacted area around here. Okay. So you can see like this is... I would guess this is where the previous root ball was. You know, it was cut here on the last repot. We've got like a stratification of the soil almost. Okay. So maybe looking at trying to get into that, clean that out a little bit more. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. One thing that I've like constantly been...that has constantly and consistently surprised me about sat-ski's in the way that they're handled is there's almost like a predictability to them in the same way that there's like a predictability to pines in their behaviour. Like you know if you prune them and you have a healthy tree, they're gonna push buds. You know if you handle the roots in this way and you don't see any sort of compromising conditions that they're gonna respond with... health, would you say that that's a safe observation, that they are very predictable if you handle them in specific ways? Yeah. And part of that predictability is that they will die if you don't handle them correctly. Right, right. Really easily. Yeah. And so, I mean, like when you, some of the bigger issues that you see in terms of the repotting process that it sounds like you're saying to me, containers where the root system is close to the edge of the container or they're exposed to intense heat, or those decisions not also coming with frequent repots, overhandling of the canuma being an extremely soft soil and turning that canuma into dust, not handling the surface roots and continuing to remove that compacted organic matter in the surface roots so that water stops percolating. And then there, and then maybe mishandling of depth of the container so that it properly drains. Yeah. And then the water can occupy the bottom and impede the exit of the water. Mm. Is that sound pretty...are those kind of the main touch points for the big problems that you've noticed that are guaranteed? Yeah. And then anything in there that you frequently see as far as SAT-SKEs beyond what you've discussed thus far that, are potential issues? One of the biggest things. is making sure that water gets underneath the trunk. Okay, and so part of that is how we deal with that surface area, the surface layer. And what we might try to look to, I mean, the nebari on this tree is pretty good and sort of all around, goes off in eight directions. But if we can try to maybe like try and make a little bit of a hole, a little bit of a passage down right into the core so that we can ensure that moisture gets down to it, I'd say we've got a bit of a gap at the back here. That's gonna be our sort of closest area to sort of get down to that. So making sure that this area, we maybe just even like just open up a little hole, sort of refill that with some, sort of loosely refill that with Kanima, then we're gonna be absolutely assured that water is gonna work its way down into there. With a nebari this sort of size, we don't really have to worry about it too much because capillary reaction will suck moisture up into it. As long as, you know, there's plenty of water in the soil. But if the nebari is like huge and sort of filling the pot, then that's something you might need to be sort of concerned about. There was one grower in particular, he was very, very good at sort of creating nebari on azaleas. He was like a colleague of Ebihara, who was the sort of the, one of the deciduous kind of like masters, and they were able to create this sort of phenomenal azaleas, these massive nebari and plant them into really shallow pots. Kinsai made them into sort of these beautiful deciduous sort of styles. Kinsai? Kinsai, yeah. Isn't that a really sensitive hybrid? Not really, I mean, it's quite an old variety. Is this the spider flower? Yeah. Yeah, okay. It's not, it's pretty strong. Pretty strong. I was saying earlier about the need to put gloves on and I didn't put gloves on and now my hands are starting to hurt. So just sort of, excuse me, man. Yeah. That was like your, that really feels unjust too because you were so vocal about those gloves. I know. And I just, I feel wronged. What? I feel wronged about the effort we went through to get you those gloves. I know, sorry. And you didn't even use them and now your hands are all cracking. I know. I'm just so into the moment of kind of like, you know, just making sure that I say everything right and don't upset you. Yeah, right. But yeah, so he would make these, the kids, and they were planted in really, really shallow pots, like super shallow pots. But he was able to get them to survive because he knew how to water them and things like that. A couple of them went over to Europe and they were seen once and never again, really. That was a consistent discussion about Ebi Hara's work is like he was this horticultural mastermind in addition to a really good design mind as well. Well, he was super technical. Yeah. And he made trees very, very quickly. And his apprentice or his colleague, they were kind of went together, a guy called Skoda. And he was originally a Satsuki grower. And he did the same sort of thing with azaleas. And so, yeah, he basically sort of created these trees with phenomenal labari. And what he did with some of them when they were in the training, he would have a hose pipe. When he repotted them, he would put a piece of hose directly underneath the trunk and it would come up out of the pot and there would be a funnel, and he would be out of water through there. Water would go through, it would be feeding directly underneath the trunk. That's how important it is. I've never done that myself. I know that one or two people have done that in the United States. I've never sort of seen the long-term results of that, but that's just an illustration of how important it is to ensure that water gets down directly underneath that trunk. Could you thoroughly water and then tilt the container up on an angle? That's another way of ensuring. Okay. And just use gravity and move the water diagonally through the root mass. Yeah. I know that's something that we use pretty frequently to get water underneath deciduous, sort of those used root tridents in Japanese maple bases. Yeah. I mean, that's another technique, just making sure that you got, just put a piece of wood under there and then that's enough. And again, the capillary reaction, because as we said earlier, canola soil has incredible sort of capillary reaction that's gonna suck up the moisture very, very easily into the, you know, up in underneath there. So there's a lot of discussion about Saskia azalea that have been cultivated in say like peat moss or other mediums. Maybe they were from the horticultural world or gardening world that have been made into bonsai. And from my limited experience, it sounds to me like people have a hard time transitioning them from like a peat moss mix to a canuma mix. And creating that, what's up with that? Can you do it? And what is so challenging about that? Well, I mean, I guess if you're trying to kind of like completely change the soil mixture, because you're gonna want a consistent mixture all throughout the pot. Right. You don't want to have like the core of it, peat moss and then around it, cannabis soil, because then you're gonna have inconsistencies in the amount of moisture and the oxygen balance throughout the pot. And you're gonna end up with all sorts of issues. But trying to sort of bare root and clean out all of the soil on an unhealthy azalea is just asking for trouble. You know, the grape taking them from the field and doing it. Okay, so you can sort of just see here that there's not a whole lot of root. We still got good consistent particles of cannabis in there. So I'm gonna try and touch that as little as possible. Can you show that to Ricardo? Oh, boom. All right. So there's consistent sort of particles in there. It's not really broken down too well. So it's that section I want to try and touch as little as possible. That is the shin. That's the core of it. We start getting deep into that and we'll start seeing the top of the tree dying off. Wow. It's that important. So if you start getting in there, you start touching it, you start screwing things up. Yeah. And so sometimes you have to. And one of the repots I did just recently with Bob, we had to get in there and do that. And so the aftercare for that is gonna be, absolutely critical. And what is the aftercare if you have to get in there? What if that's all black and you got to take that out? What is the aftercare? Making sure that there's just, you're controlling the amount of moisture loss that's around the tree. Good balance of water and oxygen. Yeah. So you're not gonna overwater the pot, but you're gonna excessively miss the top of the tree. The foliage, the leaves. The foliage, the leaves. Keeping it out of the wind. Ideally, you know, temperature control, nothing too hot, nothing too cold. Wow. Completely babying it. Yeah. And how long does that have to go on for? I would say at least sort of like half a season of being sort of careful. Uh-huh. Once you start to see like, you know, things starting to grow, starting to grow, then you can be a little bit more confident that the tree is gonna be okay. And then you could start to sort of treat it a little bit more like a normal tree, but at the same time, it could just collapse. So you're always gonna be wanting to have it in sort of semi-shade throughout the year. Boy that's amazing. You know that azalea that you pruned on the last azalea stream that you did, and the apex on that tree has been weak for a long time and is just starting to get a little bit stronger. So when I repotted that, it had been up potted and up potted and up potted without the work ever being done on the original root mass. And so when I did the first repot of it, not knowing Satsuky nearly to the degree that you do, I had to go all the way back I had to go all the way back all the way back into the sheen because it was just black to the original root ball, the very first size of the root mass that it had been obviously up-potted three times past. And then it was sort of out of my care, but serendipitously ended up in a very sort of shady, mild environment, protected from the wind and probably watered. Wow, that's crazy how scary that was. That could have died a lot easier. Yeah, but situations like that is do or die. Yeah, yeah, I had no choice. It wasn't like I could leave it, it was bad. But it's interesting to have not had control of the horticulture of that. And maybe it was actually a blessing in disguise that they sort of put it in a really sheltered environment as the general viewing location for that tree after that operation, whereas I might not have done that here. So for example, the trees that would get imported and bare-rooted. You can put that on the ground for real. Trees that would get imported and bare-rooted, they're basically sort of kept in a mist house and just misted depending on how hot it is. You try and keep the temperature no more than say 65 degrees, the air temperature around it, and then misted depending on how hot it is. Kept in a polytron and just misted all the time, all the time. And that will help the trees to be able to just sort of send out lots and lots of growth. Because if an azalea is in a really humid environment, it sends out roots from the branches. You'll see like if super dense azalea, and it's kept in like really, really high humidity, you look inside the branches and there's tiny hairs, tiny root hairs sort of forming on the branches. And is there a force? That's how much they can kind of like breathe and through the, through the, through the, through the, you know, the top of the tree. Is there a foliar disease issues with that kind of humidity? There can be. Yeah. But they don't get like, in the United States, I've never really sort of seen any kind of sort of fungal diseases with azaleas. It's more kind of insects that you, that you would start to see. Would you say if an azalea starts showing fungal issues that that's a greater discussion of a lack of health in the roots potentially? Yeah, absolutely, yeah, yeah. Yeah. I think that's becoming consistent. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Just a consistently more understood aspect of root zone health is that fungal issues really directly associate with issues in the roots. At least that, that's my experience. It's interesting to hear that, that. Yeah. What, what you tend to see would be mite damage. Because azaleas, if you, if you're growing them like, and you're feeding them heavily, you're pumping them full of, of, of food, lots of water, they're full of sugar, they're, they're really delicious. You know, and we're talking spider mites? Yeah, spider mites. I've never seen any other, any other type of mite damage here, but in azalea, in Japan, they've got thousands. There's always some new mite on the scene. Have you, have you ever dealt with aerified mites on azaleas? No. No, okay. Not to my knowledge, anyway. Yeah, sure. So, so spider mite damage is, is something that you might start seeing. Tiny little black spots, particularly on the underside of the, of, of the leaves, and, and just general discoloration. And scale on the, on the, on the bark. Which tends to be tiny little white dots. That's, no, that's just a bit of burr. I sort of tend to see sort of little white dots on the, on the bark. And, you know, that's a sign of sort of scale infestation. So, so as you're, as you're kind of working on your azaleas, and here on that area that was sort of close to the edge of the container and what not what how do you know how far to go you know I mean this is like everybody's big question like how far back do I do I take this so we're talking about this tree that we don't really want to do a lot of work to if it was responsibly handled out of the field you want to increase water percolation through the surface and that matting you want water to exit the root mass you know but at the same time you are you are working that area that was close to the edge of the container I mean once you start getting really close in it and I mean this is this is brown as opposed to black uh-huh if it was really black and we start and see some dead roots I'd perhaps be a bit a little bit more aggressive but that's probably gonna be about enough now when we start to wash that out a lot of that that that soil is gonna come out so you're working that more because it's not as healthy because the soil is broken down a little bit more I'll say it's unhealthy but the soil is in that area has perhaps broken down a little bit more than it has around here okay okay so you're on health would be kind of like dead roots and it would be kind of black as opposed to brown so brown is broken down black is dead yellow and and like you know can you like this area here is just like that that's absolutely fine but I think if we if we take took that back a little further we're going to get back to this kind of original root structure in here and you're and you're taking it back to create room for new roots to grow yeah and that's that's your general focus yep and then the degree to which you take it back to allow those new roots to grow some people are going to be hesitant to take it back far enough some people are going to be overly aggressive and take it back too far and do you have you have any advice on like how do you know when you've taken it back far enough I mean this is like a constant question that I try to answer with that conifers right yeah I would say what you want to be considering is kind of like the the surface area that you're gonna have of moisture absorbing roots in the pot as opposed to the surface area of moisture losing foliage upon top okay I'm gonna try and achieve like a decent balance about obviously with a with the repot a But you might need to be a bit more aggressive. There's going to be less roots than there are anything on top. Because the tree had achieved a balance in the container and you already took some off from there, right? Okay, and so if you start going too far away, if you start taking too many roots away in a slightly more aggressive repot, then you might want to think about perhaps just thinning out some of the branches or putting it in an aftercare situation where you're going to be able to control the moisture loss from the top of the tree until the new roots have started to sort of grow out and sort of compensate for that a little bit. The roots will start growing almost immediately. And so the minute we start to see kind of like decent elongation on here and there's no kind of like negative response from the repot, then you know it's going to be okay and then you can start looking after it a little bit better. You can be quite aggressive with them and they'll respond. As long as you're only kind of working on the side and the top you start being aggressive underneath that's when you're going to start seeing seeing issues so for you when you're taking it back ultimately what you're looking at is quality of roots quality of the soil and the space that you're creating for new roots to grow yeah you see alarming areas where the soil is more broken down you know you need to work that a little bit more heavily you you uh free up water movement through the surface you you don't really touch the bottom unless there's an emergency that you've got to handle it at yeah but your limitation around the sides or where you're stopping your work around the sides once you start kind of like getting into woody roots okay and and once you and once you're getting into really fine dense masses or or woody roots like here let me get closer from that a little bit maybe like here we start to see some of the some of the woody roots in there okay and so we don't really want to be going too much further in than that okay but i mean this was just i think the previous repot on this it was perhaps not not worked on enough around here okay around those areas wasn't perhaps cleaned out enough uh and even with just kind of just a sort of standard repot every sort of third repot fourth repot you're going to have to go in and and sort of really kind of clean out a lot more aggressively than the normal because it's always going to break down yeah in there and so so in a lot of ways this is standard it is quite standard you're going to see this and and people need to know how to be able to deal with this and and this is awesome man this this is super great just getting to see because this is for an azalea you're never going to have a situation where over the course of two or three repottings you're not going to have to do this and they're like obviously i try to organize my information so that it makes sense to me because i can't remember everything like uh trying to compartmentalize all this but just basically not not focus on like uh what you're saying as a black and white but focusing on what you're saying in terms of why are you doing what you're doing and what aspects of the tree are informing your decisions to do what you're doing it's it's become very obvious that the areas that are in good health aren't at that point where you've got to go in and do significant excavation and the areas that are in good health you're going to keep in good health to be able to support the tree while you go into the areas that have a little bit more of a compromise broken down soil black brown you can do more work on those areas if you have areas of health that you do less work on what you just said perfect okay design grow understand building your skills right live peter warren sorry i'm a bonsai uh hang on just a sec did we just get a pelvic thrust was that the first pelvic thrust on mariah live i think so no no oh it's not i believe you didn't oh but it didn't get on it was before you were wow hey lion at least you're consistent okay one thing i would also sort of point out is we have this wire this is one of the previous tie-down wires okay and it's still in the root ball okay don't go in and try and pull that out if you go in and see if it's not in the root ball it's still in the root ball okay don't go in and try and pull that out if you go in and start yanking away yanking away this is going to be a huge chunk of fibrous roots that's going to come off uh once once we start to to wash it off a little bit maybe work on it we might be able to get that out but if that stays in it's not going to be a huge issue okay it's been in there for a number of years it's not going to poison the tree or anything like that don't go in and just start yanking things out and try and pulling them because you're just going to pull off massive amounts of fibrous roots and then how we do our tie down and how we tie the tree down into the into the pot is also there's also going to be some of that sort of idea sort of playing into it um so particularly the steel wire which is we didn't bring it okay so the steel wire that you may have seen uh ryan using a lot um for the rest of the things um if we use that sort of directly across the root ball that's just going to sort of cut through it like you know like a cheese wire it's just going to cut straight through those roots the minute we start to tighten it up and so we're not going to use any kind of like if we have to use that kind of um very fine sort of steel wire then we'll be looking at sort of tying it down with pegs and then we're going to use that kind of um very fine sort of steel wire then we'll be putting sort of pegs in there and tying it down that way or maybe a piece of bamboo the whole way across and then pulling it down like this but we would never want to be putting a very sort of very fine wire across the root ball to tie it down what we tend to do is to use quite a quite quite a large at least 2.5 if not three millimeter uh aluminium wire which is a lot bigger so that like the pressure on the root ball uh the ability for it to sort of tear through is going to be a lot less okay so we're going to look at that a bit more in detail but when you do get the you get these roots sort of uh the wires sort of sticking out of the root ball sort of halfway through the repot don't pull on them just let them come out naturally okay do you do you cut them off and just leave them then well if we can't if that's not going to come out naturally then i'll cut it off okay hopefully i got you hopefully when we start to work on it a little bit more that's going to come out don't force it basically gotcha always just try and tease it out so you i mean so number one you remove the tree from the container assess the the condition of the roots number two you uh you work that surface out and then you cut it off and then you cut it surface layer to allow water penetration number three you're checking the bottom to make sure you have a good healthy sheen and and that's really the area that we're going to touch least if the canuma is still intact and health and then and then number four you work the sides and you're you're uh fixing any problems brown or black decomposed broken down etc and reducing it sort of till you hit the really heavy patches of fine roots or woody roots and yeah and and that that sort of systematically is where we're where we're at in terms of handling the the satsuki yeah what are you what are you preparing for now you keep talking about washing and washing and washing we've basically sort of taken off as much of the the soil as we can easily do with the root hook without causing any damage uh and with with the chopsticks and things like that now what we want to do is try and get rid of now we're just going to wash the surface of it wash the sides and that's going to get rid of a lot of the kind of like the dusty stuff all the muddy bits you'll you'll see quite a lot of it sort of coming out um and so that's going to be the next step and at the same time will also be a good idea to sort of um uh we're going to sort of wash the trunk as well okay so you want to take this outside and get that done let's get it done all right here we go okay so we've uh we've moved outside already for for the root washing i'm suitably attired in uh waterproofs because it's going to get a bit messy uh one thing to note is that if we start to see uh the roots kind of drying out they're turning white like this it wasn't happening in the studio because there was no airflow through there um no direct sunlight or anything like that but if that starts to happen during your repot make sure that that gets sort of uh moistened um if particularly if you're not going to be sort of washing and we don't want the roots to be drying out like that because they die very very very quickly so what we're going to do is we're going to use a pump and a sort of a water jet spray to to clean up the trunk and the roots it's very important that the pump pressure you know the water jet pressure isn't too aggressive and it's going to take the bark off the tree and start to expose uh azaleas very very thin bark so that can happen quite easily so uh the pump that we that we've got we have an adjustable nozzle so we're going to be sort of taking care uh not to do that okay but it's going to be loud and so it might not be able to talk too much but here we go okay so to test to see if the pressure is too much uh hold your hand out and if it hurts it's probably too much okay here we go so you can see a lot of the mud gets out very very easily with the water jet then we start to see areas of black in and around there that's something that we might need to look at so another good technique to use is uh with a very sort of soft nylon brush not too aggressive just brush over the trunk okay and you see it all this sort of the green algae starts to sort of liquefy try and get into all of those uh nooks and crannies across the nebari all in there now if we start to sort of really sort of take off the bark and you start to just begin to see uh some of the the sort of the cambium layer sort of showing through that's that's going a little bit too far it's not a terrible situation if you do do expose a little bit there's a tiny bit exposed but we don't expose it too much. Again when the trees are kind of like bare-rooted and imported into the United States for example some of them get washed and half of the trunk will be kind of like green and have that cambium layer sort of exposed and it doesn't kill them it doesn't sort of damage them too much as long as they're because they're sort of put into protective aftercare but if it can be avoided, avoid it. Then once we've done brushing what we're going to look at doing is definitely sort of rinsing it off. So using the jet is a good sort of good way to cover large areas but some of the more hard-to-reach areas we want to get in there with a brush. Once we get onto the branches you have to be very careful not to break any of the twigs this is where having the brush we're having the jet for example is much much better but if you're very careful you can kind of get in amongst some of those branches and just clean it up a little. One of the aspects of azaleas is that even if a tree was say 300 years old it doesn't necessarily sort of show that age and character through the bark because it would have been cleaned off many many times throughout its life and the bark of a 300 year old azalea and say a 30 year old azalea is very very similar and we want to sort of see it so it's we don't want it to be covered in algae and sort of green gunk and lichen and things like that because not only does it affect the health of the tree but it's just it's not you know azaleas are pretty trees they're not kind of like ancient rugged wild beasts and so they need to look pretty so what I'm doing here is kind of like supporting the branch structure so that nothing gets blown off by the pressure okay so this is probably one of the the best examples of what we need to try and get rid of see what all this lichen growing on the inside there now along with all the green sort of like the algae growing on the surface this is basically going to sort of hinder the new shoots or being out no no new shoots adventitious shoot it's gonna be a burst out through that so we've got to try and get rid of that okay now if the Jets too strong on this we might actually damage the branch you sort of snap them off so we've got to make sure it's not too powerful and I sort of supporting the branches at the same time okay so now that's a little bit cleaner okay we've got rid of some of it if we can't get it all off maybe go through the brush and just do the best that we can without actually sort of damaging the the branches okay it's just very carefully just going through clean those up right so I've been washing the trunk in there and this whole surface for the last half an hour you didn't need to see it all clean. I've been washing the trunk and the soil surface for the last half an hour you didn't need to see it all clean. it's very boring but we've cleaned the trunk up as best we can with the with the gun and the brush that we have the the cleaning process I mean there's once it once the trunk gets wet some of it becomes like you're uncertain whether or not you've cleaned it off sufficiently or not so I might need to come back and do this again at some point but that kind of cleaning process can be done at any time throughout the year so we've washed the root ball quite considerably it's broken it up quite a lot the only other thing that we really need to look at is developing some holes kind of like in and around the the Nibari so that water can sort of penetrate through to the shin and so kind of dug away at this area and we've got a good good sort of solid hole all the way down to there okay and then we're going to do another one just around the back here so just to make sure that you know water can some really get down to that that sort of core area I'm just going to work away at some of that compacted soil a little bit more okay just dig away you can still see it coming out it's all a bit compacted and that dark soil it's not unhealthy in here just yet but if we hadn't if we didn't we didn't do this sort of now then in a couple of years you might start seeing some bigger issues okay not putting too much regression in there because there are some woody roots down there we don't want to be damaging them too much okay just kind of by opening up a hole try to dig some of that so I'll just be careful that branch above it all right so the chopstick now it goes through there nice and easily it's easy access down right to that core so anytime this tree gets watered what's going to run down the trunk down through into there and that's going to penetrate through to the sheen and make sure that that's always kind of like always nice and moist and wet okay so then the last thing we're going to want to do is just make sure we just kind of like wash that out as best we can wash all the crap off the trunk and then that's going to be ready to repot so a good way to check to see whether or not water is able to penetrate is to when we have it like this we just cover the whole root ball with water we can see that that penetrates through really really quickly and easily and so we have no worries about kind of water percolating through down into the root ball so it's not pooling on the surface or anything like that that's that's penetrating through so we know that water is going to get through to that to that core of the root ball right so now what we're going to do is prepare the soil now what I would always recommend with any repot is that you always prepare the soil mix up ahead of time so that the the trees not sort of sitting open-hearted like this you know repotting is like open-heart surgery and so you want everything prepared in advance wherever possible the root ball is completely wet we have no worries about any roots drying out or anything like that so it's fine so what we're going to do is going to sift the the kanima into into two different grades so a larger size just for the bottom of the pot and then the sort of the smaller size for the rest of the soil mixture so first time I've used the kanima I'm going to sift the kanima into two different grades so what we're going to try and do is separate it out now look just just looking at the at the kanima at first glance we've got some we've got a wide range of kind of like particle size in there there's some small there's some medium then there's some really big that's what we're going to use try and sift those out okay so this would probably be the the big size that we're going to want to use that I don't think we're going to want to use it all now you can see the amount of dust that comes out every time you handle kanima basically you're going to you're going to have a lot of dust coming out and you're going to have a lot of you're going to create dust right so you can see that's two bags of kanima has been sifted out and that's how much dust has come out so the quality of the kanima soil and like how how much dust is in there can depend on many factors like how long it's been imported whereabouts on the pallet it's been so if it was right down at the bottom with like a hundred bags on top of it the weight of that would have broken it down and things like that so the the quality and the amount of dust that you get out can be can vary and even though it's been sifted if we every time we sort of handle it we're going to create more more dust and so even sort of sifting it before we put it in there's always going to be just coming out there's always going to be just coming out you can just sift and sift and sift and dust will always constantly sort of coming out so as you can get the most of it out that you know that's all that we really need to do at this stage so what we're going to do now is just add about 20% of pumice into both of the mixes as I said earlier that's going to help the the sort of stability of the soil the you know the integrity of it it's going to stop it from breaking down too much and it's also going to help with subsequent repot so that's what we're going to do next this is pre pre sifted pumice that's going to help now for most people what I would always recommend is that you sift before sort of mixing up sift everything up and then eight scoops of kanuma two scoops of the pumice sort of mix it up like that once you've I've been doing this for a long enough time that I can sort of just tell by sight and get a good feel for how much is in there but I would definitely recommend sort of accurately measuring things out so I'm just going to make sure it's all you know nice and mixed up kind of pulling the kanuma and the pumice through at the same time we get a nice consistent mix okay the more we handle it the more dust is going to come out so we don't want to handle it too much okay but that should be a good consistent mix in there and we can do the same here most of you if I had a twig you you could just decide like what's the way I would do this the best version is ainte so I don't have to worry on this is getting high so you know it's all organic like really Shake it out a little bit does don't quite explain or teach you what's an organic product like I didn't know it was chemical because it's a type of iota from that I wanted to do not know for gold and just nicely Liebe and in are that no that's really what's the root for now and we're not going to take that advantage of a risky way to keep things longer okay so no we're going to stay Okay, so we've finished the repotting, the root washing, sorry, cleaning it out, and if you remember, what we did was we created some holes in the root ball, so we have one hole in here, the water can penetrate all the way through to the shin, and then the other one there. Okay, so you've got to remember those once we put it in the pot. Now one thing that we've not looked at at all so far is the actual sort of front of the tree. I mentioned it right at the start, we're thinking about a potential change of front, but what we wanted to do really is get into the root ball and just see what was possible with any sort of potential front changes, for example, if we had any big, thick, heavy roots, maybe that would sort of get in the way. So what we'll do is we'll try putting it in the pot and see what happens. Okay, so the existing front, this is slightly deeper than it's going to be. Okay. Once it's planted, but the existing front was something like that, okay, and as that sort of, with that as the front, this branch is starting to sort of come across and hide the lower trunk, and we're not seeing the nebari to its absolute finest. For me, the real sort of, the best front really is going to be somewhere around there, okay, where we get to see a much wider nebari. We get to see the movement of the trunk, it is very artificial movement, okay, this is a very sort of highly sort of stylised satsuki, it is what it is, it's not a criticism, but we get to see that movement a lot better, it feels a little bit more balanced. So what we're going to do is we're going to try and move the front around there. As you can see at the moment, can we maybe get a close up of that? We have the root ball touching tight up against the pot here. So what I'm going to do is just take a little bit more soil, a little bit more of the roots off in here. And a touch more there, so we've got a little bit of space to get some soil in, okay. And what we're also trying to look at doing is maybe just tipping it back a touch, okay, because at the moment the apex is kind of dominating, coming towards us a little bit too much, so we'll just look at tipping it back. We can do that without taking any extra soil off, okay, just with the depth that we have in there, mound up the soil a little bit more at the front, it's going to allow us to tip it back a little. What we'll do is just take a bit more soil off of there. A bit more for that, and then we'll prepare the pot. So just on this corner around here. So after you've done all of those sort of, it's almost like you met the horticultural needs first. Yeah. Now you're coming back and sort of addressing some of the soil. Yeah. Some of the stylistic shifts. Yeah. You know, particularly because this is the first time that I've ever repotted this tree. If I knew what the roots were like, if I'd done it a couple of times, then, you know, maybe I'd be, could think about those right from the start, but yeah, I mean, really with the horticultural requirements of the tree were slightly more important. Because for example, the issue that we have with this branch coming across the front, one simple solution to that is to cut the branch off. If we couldn't, if we couldn't shift it around a little bit more, could just cut that branch off. You know what azaleas are like, they're going to bud all over. We can restyle that branch, but really the, the, the, the sort of the change of the front is really just to see that nebari a little bit better. Oh, interesting. Just so we get that. It does two things. This problem, the problem of that branch coming across could be solved by pruning the branch, but seeing the nebari to its fullest, you know, the only way to do that is just to tweak it around in the pot a little. Gotcha. Yeah. Yeah. The flexibility of azaleas kind of amazes me. How do you mean flexibility of them? I mean just the idea that if you, you know, really we all, all we would have to do is just prune it because you know, azaleas are just going to bud back on a healthy tree. It's like that flexibility. You couldn't just be like with a pine, like I'm just going to prune this off because I know I'm going to get buds everywhere behind it. It just doesn't work that way. Right? Absolutely not. And so, I mean, as long as the tree is like healthy, you've got a good root system on it, there's, there's a lot of energy in the tree. You can just go buck wild on it. Nice. Buck wild bonsai. You can, you can, you can hack them back and they're going to, they're going to bud. The real challenge with them is getting them healthy, okay? Keeping them healthy. It's that horticultural challenge more than the, more than the kind of like the design and the aesthetics challenge. Okay. Right. So that's going to fit into the, into the pot a little better. We're going to be able to get a little bit of soil sort of in and down around those pot points that we're touching. So what we'll do now is just prepare the pot and think about how we're going to tie it down. So here we have our pot, which was cleaned for me earlier by Ryan. Thank you very much. Did you notice any damage on the pot at all? I didn't look super hard. I was more trying to get rid of all of the, all of the canuma that was dried on it. But I didn't see anything blaring. Okay. You may want to check again, particularly on the feet. Yeah. So let's just have a check of the front. Again, I didn't see anything obvious, any obvious damage. There was no obvious sort of anything going on. I feel like there might be a chip on the foot on this side, but maybe not. That might've been some soil. Yeah. I think it's just soil. Okay. So. It's interesting watching when you watch professionals repot, you know, there's 500 things to keep in mind as you're repotting angle of the tree, position of the tree, position in the container. But then you also have the container best front color, shape, form, chips, imperfections, and keeping all of that in mind so that all of that comes together is a, is a lot. Yep. And the reason why I do that for, like on an industrial, when, you know, when we were apprentice doing that on an industrial level. Oh yeah. Was, was, you know, 20, 30 trees a day. Yeah. Well it's hard. You had to be totally on top of your game all times. Yeah. Okay. So we have our, this is, as I said earlier, this is an ideal sort of pot for, for an azalea because of the depth, the depth to it. We is ever so slightly kind of, we do have a little bit of a lip there, but nothing too much to consider. But when we're working the soil. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. When we're working the soil, I'm going to make sure that that gets filled in. So ideally we have the, the, the black mesh that, that gets used here. What I found is trying to use, and I use this at home, but if you have access to slightly larger gauge mess or bigger holes that will allow a lot of the dust that's going to sort of accumulate in, in the pot as we work in the soil, and it's going to allow that to, to drain out a lot quicker. So I mean, really all it means is we just have to be super careful. That we get all of that, that, that dust out for the first couple of waterings after repotting. It's not, it's not going to really sort of affect the long-term health of the, of the root ball to have this, this finer mesh in there. We've just got to sort of bear that in mind when we are sort of doing that wash out. Okay. So tying down the, the, sort of tying down the mesh, I will always talk to, to just make a little staple like this. The chief would always sort of. Laugh at us if we did all of the fancy little, the loops like you do, and every time I see you do that, I just think of the chief. Just laughing at us, waste of time, a waste of time. Just do it like this. It's so quick. So, I mean, there's, there's all sorts of different methods of, of holding the, the mesh down. Sure. As long as it's, as long as it stays secure, that's all that matters. Okay. So we've got one, two, three, four holes, the same size. So we make. Okay. And I always tend to use a waste wire for this, I keep an old wire just for this purpose. That's funny because Mr. Kimura would have been like, that's just poor craftsmanship to not do it any other way. Each to their own. To each their own. That's right. Absolutely. As long as the end result is the same. That's right. Okay. The important thing with the, with any of the, any, any technique is that the, the legs of the, of the, the, the, the staple as it were hold tight against the edge of the pot, the edge of the hole. So they were up against the pot. So as we push it through, just putting enough pressure on there so that it is tight, not so much that the, the, the, the mesh sort of lifts up. So we're pushing the mesh through with it and then just bend the legs back on the other side and then that cannot move. So thinking about the tie down strategy is I like your, your description of it the other day. Basically, we are going to move away from the, from the, the fine steel wire. That you normally use here because that would just cut through the root ball like cheese wire or, you know, piano wire garrotting a Russian spy or something similar. Wow. Topical thing there. Some, some of that, some of that Euro torture vibe. So we're going to avoid that. And what I would tend to use is if I had, if I only had the, the finer sort of steel wire, I would think about using bamboo pegs in the side of the root ball to, to, to pull down on all four corners or having a piece of bamboo kind of across the root ball and then pulling down. Okay. It's just the, the idea is just to kind of like sort of spread the pressure. Okay. So with the, the, the fine wire, the, the, the sort of the tension that it's going to be put under will, will, will cut through. With a lot of, with a lot of pressure as opposed to using sort of quite a thicker gauge aluminum wire, aluminum wire, which is what we'll, which is what we'll do. So what I tend to use is anything sort of more than about 2.5 mil for a tree of this size. Tree this size is going to be sort of quite unstable in the pot and it's going to be a sail to sort of catch the wind. Okay. So if it's put in some, in an exposed position, it could catch the wind quite easily. Which could move it in the pot and if it moves in the pot, the tips of the roots will die and you're going to sort of see some stunted development. Okay. So we're going to have to make sure that it's tied in nice and tight. And one of the differences perhaps that you'll see with, between azaleas and other trees is you're never going to get it like super tight in the pot. Okay. Even though when we, when we tie it down, there will be a little bit of give until we fill up the soil, just because of the sort of the structural, the softness of the, of the canoma. Okay. So there's always going to be a little bit of movement in there. So just immediately after repotting, you're going to want to just be very careful how you move it. I mean, as with any other tree, never, never sort of pick up the tree by the trunk, never touch the trunk when you're moving it, always hold the pot, but just be that little bit more careful sort of immediately after repotting for, for a couple of months until it establishes itself in there. Would, would the bamboo. The bamboo, you know, hammering in the bamboo stake and tying down with, you know, the steel wire or aluminum, whatever your choice is to the bamboo stake. Do you prefer carrying a thicker gauge aluminum over the root system? You said the thicker gauge distributes the force, won't cut through the root system like a thinner steel wire would, but do you prefer that too, because the bamboo stake can damage that fine root system? When you're driving the stake directly into the root ball, you could end up sort of hitting up against the. The thicker roots, the thicker, woodier roots that could cause some damage, but realistically it's more a question, I mean, there's the time perspective, it takes a lot longer to do all the things in as opposed to just sort of taking two wires across. As long as the tree is solid and stable in there, but yeah, I mean, you have a lot more kind of, it's a lot more faffing around, putting pegs and things in. So as long as you've got a good solid root ball like this has. We've got something to sort of tied onto. We can run a wire across it that's going to be strong enough to hold in, then I would do that all the time. Gotcha. Okay. So what we're going to do is going to put it in kind of at the angle that we're looking at. It'll be something like that. And then look at where our holes are. Okay. So we're going to put it in the pot and see where our sort of holes are in relation to the roots. Okay. Okay. So I'm going to try and put one wire across the front of the root ball there and then one across the back. Okay. I forgot to tie that one down. So we're going to go across there. And maybe just across that corner there. Okay. So we're going to go with a good thick gauge of aluminium. Now it's a lot more expensive than the steel wire, so none of these massively long, huge pieces. And we have to be a little bit sort of cost. Okay. Conscious, but not so cost conscious that we end up being too short. Okay. So this is just a rough estimate of kind of how much it's going to be like that. Always leave you a little bit for good luck. Better be lucky than good. Well, you never know what might happen. Okay. And then what we'll do is similar to other repots you will have seen, we'll pre-bend so it's nice and flat on the bottom. Was the chief really demanding of rapid preparation? Yes. Just professional is speedy. What was it? Speedy. Beautiful. And cost-effective. Ah. Sort of that sort of thing. Like moth by night. There's no wastage. Yeah. Right. Yeah. That was Mr. And so we would never kind of like pre-bend and sort of do anything like that. Because it would just . We'd be like, what are you doing? Just throw it in there. So, okay. All right. Okay. You got me forgetting where I was at. Sorry. Sorry. I should have. Okay. Okay. So when we put it through the whole thing. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So when we put it through the hole, always make sure it's going to be tight up against the pot wall. So I'm not putting it right in the middle there and pulling the mesh. Okay. Because of the thin gauge of the mesh, it's difficult to get the wire through. Make sure that's straight. But yeah, it would be always just speed, speed, speed. But that sets you up for later in life. Okay. Because we've pre-bent it and we measured it out perfectly, that's flat and tight against the pot. Okay. Now, when you're using multiple wires, such as this, it was a good idea just to bend the two together so that you know which two are connected. Okay. We don't want to be necessarily sort of trying to tie the ends of opposite wires together. A bit longer than that. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Okay. Let's just do that one. But it's interesting how your sort of techniques and things change a little after you leave, and you know, you get to the opportunity to do things for yourself and some things never leave you then. Yeah. yeah they were um burned into your mind forever but even just like the the being kind of like cost-effective thing and i didn't think about it at the time um until i actually had to start paying for my own materials yeah sure until until you start buying your own why you're just like yeah i'll just use loads of it it's fine and then you see students clients burning through massive amounts of wire and you're like whoa easy now easy that's like ten dollars worth of wire that ten dollars adds up yeah that's what i'm saying ten dollars every repot yeah you repot 30 trees that's 300 bucks do you ever did you used to collect all the old wire um yeah yeah we recycled everything everything you know even as successful as i think a lot of the big name bonsai professionals in japan are that i think there's a misinterpretation of wealth and bonsai you know like oh they're these trees sell for so much money i think one thing i've noticed is that a lot of people don't grasp how how much time they're spending on bonsai time and and um time is money how much time and resource in terms of the supplies like the wire that adds up like the time that adds up like the care the fertilizer any sort of you know disease and pest maintenance bench space i mean it all when you're doing it on your own all of a sudden you realize like oh wow in order for bonsai to even be minorly profitable you've got to be really cognizant of all of the little pieces throughout the throughout the process all of the little pieces that you would you would pin down all of this time yeah yeah you separate those okay after that talking about being tight we're going to make sure is that now our soil in the basis is relatively tight so we put in a layer of the slightly larger grain mix that you saw us creating earlier with the back of 20 promise in there okay now what we want to do is just tamp it down not too aggressively not too not turning it to dust because every time those or perfect then petty we too not to not turn it to dust because every year by recorded doing it on such OK helping you the dust is going to be created but what we want to do is make sure it's nice and settled in there because otherwise under the weight of the the tree it will then sort of settle very very easily and then pockets might appear okay so just tamp it down just gently until it's as settled as it possibly can be all the way around the edges of the pot okay now just check the level okay remember that we wanted to just kind of tip it up slightly okay so we're not going to want too much more of the larger grain stuff in there there's probably about two to three particle depth in there and that will be enough to give us a good sort of aeration layer down there do you um do you use a little bit of a thicker aeration layer on satskis than you do other satskis or trees or do you depends on the depth of the pot okay so if we if this was a slightly shallower pot then i would just use the the smaller particle size the whole way through oh interesting okay but then i would but and then a deeper pot you would perhaps use a little bit more gotcha so essentially where you that that sort of central core of all those roots is going to happen you want the smaller smaller gauge stuff all right so we're going to just kind of mount it up a little bit towards the front okay now because we uh we didn't sort of attack the the shin of the tree we didn't really do too much to the bottom we should have a very very sort of flat base okay we'll just check that to the camera yep perfectly flat okay so there's no big depressions or anything in underneath there there's no big big holes so we don't have to worry about that if you come come to a repot um if you come to an azalea and you you perhaps the the shin hasn't completely developed okay or you've got like a big gap in somewhere then one technique that you can use is to touch you sort of turn the tree upside down pre-fill the hole okay make sure that you sort of work the soil in moisten it put your hand over it and sort of wwf sort of slam it into the pot or also sort of comes out okay that's what we would do um with a with a tree that didn't have any sort of shin in there obviously you make a bigger a mountain sort of in the in the middle of the pot but that won't be enough to get it into all of the nooks and crannies so you sort of pre-work it into those nooks and crannies make sure you've got a bit of excess soil in there try and match the two up and then you then you're absolutely certain that you're going to get soil in all in around the root ball because this is a well-established root ball we don't have to worry about that you just have to make it sort of flat and ever so slightly angled okay so we've got ever so slightly sort of rounded up at the top there okay that's going to give us our angle change a bit of a feel underneath okay we've got a big gap under the back here okay so i'm going to want to put a little bit of extra soil in there okay it's better to try and get as much soil in there before you tie the tree in as possible all right so i'm giving a mental image of all the gaps that are in and around okay i need more around there because we don't want to be working the soil in too much okay so i need a bit more soil around here we don't want to be sort of uh you may have seen with other repots sort of squishing the tree in and seating it down putting lots of effort in every time you do that all you're doing is turning it to dust okay so we want to try and avoid that as much as possible there will be a small amount of that okay so now that hole under there is going to be a little bit smaller so we're going to put a little bit more soil in there okay so we want to try and avoid that as much as possible there will be a little bit more soil in there sort of beginning to be filled a little okay maybe just a touch more okay all right now it's just really the spaces on the side of the root ball okay so i'm going to go around the front and look at the angle and the actual position so i'm going to go around the front and look at the angle and the actual position okay ever so slightly off center towards the left hand side as previous do you like do you like to to offset that trunk yeah it's not we're going to want with the design of the tree we are going to want to to to add a little bit more um sort of direction to it and because of that sort of strong initial direction across i think we're going to want to just and the way in which the kind of a lot of the branches are growing i think we're going to want to just ever so slightly have it elongated on the on the right hand side not a massive i mean because it just moves upwards sure okay but it would look a little bit strange if we had it and plus the way in which it's already previously been growing the massive roots that we have here there's not going to be that too much to gain from and changing it okay check from the side still a little bit leaning forward we could perhaps take a few of the branches off let's try and get a little bit more okay just soft movements nothing too aggressive i want to break that soil down okay roots are starting to become a little bit exposed there okay okay that's a little bit more vertical so we're good to look at tying it in now okay now ideally we've left one of the the the arms longer so we sort of pull that across the root ball okay and then we're going to tie down so that one is vertical so we're sort of tying down on the corner there okay that gives us most sort of uh stability it's a bit tighter so i'm going to be careful that the roots are not going to be sort of digging it we're not going to start cutting through you can you can see it sort of beginning to sort of cut through a little okay pull stop pulling twist pull the tension through stop pulling twist if you pull and twist at the same time you're just going to snap the aluminium aluminum okay we won't cut it just yet and go through to the other side now does the the fact that those finer roots are so close to the surface does that concern you or is that okay that'll be okay okay okay i mean particularly with this tree i mean essentially the the level of the bar is exactly the same as it was before um there was a lot of moth on the tree before right uh and so once we've if we put a bit of sphagnum moss on there light sphagnum moss that'll help to cover it away over okay so pull it through tight make sure we're not cutting through anything we're not touching any woody roots stop pulling twist pull it tight not cutting through okay twist stop that root ball is not moving nice okay nice because we left these slightly longer and we didn't cut if we experienced the the the the wire sort of going across the root ball might be sort of beginning to slip off what you can do is then sort of you can either use chopsticks to to act as an anchor point to stop the the wire slipping or we can sort of use those ends and sort of tie them together do things like that all depends on those individual situations okay but in this case we don't need to okay so just cut them tight making sure that the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the cut bit of the wire is it's not going to be visible okay now this this sort of juncture we have to be aware that we have a moist root ball and very dry cannabis oil sucking the moisture out of those roots and so it's becoming quite a time-critical operation now okay so we want to get this done as quickly as possible okay now this is just going to be all of the finer mix okay we need to have a mental image of anywhere where there's gaps okay anywhere where there's spaces within the root ball try and keep that in your mind so you make you know that where we need to fill in you don't really have too many of those which is good okay now the only sort of difficult bits to that we we're going to find the areas around here and so sort of attacking from the side is going to be one way to to make sure that we get the soil in rather than going from the top from above so it's sort of mounding up giving ourselves all the soil that we're going to need we're going to work in sort of back filling as we go okay now we're not aggression is not the key word for us here soft softly okay we can sort of see the soil going in we're not wiggling the chopstick around aggressively we're just pushing it in pulling it out and it's back filling as we go okay making sure we've got soil to fill in those gaps okay it's one of the most difficult things to teach somebody when to stop okay it's just when you start feeling that right amount of pressure when you hit that sort of sweet spot between you filled up all of the gaps there might be a summer you know just the might you might be I get a little bit more soil in there but the more you push down the more it turns to dust this is there's a there's a sweet spot between filling up every single possible gap in there and working it in too much that you're going to turn it to dust as we said earlier in the stream you know azaleas will grow roots from there from the trunks if there's enough moisture so tiny little tiny little pockets of air you know maybe where there's not too much soil we don't have contact you know perfect contact isn't going to be a huge issue for it okay but compacted soil where it's just all turned to dust that is going to be a much more major concern long term okay we're not looking at really sort of compacting it in just softly working it in you can see you can see the soil sinking down as we as we take the chopstick out okay we're just starting to get a little bit of firmness in there working it around the root ball gently not being aggressive okay okay okay okay okay okay the soft touch all the while I'm conscious of the moisture being sucked out of the roots okay okay experience will teach you common sense will give you a very good idea okay so as long as you understand all of those principles you start thinking well yeah actually it's starting to get a little bit difficult to get my chopstick in there now all I'm going to be doing is turning it to dust okay so once that sort of core layer around there is filled up you want to be even looser with that top section okay just making sure it's all in and around because of the shape of the pot we just want to make sure that there's no gaps there working it in that way okay have you ever um have you ever come back to a satsuki that you have potted two or three years later and seen where you chopstick too aggressively yeah or seen where somebody has yeah uh-huh and that that probably a big learning experience yeah uh I remember we had we used to have a lot of older gentlemen uh enthusiasts used to come in and help us and there was one guy we were repotting field grown trees and And he was working in sort of like an hour and a half. I think you've got enough. He's like, no, no, the chopstick's still going in. It's still going in. He's just going on. We're like, it's fine. It's fine. You've done enough. But he was quite a senior guy. And then we came to repot it. And you literally just couldn't get water in. Everything had just turned to dust. And all the water was pooling on. This was a freshly repotted tree. So yes, you can absolutely do that. So would water passing through the root system post-repot be a good indicator of, oh, OK, we were. And then how do you know that you've filled all the spaces, I guess, then becomes the other? Well, that's the experience thing, having that mental image of the root ball. Remember, we had a hole somewhere in around here that we needed to fill. There it is. There it is. There it is. Make sure we've got some soil in and around there. Like I say, tiny little holes, the small holes, that's not an issue. Big gaping gaps, obviously, they are. But because we had that fairly solid root ball, I was feeling it as I was putting it in, making sure that the bottom side of the root ball all had soil around it. Working it in, we've made sure that soil is now on the side of it and then the soil on top of it. As long as it's all in contact, then that's enough. We can deal with a couple of tiny pockets where maybe we could have got like five more particles of soil in. Massive gaps we can't, but what we don't want to do is have too much in. OK, so that's going to be enough. Got a bit of excess soil on top of it, which we'll just brush off. All right. It's interesting to watch the rapidity with which you're doing this and sort of the time-sensitive nature of that canuma imbibing so much water from the root system. It's pretty clear that there's a significant... sort of feeling of urgency in this process. Yeah. It's the same with sort of doing deciduous repots with maples when you kind of like really bare root them and you're sort of positioning out those roots. Once you expose them to that kind of level, you know, when they're really at risk of drying out, which is why having the spray bottle whilst you're doing it is essential. But once the soil's gone in there, we can't spray those roots. Right. And so getting that done quickly... Can you... Can you shed a little light on why you can't spray the roots once the soil's gone in? I mean, I know, but just... Well, particularly with the canuma soil, you could perhaps do it with a maple, have just sort of mist the soil and things. But with the canuma, the minute you sort of start misting it and getting it wet, then you start working it in. It's just going to crumble even more. Makes it softer for it to be wet. Makes it absolutely softer. So what we're going to do now is we're going to take it out, water it. We're going to watch how the water goes through. See if there's any areas... Any areas that are pooling, we're going to be of particular interest here. Okay. If water sort of pools, doesn't flow through too easily front and back at those points where it was touching, then it means that we've worked the soil in too much and turned it to dust. And then just sort of give it... Just sort of have that visual check. And then what we'll do is we'll put some moss on top of it. What would happen... I know this is urgent, but what would happen if it did pool up? What would you do? You're like, oh, I overworked it. What would you do then? Ah... You could... You could take it out and do it again. Start again. Would that be the best solution? If it was really bad, then yes. Okay. If it was really bad and you really overworked it, but you should never get to that situation. Okay. Okay. So we're going to take it outside now and water. Okay. And we have to water it until it comes clear. Now one thing you have to be careful with the first sort of watering is that this soil on the surface could be easily moved. So if we... If we attach... If we have a jet attachment to it, we could send all of that soil flying. So just very carefully make sure that the water isn't too aggressive. And you'll be out... If you see, we've got lots and lots of dust coming out. Lots of it coming. We need to try and get it so it's as clear as possible. But even though we get it running clear today, for the next couple of times you sort of water it, dust will still continue to come out. And so you're always going to have this kind of like residue of canoma dust on the... On the bench afterwards. So there's absolutely no sort of pooling of water anywhere. It just flows straight through. We can feel the ease, even if one... A little bit too much there. If we were on the trunk and we see the... The water coming off of the nebari, it's being absorbed all immediately around the base of the tree. So we're confident that all of that water's going to get through to the shin. Just to make sure what we can do is just tip it up a little bit on one side. See, we've still got dust coming through there. Just tip it up on the one side. Water here. And the water will come in, go underneath, be sucked up by capillary action as it's passing through. See, even though we've been watering for a couple of minutes, we're still getting lots of dust. So we're going to go in there. We're going to go in there. We're going to go in there. We're going to go in there. We're going to go in there. We're going to go in there. We're going to go in there. We're going to go in there. We're going to go in there. We're going to go in there. So we've watered it. You saw the water sort of passing through, and what that also did was it allowed that top layer just to settle a little bit. Now, if we just sort of check around the edge, we've got just enough of a lip so that water is going to catch on that lip, and it's not going to flow over the edge. With other trees, other repots, before you sort of water it in, you're actively going to be wanting to go in and making sure you've got that lip. but we were really concerned about not compacting the soil too much and so just that natural settling with the water has created that for us. So final touches in terms of the repot, make sure our pot's nice and clean. The worst thing about dealing with canna is it leaves terrible stains everywhere. The dust gets absolutely everywhere so we've got this lovely pot and I just make sure it's nice and clean. I guarantee you that once it dries off there'll still be hand marks on there. And then we can look at top dressing. So we have some of our pre-prepared official Bonsai Mirai top dressing which can you give us a description of what this is? Yeah, it's a 50-50 mix of shredded sphagnum and shredded collected green moss that we grade over a quarter. A quarter inch sifter, collect the graded product on top of a sixteenth or potentially an eighth inch sifter depending on how coarse we want it to be, usually based on the finest particle size in the soil mass. Okay, now what we don't want to have is too much on the soil surface and we don't want to be sort of compacting it down. Okay, we just want it to develop some nice green moss on the surface. Just to stop excessive moisture loss. Okay, but we're going to be wanting to water the azalea fairly frequently. Fairly frequently. Perhaps a little bit more frequently than we would do with other immediately repotted trees. Okay, just making sure that that top layer never sort of dries out. So little bits of watering quite frequently. So just being able to sort of see the soil surface. So when we can sort of just see it begin to turn colour. That's when we want to be thinking about just giving it a... a top-up of water. Not a drenching, but just a top-up. And so having a light covering of sphagnum moss will just help to keep some of that moisture in. But covering it entirely so that we can't see the soil surface means that we could miss out on seeing when that soil starts to dry out. So, just enough. Just that sort of in-between sweet spot point. So, that's pretty much the repotting done. So after care. For an azalea. As we said earlier, basically we'll just want it the same as any other tree. We want to sort of be keeping it out of any extreme conditions. So that includes any sort of extreme temperatures, extreme wind. So the extreme temperatures could be high or low. So I'm going to keep it above freezing and out of anything that's, you know, sort of excessively hot where the tree is not going to be able to uptake enough moisture to transpire and cool itself down. Keeping it out of the wind is an important one. And then out of any sort of excessive... It would have to be very, very excessive rain in order to sort of create a big imbalance with an azalea. Okay. Because they are very water-loving species. But keeping it out of the rain so we can control the sort of the amount of water that's in the soil is a definite good idea. And so misting the top of a tree. If it was a very severe repot, I would recommend misting sort of every time you walk past the tree. As long as you're not walking past it 70 times a day. You know, seven, eight, nine times a day would be fine. But sort of just constantly doing it would be a bit excessive. And just so that the skin of the tree, the bark of the tree is moist. That all of this, the new foliage, there's a lot of sort of moisture all over it. The azaleas respond very, very heavily to misting. And so having a lot of humidity around them. I said earlier about the roots developing off of the branches. It really helps for new shoots to start developing as well. So misting the top of a stressed tree. Is always a sort of a good idea. But for this tree it wasn't a particularly severe repot. So just sort of putting it in relatively sheltered conditions. And then just making sure that the soil is, the moisture level in the soil is just topped up every so often. And then giving it a really good watering after maybe sort of two weeks. Okay, so we've got to make those roots start to want to sort of go out and grow. So there needs to be moisture around there. But it doesn't need to be drenched in water. Okay, so the other thing that we now just need to look at with this tree. At the same time is just let's have a look at maybe just doing a little bit of pruning. To just improve the style and the shape of it. Okay. Peter, can I ask you a question real quick? I mean, I noticed this tree is pushing new growth. You've got new fresh leaves out already. Yeah. When do you repot an azalea? Because I've heard that you repot after flowering. I've heard that you repot before buds push. Is there an ideal time? The best time really is sort of dependent a little bit on how severe you think the repot is going to be. The more severe the repot, the earlier in the season you're going to want to do it. So the more dormant, when the tree is at its most dormant. The window of opportunity is really from sort of January right through to probably I would say about another week or so from when we're doing this. So that would be by the end of May. Absolutely. It has to be done before these shoots are elongated too long. Okay. As I said earlier, post flowering pruning, post flowering repotting was traditionally done in Japan. And I did do that as part of the first couple of years of apprenticeship. But what we were finding and what other nurseries in Japan were finding. So it wasn't just a problem that was localised to just us. Is that the trees that were repotted after flowering were struggling to cope with the increased sort of temperatures that we were facing. Due to global warming and Japan becoming an increasingly concrete based society. And so very few nurseries now do any sort of post flowering. Post flowering, repotting. Okay. But realistically, I mean if you think of them as just sort of doing them around the same sort of time as deciduous. Gotcha. So just before bud break, just after bud break is fine. Okay. So as long as it's round about that time when things will start moving, you should be okay. The more severe it's going to be, the earlier in the season I would definitely be looking at doing it. Okay. So we're just looking at sort of tidying up some of those. The foliage pad a little bit, making it a little bit more rounded. We have a touch of a gap in here. Okay. So it sort of comes round, just sort of dinks in a little bit there. So we're going to be definitely in the future looking at sort of growing that out a little. We are looking at perhaps pushing it a little bit more across to this side. So we can just take this one back by a node or two. Okay. The other thing to talk about in terms of sort of the post repotting after care. Is to do with flowering. It's perfectly okay for a repot of this kind of level. To allow the tree to flower as it normally would. Okay. As long as we don't see any sort of negative reactions from the repot. Things just start to grow as normal. Just let it flower. But think about removing those spent flowers perhaps a little bit earlier. Okay. So if you have a number of azaleas in your collection. The ones that you've just repotted this year. Those are the ones that you would go to first to do your post flowering. Work. Okay. Because just leaving them on there a little bit too long. That's what's going to tire the tree out. Not sort of letting them flower. Okay. So we're just looking at just tightening that one up a little bit there. Okay. Anything else that we need. Just any sort of these downward shoots like this. Take that back out. A single shoot. We're looking at maybe just trying to elongate that out a little bit more. Okay. Just so it gets balanced up. Now the styling of this tree is very, very kind of traditional flower tower type growth. It's not designed to look like a tree in the wild. It's designed to be a platform for a large number of flowers. Okay. So we want to have large foliage paths. We want to have plenty of branches on there so that we can see all the flowers on the tree. Okay. And so we just have to kind of maybe take a little bit of a step back from that putting too much design considerations into it. Okay. It's not that type of tree that needs that to happen. What we want to try and do is achieve a bit better balance between this side and this side. This is a little bit too big, a little bit too strong compared to this one. Rather than handicapping this one too much, what we'll do is we'll just look at growing that one out a little bit so we get a bit more balance. We'll get some movement, some sort of flow, some sort of design elements within the tree. But really what we're trying to do is get nice, even balanced. We can have a beautiful sort of show of flowers in sort of late May, June. And then just sort of keeping it healthy. Those are our sort of biggest concerns. Okay. Rather than trying to make it into some kind of tree that tells a story. Okay. If you want one of those azaleas, those do exist. Then you can go out and find those. But if you just want to kind of appreciate the flowers, then this is the type of tree for doing that. And the difference between the two, one that is the tree form is more of the feature as opposed to a flower tower or one where you're creating pads to best display the flowers. You're talking about. Okay. Sort of this exaggerated movement, more linear or longer upright form. Yeah. And so in terms of like why these were kind of grown traditionally in Japan and the sort of society that was around them, these would have been put into exhibitions. And then they would have been judged on how sort of almost how symmetric that they were and how beautifully distributed the flowers were and how perfect those flowers came out. Okay. And so like when you look at the sort of the judging of them, of that category of azaleas, it's hard to tell the difference between them. And it is, you know, but the effort that goes into them is just as much as effort as goes into the sort of the more sort of artistic side of azaleas. You know, trying to get them to flower out perfect distribution of multiple colors and things like that. It is just as much of a skill as, you know, wiring and styling and making into a sort of an artistic design. It's just a little bit more, say, horticultural. You enjoy, do you enjoy the breadth of bonsai approach that like you've shared some of your deciduous approach. I've obviously gotten to experience some of your approach on conifers. You have this diversity inside of azaleas. You enjoy all, you know, the flower tower versus the more, as you put it, artistic forms and sort of the nuances of each of those. I can appreciate them. I can appreciate because I've seen the amount of effort that goes into them. And I can appreciate when I sort of see them done and done well and things like that. I can, I can very much appreciate. It's not something that I would necessarily like to do. But I do have an understanding of kind of like how much work has gone into it. And so, so just taking that one off, we can just see that the movement of the trunk further up into there. Yeah. And it is, and having sort of been around that from an early age, you know, in my bonsai career. It does, it did kind of open my eyes to a lot of different aspects within the, within the sort of the traditional bonsai sphere. And a lot of the principles are very much the same, you know. And working with azaleas, you get, you get a very sort of quick response. You can create a tree from, from raw stock and have it show ready in three years. You know, there's, there's not many other species that you can kind of do that with. And they are sort of very forgiving. With, you know, we were sort of saying earlier about sending buds out from all over the, doesn't matter where you cut them from. And it is a bit topiary. I'll give you that. Um. But. When they're in flower, there's not a lot that kind of beats them for looking pretty. So for that aspect of bonsai, the, you know, the pretty side of nature, as opposed to the severe side of nature that we often look to represent with pines and junipers and such like. They're a very good representative of that aspect of nature. Because we can become, within bonsai, we can become too focused and too obsessed with severity and age. And ignore some of the other, other sides of nature. Youthfulness and vibrancy. You know. The chief always used to talk about the struggle between life and death. And that's a very important part of it. But it ties you out. Just constantly thinking about the struggle. It's like, dude. I just want to see some flowers. I just want to feel alive in the spring. You know. And so. Having those aspects in a bonsai garden. In a bonsai collection. Just little, you know, accent plants that might help to give that. Or useful little trees that just add a little bit of the variety of the natural world. Will always kind of improve your appreciation of bonsai. Improve your appreciation of the natural world. And add a bit of enjoyment to it. You feel like studying with the chief gave you an opportunity to appreciate a wider world. To appreciate a wider breadth of nuances in bonsai. Yeah. Because we were exposed to a wider range of people as well. And. The chief would deal with a lot of different species. Yeah. We were just sort of. And I was allowed out into the bonsai community from an early age as well. We used to be taken to other nurseries. Which is something that you never would have. Yeah. I was definitely exposed to a lot of different. Different things. And that was actively encouraged. But when it came to sort of styling the trees. Then it was very much kind of the. The chief style. And whatever was the overriding. Kind of. Style of the time. Whatever was selling at the time. Whatever the customer wanted. Does the chief have. A Shunkan or a Kunio Kobayashi style? Would you say? Yeah. You can definitely tell the trees that the chief's worked on. And things that he likes. But that changes. It changes with the market. It changes with age. When you've seen that. You've talked about the change in Mr. Kimura's style as he got older. Chiefs had similar. Kind of. The word I'm looking for. My evolutions. But you know. He's realized certain things about bonsais. He's got older. Yeah. He's definitely got his kind of. Going through his Chinese phase at the moment. So. The trees that I see when I'm there now. It's just kind of like. Huh. Interesting. Yeah. Well that's new. Yeah. It's good. It's good. It just shows us an evolution. Evolving art form. And. You know. At the end of the day. It is. Like any art form. Kind of. Customer based. You know. What the trends are. The fashions are. To a certain extent. It's going to be a part of the. The process for. For a large. Community like. Like that. You know. If it's. Unlike the American market where. You're creating it. Yeah. It's different. Right. It's an established versus. It's an established market. And. You know. An established. Scene. You know. Working within those parameters. Okay. So one of the considerations for the branches that I'm pruning out as well are. How old are they? Can we try and sort of prune back to some younger branches? So it's. Very similar ideas. To. To. To what we were talking about with the. In the. Post flowering. Pruning. Okay. So it's not just stylistic. Decisions. So for example. We've got. Yeah. I'll get a close up there. Oh. I'll just cut it off. And show you. We've got a tiny. We've got a very sort of lignified branch. Are you getting a good shot of that? Okay. A very sort of lignified branch. With just a tiny little. Bit of green on the front. Okay. That's good. Very inefficient. That's very. Unlikely to. To. To. Strengthen up. Okay. So getting rid of that there. And then hoping for. A new. More vigorous shoot. To sort of come out at the base. Somewhere along there. Is going to be a much better long term. Okay. So getting rid of that there. And then hoping for. A new. Approach. Okay. So. The only other thing really. That needs to happen. To this tree is. As I said earlier. With the cleaning. When the trunk's still wet. You can't necessarily check. That it's entirely cleaned up. And as it's dried off. We noticed a few more patches. And so just going over that. Again. Will be a. Will be a good idea. But it's been really useful. I think. I think. I think. I think. I think. I think. I think. I think. I think. I think. I think. I think. I think. As it's been repotted. The style has been tweaked ever so slightly. Just tidied up some of the foliage pads. And it's now ready to sort of. Start growing. And then. Flower and be beautiful. In may and June. But. Thank you for having me. Very. Cool man. Thank you very much. Any final questions? I think anything I'm gonna ask you. You've already answered. So let me go ahead and refrain. You've been very, very thorough. This has been. It's been really enlightening. to see and again you know just sort of um kudos to you on on the breadth of knowledge that you have and bring to bonesize very much appreciated peter your your efforts over your apprenticeship and post yeah lots of love brother thank you my my pleasure 
