what is up everybody super tuesday in the house so i just have to say uh number one i love super tuesdays no matter if the coronavirus is happening or not uh but it's super weird because the team you know used to all be here and now it's uh even jesus are in the house but the rest of the crew is not here and it definitely feels a little bit like lower in terms of energy and general um general like i would say human presence is that is is at a lower level which i think we're all experiencing anyways we'll come back to that got eve on the mic this evening hello hello making her debut bada bing bada boom and jesus is running all three cameras so uh josh is at home uh producing the stream and uh and we are still gonna kick ass and do some great things before we get started eve do we have any announcements we do have some announcements so for those of you that haven't seen in the chat already hi my name is eve sam is still running the chat for us uh i will just be her voice for the evening so i will be reading out what she has typed up for me i will say this right it's always interesting to work with someone who's been in the chat for a long time and i think it's always interesting to work with someone who's been in the chat for a long time and i think it's always interesting to work with such a creative group of individuals because when you lob lemons you can get some pretty tasty lemonade and i think mariah is going to be producing some really interesting stuff for you guys i'm pumped on it i can't wait for it and we would have never come up with these ideas had we not been faced with the opportunity to once again rethink things and be creative so we have some exciting stuff coming your way stay tuned you'll know more about it anyways here we go uh we kind of came back to the beginning of the show and we're going to be talking about some of the we're going to be talking about some of the back to that other deciduous conifer that we really um that we wanted to complete the scope of knowledge around when we did the larch and the pre-flush spring pruning with larch and i wanted to come back to this this you know sort of overwhelming and whether you're in europe whether you're in australia whether you're in north america south africa uh bald cypress taxodium disticum has become a worldwide bonsai accepted species and we're going to be talking about some of the things that we're going to be talking about understanding how we handle not just the timing for the pruning but also the stage of development that coincides with the decisions for that pruning is a very paramount aspect to being able to prune in the correct locations to set yourself up because let's just establish what it is we're trying to accomplish in one year we want two sets of ramification that means that those two times for pruning to get those ramifications are number one right now just prior to the spring flush if i come back in and i prune the tip of this branch i should get at least two if not more really nice elongating definitive pieces of ramification not just a frond like piece of foliage but actual branchlets that elongate that i know i can build ramification on and if you've followed mariah live or you've checked out the library and you've seen the way that we've handled bald cypress there is also the next the number two time which is in that early summer period of time when we see those elongating pieces of growth start to show that ruby red color we can come back in and we can prune those to the desired length and they too should produce elongating pieces of ramification that really start to expand the deciduous form that we get to appreciate these very unique conifers in over the fall winter and early spring periods of time where they are leafless okay so tonight we have two different cypresses that are in the studio we've got this true bald cypress taxodium distichum and we've got a very very special pond cypress taxodium ascendance that's sitting over here okay and i want to just start with this process i'm going to spin the tree one time i'm going to go ahead and let you see all sides of the tree recently potted into a tracy francis and i think a really stunning combination in terms of the container in the tree contextually the color of the container i think really coinciding beautifully with the tree and where bald cypress typically come from but i'm going to go ahead and give you a rotation because there was a debate this was repotted in elongating species class and there was a debate of where the front existed now this is what i've proposed to be the back okay and in proposing this to be the back there is interest and there is basal spread and there is trunk movement but what we see is a very two-dimensional and jesus can you i'm just going to orient this towards you so that you can capture that two-dimensional aspect to that piece okay anytime we have that two-dimensional aspect we're going to have that two-dimensional aspect we can turn it a little bit to give a little bit of middle ground foreground background but as i continue rotating notice the dimension that we gather in the base here we have a little bit less flare but we have a significantly greater degree of foreground middle ground background we have the same trunk movement maybe even a little bit more interest in a wonderful structure this is where we change the front of this tree to this side i think the old front was the two-dimensional side now we're moving to here okay so we're going to go over here and i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to set some of the big structural pieces to start to kind of pull together i'm going to move in the natural sort of flat top bald cypress form that we really get to enjoy and see these trees enacting in the southeastern united states in that swampy ground six months submerged in water six months a lot drier we know bald cypress to be extremely tolerant these trees have been left out freezing temperatures over the winter time it's the first time i've ever rolled the dice with that completely successful they grow in botanical gardens as far north as minnesota bald cypress really really durable diverse and capable of tolerating a lot when i when i look at this okay going towards that flat top bald cypress what do you got okay i'm going to clip it on the back side okay how's that is that better okay if you if we have further problems okay if we're going to kind of create that flat top bald cypress kind of vibe up and out as the initial movement and you can see that a lot of these branches started with that up and out but really the goal here is determining in this developmental phase where we're still building the structural pieces how far back do we prune where do we prune how do we determine where to prune because right now is the time that we make that pruning decision all right i'm going to jump into some structural work getting some of that elevation out of the structure i'm going to open it up to questions from eve let's rock and roll let's get some get some good work done tonight great uh so max was wondering could you apply this technique to taxodium macro natum i so i feel and there's been a lot of discussions about montezuma cypress which was a very pivotal and prominent species utilized in bonsai particularly i think in the early southern california bonsai days when john naka and and that sort of group or congregation of individuals was beginning to explore what types of species can we really work with that are native um and so the montezuma cypress which i i'm not sure if that's the macro carpa or if that's can you do a little research on that eve and figure out what montezuma cypress's uh latin name is it uh it is taxodium macro macronate it is okay yeah so um from from the the best of my knowledge you can utilize these techniques for any deciduous taxodium species um because the same things apply to the saccharidina of the monoex Chocolate I don't see why it wouldn't apply to taxodium which is the pond cypress the same things apply to disticum i don't see why it wouldn't apply to taxodium what is it macro carpa uh taxodium mucronatum mucronatum okay cool so i see no reason why it wouldn't i need to be really honest and transparent i haven't necessarily tried it myself on on montezuma cypress but again i'm very very confident and in fact these same techniques will work very well on your monoex-carpa which is very good it does that we talked about in the on dawn redwood which is which is another one of our deciduous conifers shares some of the nuances that exist inside of our taxodium species so we can prune at the same time we can look for similar factors we can behave in a similar manner and methodology shape wise we might choose to take dawn redwood a different direction but there definitely is the opportunity to utilize this same strategy to enhance the ramification on dawn redwood as a bonsai species all right so michael says here in central texas my cypresses have already flushed out is it too late to do this work um i would say if they are just pushing we know that they're expending their energy to push probably just a little bit too late to be doing this because we really do need them to be in an energy positive to kick out that elongating growth that becomes a branch and here's one of the interesting things about cypress cypress extremely strong extremely durable species i think they've been abused and that piece was already broken i was going to show you guys as i pruned it off but um the wire just took took it for me um i think that cypress in general people say oh bald cypress they're so strong you can defoliate you can do this you can do that and i think it comes back to one of the the common north american bonsai species that has had the same cavalier mentality applied to it and there has been a lot of failure that if you really start to look back at history year after year and year and year and year and year and year and year and year and year and year and year it may not be so abundantly apparent but when you look back at history the california juniper as this species that over the course of time was pinched was heavily root pruned was thought to not like water so it was not watered and all of a sudden you start looking at the history of california junipers and you're like hey where did all the california junipers grow well this is bald cypress and pond cypress in terms of all of the collected trees that have come out of the southeastern united states and you say okay yes very durable right some people defoliate them some people repot them every two years some people put them in garden soil and say or submerge them in water and say hey this is great okay when we do that show me where all of the famous old collected bald cypress are right and that's really one of the things that we've got to be really very aware of and respectful of is these tolerances the ability for a tree to endure or tolerate these conditions for a short period of time definitely exists but the bonsai container is a very unique containerized environment different than any nursery culture or natural culture that exists and inside of that we really have to adapt and adjust and start to understand that that just because a tree can survive it once doesn't mean it's a technique that we apply just because a tree can survive it twice doesn't mean it's a technique we apply but the tree needs to be able to respond dependably in order for it to be a valuable technique and when we look at bald cypress and pond cypress and taxodium as a general species we do understand we've got to be very respectful of the fact that they do have that strength put that strength into action to get positive productivity of ramification and that means prior to the flush pruning it waiting until we get that ruby red color of the elongating growth in the early summer to partially defoliate not fully defoliate partially defoliate and to prune again but really understanding how far back do we prune that's the focus of tonight's stream knowing that this is the season that we would be at right douglas asks are the buds just pushing in this and also is that remnant of the knee coming off the base yeah so there are a few different knees right we have a remnant of a knee here and there's there's kind of nuances of that we have a remnant of a knee here that was carved unfortunately i wish that hadn't happened but that was pre pre-marai and then we've got this beautiful sort of very vigorous piece of odd cellular division which i don't think it's a knee but we see this in bald cypress a lot where there's damage or where there's potentially more meristematic or cellular division taking place we can get these really interesting growths and pieces of wood that form okay so as you can see with the structure I'm carrying all of these pieces up a little bit more out up out up out and that's really where I want to set my structure now you'll notice that I haven't necessarily started the process of determining where the length of this and that's why I've left my wire where it's at where the length of this exists because in general when I'm looking at these lower branches I'm thinking I want the lower branches to be slightly in slightly shorter and I really want the canopy to be giving me that length that doesn't mean that I can't have length here but when we start talking about hey how long do these branches need to be we've got to be thinking about well it depends on what stage of branching we're talking about okay because if we're talking about a structure all piece of branching then we're saying listen if I leave say for example this piece right here I want this to be a nice short compact sort of tight because when bald cypress grow up and out from the bottom the smaller branches down lower on the tree stay really nice and tight typically they'll start out as a conical form and then they'll start to gravitate towards that canopy expansion in the apex the lower branches will die off and then as that canopy expands and gets taller you'll get these buds forming at the base of the trunk that form these smaller tighter branches I want to show that generational branching in the design of the tree okay so if I say I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to prune this here okay this is my structural branch if I prune it here the way that bald cypress or any taxodium species works is it's going to produce elongating ramified growth very close to that tip so if I leave that super long and I cut it there I'm going to have ramification occurring here but I want to show that generational branching in the design of the tree okay so if I say I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to prune this here the way that bald cypress or any taxodium species works is it's going to be a nice short tight branch so I'm going to be basing my pruning decisions and my length on where do I have the most interesting movement where does that movement start to taper off in terms of its value and where do I really want the ultimate length and ramification of my tree to be so I'm going to say I actually I'm going to take advantage of this last up out up out I'm going to take advantage of this I'm going to cut back where I have lateral buds growing and I'm going to go through this medium and I'm going to put it into a new branch and I'm going to do that there now we see we have secondary ramification here so let's come back in let's go ahead and let's wire out that secondary ramification and let's see how the secondary ramification differs from the primary primary being a branch originating from the trunk okay primary lines are the trunk or branches originating from the trunk let's see how the secondary branches originating from a primary differ in terms of the length that we're going to hold them to All right. So Kurt wants to know, does this work apply to coastal redwoods too? No. Coastal redwoods, very, very different than a deciduous conifer like a bald cypress. So when we start to talk coastal redwoods, we're talking about sequoias, sempervirens. And when we start to talk about coastal redwoods, they're evergreen. They're not deciduous conifer. Everything about them in terms of their handling as a bone size subject, very, very different. So this is very specific to dawn redwood, bald cypress, pond cypress, or any of our taxodium species as far as we know. And again, I want to reiterate, I don't have firsthand experience with Montezuma cypress, but I do believe that these same techniques would apply. I have done it with dawn redwood over multiple years. I have been working with taxodium ascendans and disticum, and I feel very confident in what I'm teaching you guys here. It has given us wonderful ramification. Okay, so these secondary branches. And I'll come right back to questions, Eve. Okay, these secondary branches, I also want to have this up out. I want these to be working not necessarily as secondary pieces in conjunction with my primary piece, but I'm going to be pruning these much, much shorter. Okay, because again, wherever we prune, we're going to get ramification fairly close to that prune site in terms of where that next flush goes. So if I leave that super long and I cut it out here, I've got ramification out here, but in a secondary branch, I want ramification up in tight so that I get that compressed deciduous canopy that I'm looking for. Okay, so I don't want to save the bulk of the length that exists inside of these branches that are secondary coming off of our primary. I want to be using these pieces to really start to build some of that tighter beginning of ramification. I set the line of my primary structure, I start building these pieces, and now all of a sudden, you can compare how we've handled this structural piece to where these structural pieces exist, and you can even see here. Jesus, can you zoom in right here? Okay, you can see where this was pruned last year at some point, okay? Well, this wasn't at Mirai last year. We acquired this over the wintertime. You can see where it was pruned here, and you can see the length of that ramification. You can see where that new ramification emerged as a result of that prune. This is not usable. I've got to cut all of that off. Begin again, coming back to here, perfect reason to be dissecting and discussing this structural pruning and how we get that ramification pushed back in. Okay, go ahead, Eve. All right, so up next we have Roman saying, Greetings from Chile, South America. I got three bald cypresses from a local nursery. What's the first scope of work I should do? Should I start by chopping? When should I do it? Yeah, so it depends, right? First, I think you have to understand and decide, hey, where, in terms of the design of this tree, where is it headed? Is this going to be, because a lot of people handle bald cypress as a formal, upright, bonsai subject and specimen. Nothing wrong with it, right? Is this tree that you're creating going to be a flat top, or is this tree that you're creating going to be more of a bonsai, formal, upright style? Okay, two very different decision-making approaches depending on what you're trying to accomplish with your tree. So I think first and foremost, you have to look at the quality and the characteristic of the material and decide, which direction are you headed with it? Okay? Once you've decided that, then I think you start to look at, okay, if this is just a very slender trunk, which a lot of nursery stock, Taxodium disticum, or Taxodium ascendens is, right, bald cypress, then we start to say, okay, where do we want to cut that big, long cylinder to begin this ramification and really start the process of building that flat top form if we're going natural? Or where do we want to cut? We want to cut that height to wire up a new leader and continue that transition of taper to create a more formal, upright style. So first you have to decide the style, and once you've decided the style and the direction, then that's going to guide the process of reducing the height and beginning the build of the branches. We have a request to see the close-up of that last cut site you made. Of this cut site? So I've got two here, and let me go ahead and just position this. Okay, and one thing that you'll notice, right, as I'm wiring out my secondary pieces, I'm also carrying my secondary pieces. I'm bringing them in close to the branch here, boom, closing that acute crotch, but then I'm coming up above, right? I'm not forming your standard fan-shaped pad as we typically see in bonsai. I'm using those secondaries to build body. I've got my primary. My secondaries are building body. Part of that up and out growth habit, how do you build that? Boom, I'm going to come here, and then I'm going to come here, and then I'm going to come here, and I'm going to add a little bit more. I'm going to have this primary continuing to push out. I'll show you that when we get to the pond cypress. This is just that initial decision-making process. I'm going to walk you through about 50% of this tree, and then I'm going to switch, and you're going to see how different that decision-making is when we move from the primary and secondary to the tertiary in the next piece, okay? All right. Ready for some more questions? We've got a lot. Ready for more questions. All right. Let's see. Chuck wants a refresher on what soil mix you're using for this. So I'm going solid Akadama. With my deciduous conifers, I'm going solid Akadama. And this is, again, this is, and I'm like super, I'm super sympathetic to the bald cypress plight. Just the same as I have always been for the California juniper, because I think they've been so abused over the course of time. There, you know, there have been absolutely phenomenal, phenomenal bald cypress collected out of the native landscape, and not many of them still exist. And that is really a shame, particularly for a species that has such a potent capacity and a ridiculous amount of strength. If we abuse that strength and we start to see those trees not carrying forward with the way that we're treating them, to not observe that and make an adjustment in that, I think is really, really sad, because we know over the course of time that the quality of the material we get out of the native landscape does decrease, and you would hope that. We would be able to amass the technique, and I think the goal is to amass the techniques that allow us to maximize the initial highest quality material that we get. Unfortunately, we usually amass the techniques to be able to handle the material after the best stuff is gone. And I would really, I really, in crossing the bald cypress bridge over the course of the past two years on Mirai Live, the goal has definitively been to try and set the record straight. So coming back to soils, this is another one where you have to be very, very careful. You say, okay, should you submerge a bald cypress because they grow in standing water for six months? No, you shouldn't, in just the same way as you shouldn't keep a California juniper overly dry because they grow in the Mojave Desert, right? You're pulling on different root systems and different mechanisms in the bonsai container. Solid akadama allows the roots to ramify, which therefore gives us better ramification in the crown. And what you will see if you cultivate bald cypress in a really organic garden soil-ish mix is you're going to start to see a . A very coarse root system that's going to equal a very limited amount of ramification. And this tree is a perfect example. It came out of really big particles, had big coarse woody roots, very little ramified root growth, and consequently the structure is magnifying and duplicating what's happening in the root system. Now that it's in solid akadama, I predict a high level of ramification being produced this year. All right, Roman wants to follow back up. He's the one with the . Nursery stock, let's see, yeah, nursery stock bald cypress. Since my design choice is a flat top, when should I start chopping? So as long as it hasn't quite pushed growth yet, you're safe to be cutting at this point in time and starting that process of generating the next round of ramification, which you will allow to elongate, build up a little bit of tissue. It will look very similar to some of these branches that we have on this piece. Then we start to give it definition, wiring, et cetera. You could do that as early as early summer. When we do the partial defoliation and pruning, which that video exists on Mirai Live, or you could wait, let it build up a little more meat and come back next year prior to the push of growth in the spring and really start to give it definition and shape. I like this time of year because there is a lot of flexibility and there is a lot of forgiveness in the bald cypress. I will say that when they are just starting to push, they don't have a tremendous amount of water in their tissue, and consequently they can be a little bit brittle. It feels a little bit poppy and cracky. It doesn't, to the best of my knowledge and my experience, it has not impacted whether the branches are capable or thrive after that operation. I have seen them and experienced it enough to say confidently that this is a great time of year to get away with a lot of movement. In the early summer, you won't experience as much of that cracking and popping because you do have more water in the system. Again, I have not seen it impact success of the styling and wiring operation, and I have not seen it impact the quality of the operation. I have seen it impact the quality of the branching that forms. All right, Tak is wondering if you could talk about working this tree so soon after it being repotted. So, whenever we start talking about, number one, this has been a bonsai for a while, so it wasn't like it was its first raw potting where I really changed out a lot of stuff. We did improve, I think, to a dramatic degree, the quality of the soil that it was being grown in, and we definitively improved the container, the planting position, et cetera. Okay. But it wasn't like we were dealing with a tree that had no roots on it. This tree had a relatively good established root system, and when we start to deal with deciduous trees in general, whether it's a deciduous conifer or just a straight deciduous tree, you do have this major storage of resources in deciduous material that exists inside of the vascular tissue. Now, bald cypress we treat as an elongating species in terms of our thought process around management. Management of growth and handling of the growth very much fits inside of the elongating species ethos. Elongating species as a coniferous training methodology and group of trees that we try to manage growth in a similar way also sees that the strength of the tree exists in the vascular tissue. So when we start handling this piece, we're really looking at maximizing the fact that this is where the storage of energy is. It can go to the roots, and it can grow to the branches. And because we're dealing with a deciduous conifer, we can do a little bit of work on the branches as well as on the roots and not really suffer or have a detrimental impact to the health of the tree. But I would say this is very specific to deciduous conifers or deciduous trees in general. All right, Chuck is wondering if you could talk more about the pot. Is it a Tracy Francis pot? Tracy Francis, yeah. Tracy is an absolute monster. Her work coming out of Australia has a rudimentary impact on the health of the tree. She's been doing a lot of research on this. She's been doing a lot of research on this. She's been doing a lot of research on this. She's been doing a lot of research on this. And she has a ruggedness and a vibe to it that is just really pure, really beautiful, and I think exceptionally well-suited for the wilder environments and more wild reflections of the natural environment. We have the ability to reflect in bonsai. So we definitely took the liberty of getting first pick of Tracy's work and putting this piece to the test. We don't have many of her pots. They tend to go very, very quickly. But if you check out our web store, there are a few very choice Tracy Francis pots still there, pots that people have looked at that didn't quite fit size-wise for their tree, pots that we even maybe considered going a little bit farther than was advisable on trees and pulled back on just because the students wanted to use Tracy's pots, but there still are a few, okay? Tac was wondering if you could go over the wire gauges that you're using. Okay. So obviously, any time we're setting structure, we're going to be using heavier gauges. The goal at Mirai and Mirai's methodology of wiring, and one of the things we're consistently told is, wow, you use really heavy wire. But what you'll notice is when I move a branch into a position, I only move it there once, boom, it's there. I change that position, support, hold, bend accordingly and effectively, and it's there, right? I'm bending things multiple times. When we talk about the stress of bending, the stress of bending is more a stress that's formed from repeated bends, from constantly handling that tissue that causes the damage. If we use a gauge that allows us to just, in a one gauge of wire, hold the branch wherever we want it to go, because one of the constant thoughts in wiring is, I'm just going to bend it a little bit, so I'm going to use a lighter gauge to just bend it a little bit, and then you bend it, and it comes back, and you bend it, and it comes back, and you keep fidgeting with it. That is far more detrimental than using one gauge up, bending it one time confidently, strong, nice, confident move, and not touching it again. That is how we get success. When we start to break down our gauges, I'm using a six gauge on my most dominant pieces of primary structure coming here. I probably will use a four gauge to change the shape of the apex a little bit. We'll see. I'm not quite there yet. Then when we march through the other pieces of ramification on these secondaries, I'm actually using a 12 gauge. 12 gauge for my secondary pieces, to give that up, because I'm changing that position so greatly. One piece of wire that allows me to move it anywhere, 12 gauge. I'm working with 14 gauge on my finer branches up here. I'm working with 12 gauge on my secondary. I'm working with a 12 gauge right here. I'm right in that six, eight, 10, 12. In this tree where I'm working primarily on primary structure, very little 14, 16, or 18. Those gauges, those branches don't exist. When I shift to the pond cypress and I move to that finer ramification, I'll be strictly 14, 16, and 18. I'll walk you through that as we get there. I want to dissect one piece here. I'm working in the back of the tree here, which formerly was the front. You notice that I'm saving a little bit more. I'm just going to go ahead and ... Let me just cut that off so we can see. I'm saving a little bit more length. I'm moving from my primary branch right here, coming off of the trunk, to a secondary bifurcation. This is the first time that we've really worked with that tertiary level. Now you'll notice I'm saving this because I don't have any branches back here. This is a very dominant structural branch. When I get to this tertiary level, you saw my decision making on my primary and my secondary in the front. I'm going to be cutting my tertiary levels relatively short because it's from here that I want two really nice fine pieces. I go primary bifurcation, secondary bifurcation. Tertiary bifurcation. This is when I really start to reduce the length. Primary I'm going to have a little longer, secondary a little shorter, tertiary really nice and short and tight to start to amass that fine twigging that gives us that sense of scale and proportion. That's where the decision making process has got to transition. Even though this is still in very much a primary form of development, there are branches that have tertiary that I have to apply that tertiary reduction of length to try and get that tighter, more compact ramification. We know that any tree can have branches in every single state of development, primary, secondary or tertiary. We've got to adjust accordingly, identify and behave in the way that maximizes the quality. Do you know the wire gauges in millimeters by chance? Oof. Oof. Here's the weird thing. Because when we talk European or... I don't know. Australia, well, pretty much anywhere outside of the United States because we're kind of messed up in all of our gauging. We use inches, we use feet, we use pounds, we use miles per hour. We're like totally screwed up. I don't know millimeters. I don't. This is standard. When we talk about these gauges, even if you talk about Japanese copper gauges, it's not millimeters. It's a standardized gauging of electrical wire, which copper is an electrical conduit wire. In Japan. The gauges are two gauges different than in North America. So a four gauge in North America is a six gauge in Japan. And this is where you really have to be able to function inside of that. I can do a little bit of research to get to the millimeters. I don't have it right now. I want to point out a very common thing that we see in Bald Cypress. Jesus, can you zoom in right here and focus on this area? It is very, very common to see a branch come from the base of a primary piece of structure. Right? And oftentimes we're tempted to leave this. It takes a while for this to amass enough thickness here to cause inverse swelling, but it definitely will. And as long as we've picked out our dominant line, and that dominant line has quality, which I would say this branch definitely does, has ramification here, I'm going to go ahead and at this point in this tree's development, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to start to take away any of those clumping branches that do typically and very commonly exist inside of Bald Cypress so that I have the capacity now to move towards a more singular, more singular reflection of that branch and show that structure. Okay? All right. Eve. Keep them coming. Keep them rolling. All right. Michael's wondering, since Bald Cypress is taken from boggy environments, does the bonsai soil require a higher percentage of Akadama relative to lava and pumice? So again, I go solid Akadama. And I think what ends up, what I'm really looking for in solid Akadama, and again, this is now 10 years down the line of success. We... The Pacific Northwest, not typically thought to be the stomping grounds of Bald Cypress, we've been able to produce ramification on Bald Cypress that I personally have not seen anywhere else. And that's not to say that everybody else's techniques suck or anything, but I think a lot of it does come down to the soil and solid Akadama creating the scalability. I don't like to use pumice and lava in Bald Cypress. They like a lot of moisture, Akadama more than anything is a nutrient holding component in our soil composition. But... The scalability, the ability for the roots to self-scale the Akadama creates a water dynamic that is very fruitful for a tree that does like water over the course of time. And we really see Bald Cypress over the course of time start to favor that solid Akadama because the roots do scale the Akadama and the Akadama does become smaller over the course of time as a result of that root activity to really start to accommodate water and nutrient needs with that expanding surface area of the scalability. Okay? So that's where I find Akadama and again, Akadama's nutritional capacity. You're talking about when we deal with deciduous trees, maples, beeches, elms, etc. Using solid Akadama is almost accepted as an approach. It's like, oh yeah, no, that's what you do. Well, we're dealing with the same high water mobility in a deciduous conifer for a Bald Cypress. Akadama now, providing that cation exchange capacity, nutrient availability and scalability of the soil. So really accommodate the size of roots and the ramification of the roots. Beautiful, beautiful marriage of characteristics of soil and demands and needs of the tree. All right. David is wondering how brittle are the branches. They look like they will break pretty easily if bent. Actually, this is quite flexible. Now when we say flexible, you always have to. Whenever you start working on a tree, you always have to start by getting familiar with what are the tolerances of a tree. So the branches that I cut off originally, I just like to take these and I like to move through a structural level and start to test and look at that really nice malleable tissue. Now it'll tear. Bald Cypress will tear. But we do see that this particular Bald Cypress, extremely flexible. When we move to the secondaries, you hear, you can probably hear the popping, which is the bark separating. Not the actual vine. Not the actual vascular tissue that's conducting water or sugars and starches. So I've got great mobility there. Now there's a break. So we say, oh, OK. It will break. It will break. And then when we get into the tertiary, this is really when you start to see Bald Cypress get a little bit more brittle. You hear them pop. Let me just be quiet. A little ASMR. Yeah. Yeah. This is when we get real deep at bone samurai. All right. You can hear that popping, right? That's the bark and that's the malleability. But we do need to be careful with the finer ramifications. So structurally, I'm good. Secondary, a little bit more brittle. But I'm still pretty good. So I need to exercise caution, place my hands in appropriate locations, use the appropriate gauge. Finer stuff, got to be careful here. That's where we've got to be really careful. Sarah's wondering, how does the timing of pruning for pruning for this spot? Yeah. I mean, I think that you have, OK, and let's just kind of, so you're going to start to see a little bit more length on my upper pieces of growth here as I start getting into that longer upper canopy, just to kind of walk you through where I'm at as I'm dialoguing about technique, OK? You do see generally across bonsai, spring prior to the flush of growth, all trees are in an energy positive state. Which means they've stored over the fall season last year, and continue to accumulate over winter time, sugars and starches that they are destined to utilize as daylight length increases and temperature increases. They're going to utilize that to expand their photosynthetic mass, because every tree wants to expand its photosynthetic mass or its number of leaves or needles every year, because it thinks it's going to be a big tree, right? And we know that when it's in an energy positive, whether it's a coastal redwood, a sequoia sempervirens, a Monterey cypress. Or a bald cypress, Taxodium distichum. We know that at that time, we do have the ability to prune the foyer mass. And chances are, assuming we don't completely wreck the tree, which you would never prune off all the growth on a Monterey cypress or a pygmy cypress, Taxodium distichum, although it's called bald cypress, is not a true Cupressus, like a Cupressus macrocarpa, Monterey cypress. So there's common name Latin name differences, right? But we know that the response should be positive. That this time of year, because the tree has all this stored energy. And I would say that is a similarity that exists across almost every species. Now, we do have to ask ourselves how much of a response do we want the tree to have to this pruning? Do we want the tree to explode with growth? The more we prune, the bigger the response is going to be. The more refined or the smaller we prune, the more controlled that response is going to be, because you already have the stored energy in the tree. Yeah. the amount of tissue that that energy is going to be is going to be distributed across the tissue that's left is going to grow more if we leave most of this tissue then it's going to be a very moderate amount of growth and that starts to become a question of are we developing a structure of the tree where we want a big push are we developing secondary pieces where we want a moderate push or are we developing the finest branches where we want a really small push that again is going to influence how we're pruning and how we handle this tree in it I'm gonna get through this just because we're rocking and rolling before I move to the pond cypress but you'll see a dramatic difference when you see the the shift in approach to the pond cypress Rafi is wondering if we could get a close look at the branches again and he was wanted to see if there are visible buds that you're avoiding well there's there's there's like so many buds I'm trying to not strip it of buds you'll notice that I'm keeping my fingers right on top of the wire so that I avoid but but Jesus just go ahead and zoom in right here you need me to rotate are you good okay so you can see the state of the buds they are definitely present they're very easily shed if I handle the branches incorrectly and I like to I like to see the buds present they're a little bit more developed at this point than I would want them to be because they do become quite fragile but you know in order to do this stream and kind of walk you through this this is where we're at and if I'm just being honest most years much like larch when we get into bald Cypress work we're already at a point where we've gotta be very careful just because it happens relatively quickly like you'll see the buds starting to swell you'll come back to it two days later and you'll be like oh my gosh if I don't do this right now I'm not gonna be able to wire this and prune this okay up next we've got Marty Marty has a John Redwood that is pushed super early this year and no matter what he's tried to do to hold it back the foliage has been really strong to the he's tried to do to hold it back the foliage has been really strong to the has already been growing since early March. So I went with the tree and began fertilizing. However, I'm experiencing some powdery mildew and I've noticed a really earthy smell. I know I can't repot now because this tree isn't energy negative. Do I have to wait until next spring to repot? The growth is currently healthy. If growth begins to deteriorate, can I do an emergency repot? I mean, so I would say let's proactively, if we start to think that we have an imbalance of water and oxygen, tilt it at an angle, pull back on our watering and really watch the tree, okay? I would say you are in for the long haul with that tree, which means you're gonna have to triage it through its water issues, particularly when we deal with these types of trees and they actually push out foliage. I think you were correct to fertilize. You can come back in that early summer period of time, partially to foliate, prune, and even wire a little bit at that point in time if you can preserve the foliar mass that's on the tree. But I would not set yourself up for accepting the fact that you're gonna be repotting at an inappropriate time of year. We should just understand, we're gonna triage this tree through this, we're gonna be careful with our watering practices, and that is exactly how we're gonna go ahead and handle the continued efforts this year with that tree anyways. If you get on it now in the spring, where it's pushing all its energy into new roots and new foliar mass, you shouldn't have any issues. But being proactive about it now, I think is where you get ahead of the curve and help that tree have a really positive, productive year. But let's move away from any thoughts of repotting at the wrong time of year. This is a spring-only event for these species. Okay, I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna change the line of this apical region here. Just because it's really, really straight, and let me go ahead and walk you through this. I'm happy you can see kind of where we've really reduced the length of the bottom branches. I see where I could break that up a little bit more. I like the length on this branch off to the left. I'm supportive of the branch off to the right, but I didn't want it to be exactly the same length as the piece on the left. I feel like pulling that apex back to the left could really change some things. And you can see how straight and how rigid that is. Now, we walked through the flexibility of the pieces on the floor. We see that the structural pieces do have the capacity to bend. This is where I'm gonna shift to foregauge, because I really don't want to have to push that past, have it return, fiddle with it. I'm gonna lock it in with one single piece of wire. This is gonna feel very, very heavy, but you're gonna see how it functions for the tree. I'm gonna focus on just getting the application to be perfect. Now, when I'm bending here, I understand I can't bend this area with a piece of foregauge. I would have to use a piece of rebar and other techniques to bend this. I don't want to bend this, though. I want to bend this to change the straight line that otherwise exists. And if I'm gonna bend here, I know that I need to have my wire entering this point on this, so that I have the ability to hold that bend. So this is a target point for my wire to actually hit and be effective, okay? So with foregauge, if I'm gonna be bending here, I don't need to wire out to one of these branches. I'm just gonna go ahead, and I'm gonna set myself up. I'm gonna follow the same angle of turns. Okay, and this is an advanced wiring technique. I will say that, okay? I'm just gonna slide that down to get it right where I need it. And now, this is where I've got a same angle, same spacing, no gaps, okay? I want to be very diligent. I hit that point right there, right on the inside of that with my wire. Now I come back over the top here. Same angle, same spacing, no gaps. I'm not changing the application of my wire to do anything or adapt. You see that I have that same angle following up through here as I come into this nice and clean. Now I'm gonna go ahead, and I'm gonna come in here, and I'm gonna come back in. I'm gonna hit this right here. Okay, I gotta maintain a little bit of, and this is where not having it totally anchored is challenging, but you're gonna see where it cleans up the aesthetic to not have four gauge on a branch that can't handle it. And I'm gonna come here. Now, I want my fulcrum for the bend to be occurring right here. So notice my hand down here. I'm gonna tighten this wire, and I'm gonna be watching the flex on that structural piece, and I'm just gonna give it a slight rotation. Okay, I see the bark separating. Comfortable, comfortable. Okay, really nice. Changing that position, and boom. Really nice hold on that. And that completely shifts the dynamic of the tree, because now we come here, and then we move up, and now we come back. And this is interesting because you have this character branch coming here, the apex was over here, very docile, right? The tree comes up and moves this way, but we've got this interesting piece here, and when we take that, and boom, we come back here, we give another change of direction, and now all of a sudden we start to see, oh, if I bring that up, and I change these, and I utilize that length, boom, we've just created an entirely new piece of interest in the design of this tree. That is really something where we're capitalizing, capitalizing on the opportunity. And that's what we're trying to do here with this tree, is we're trying to make this tree look like a tree that exists. Now, I've got a kind of a conglomeration of branches here. I'm gonna take out the least valuable, which is that short, kind of crummy one. I still have a congregation. These pieces are more valuable, I think, this one at a downward angle, not so much. Cut it back, I need two pieces at any junction. And now I can go ahead and continue my foregauge. And this is where it gets a little gnarly. I would say, if, if, if, in this instance, then you can definitely figure out a way to transition. Okay, I'm gonna go ahead, got a really odd opaque spider on this tree, which I've never seen before. There were many comments about that spider. Yeah, yeah, crazy looking spider. Okay, now watch closely. Now I come back to this point here, watch this. Boom, clean. Boom, clean. And notice that I don't have foregauge wrapped all over, but I can actually bend it into a branch that can't support it. Just a nice, clean, functional cut, right? Again, advanced wire, advanced structural wire technique. I needed the bend to occur here. I've got my holding points here and here, as well as here. Okay, that's what's giving me that fulcrum. And all of a sudden, the wire there, I don't need any more than that. Oh. Ready for some questions again? I'm quite happy with what's happening with this tree, beyond expectation. Yeah, I'm ready for questions. Yeah. Okay. Let's rock and roll. Jacob is wondering, can you propagate taxodium via knee cuttings? Oof, good question. I honestly do not know. I honestly don't know. I've never tried to propagate taxodium via cuttings or any other way. I have a feeling that you probably very easily can propagate taxodium via cuttings, just because I know how much root you can reduce in the repotting process. And I know how much, I know how durable the species is. So I would have to believe that you can, but I don't have any experience with that. Can we get another shot, zoom in to the bottom of that four gauge that you were just working with? We have a request. Jesus is like, you guys can't see him, but he's like, there's three cameras. He's like moving between all of them trying to get it. Let me rotate here. I'll just show you this right there as I'm wiring out. And Jesus, I'll leave it here for you so you can. You want me to point here? No, there are two. This one? Yeah. Yeah, let me go ahead. Let me go ahead and boom, take that off, and then this piece is toast. There you go. Are you using aluminum or copper wire? This is definitely copper, because I'm making, right, and when we start to talk about conifers, you've got heavier bark, you've got more rigid branching, copper gives us the ability to, to accomplish the kind of significant stylistic changes that we typically envision as the result of coniferous work with a lighter gauge of wire in all honesty, because if we're talking about four gauge, which if we compare four gauge, I'm guessing four gauge right here is six, six millimeter, five and a half millimeter, six millimeter aluminum. You would have to have a seven millimeter to have aluminum give you the same response as the copper. Yeah. That's about a full millimeter difference, and because we're not dealing with a soft bark tree, this is a very rugged bark that, that taxodium has, we know that the bark is far or, or the tree has the ability to, to protect itself from scarring, the rigidity, the roughness of the surface of copper being very abrasive can definitely have a negative impact on soft bark trees, which is why we typically utilize aluminum with softer bark deciduous trees. Um. So, it, it, it is far more functional to be using copper when we're dealing with conifers because it does have that holding capacity that allows us to utilize lighter gauges. Okay. So, I'm kind of getting up here. I've obviously got the apex, I've got these two pieces here. These are going to be crux pieces for the design of the tree, right? Um, and so I really want to focus on this. Now I'm coming back to my six gauge because again, I've got big thick branches that I'm going to need to move quite a bit in order for them to engage in the design in the way that we're taking this tree, the direction that we're taking this tree and, and, and making sure that I've got the gauge that allows me to position the tree or the branches wherever I want them to go, whether it's a little bit or a lot, okay, makes it, it just guides our process to know that we need to have a gauge that allows us to accomplish every single piece of movement that we would like to put into a branch. We know that over the course of time in your bonsai practice, you will find that when you under gauge, you will want to move that branch far more than you thought and you don't have the firepower to get it done and you end up doing more damage than good to that branch. A lot of times when we're out here in the finer branches, a lot of people will start to downsize their gauges and then they'll try to move those finer branches and they'll have to move them more to get that wire to hold and that's when we start to see the fragility of those finer branches existing. Okay. Now. Okay. Let's talk about the tips here. The upper portion of this, we want this to expand and actually be the bigger portion of the tree. I'm going to start to leave more length here. Even though I know I want ramification in the future, we can get that growth to occur, cut back to it after it's matured, but for the initial shape of the primary structure, I'm going to leave a little bit more length up in this upper portion here. So I'm just kind of walking you through my decision-making process. As you see me leave more, that flat top bald cypress form. Longer branches, more expansive canopy in the apex, shorter down low where we've shortened these a lot more. Now you're starting to see that come to fruition. Jim is wondering what type of style you would do with nursery stock and where would you cut the main trunk? So again, you really do have the ability to choose with nursery stock. I don't have a strong affinity for a formal upright bonsai form with a bald cypress. I do like the flat top. I like the flat top form, and what that means for me is, when you start to see the flat top form, you're really looking for a taller, elegant tree. I would say you see that buttressing trunk, which forms on nursery stock or mature trees, you notice the buttressing trunk here, this is a characteristic of bald cypress. You start to move up into the canopy. As soon as you start to get a real significant length of the same diameter, I would be looking at cutting that to really begin the building of branches. You'll see that taper, and you'll see it take on this, and I would be letting that run for a little while, but I really would be looking at, say, if you have a nice buttress and that nice taper, and then it starts to straighten out, I would let that run for 50%, maybe double what that tapered base is. You've got, say, 10 inches of taper. You've got 30 inches, or say ... God, what am I trying to say here? I'm thinking in centimeters. I'm thinking in inches, knowing that we're talking in centimeters to a large portion of the population. Say, for example, we've got 20 centimeters of taper, and then all of a sudden we've got 60 centimeters of straightness. I would keep half of that straightness. I would keep 30 centimeters. 20 centimeters of taper, 30 centimeters of straightness, boom. Cut that off, and then you get this at the top. Over the course of time, it's going to produce branches back down in that are going to cause that taper to get better. That are going to change that trunk. For the better, one of the things that we want to avoid with bald cypress is chopping it at the base and trying to regrow it. That never produces a good bald cypress. It never produces a good bald cypress. Keep a little more length than you think you want, and you're just in the wheelhouse of where you need to be for that flat-top form. All right, Scott is wondering if I heavily reduced a nursery stock bald cypress into a bonsai container, and it is flushing out vigorously, should I go ahead and prune for ramification after the first flush hardens off? Or leave it this year? It was a huge root reduction. Kill it or make it a bonsai moment. Kill it or make it a bonsai moment, nice. So I would say it depends on where you're at in terms of your branching, and your branching are going to guide your decision-making process, right? Do you want thicker branches, longer branches? Do you need more branches? Are you trying to recuperate the root system, right? These are developmental goals where we let it run. I would say putting movement into the branches earlier as opposed to later is going to give you a far better shape. But you may change. You may choose to let them elongate, come back next spring after they've gained some girth, and prune it back. You might also get to the early summer and say, God, these branches are getting really thick. If I don't do something, they're going to be disproportionately thick to the size of the trunk and the tree. And if that's the case, prune in early summer. But you have two times. You can prune prior to the flush in the spring. You can prune once that growth hardens off in the early summer. Those are your two times for bald cypress, dawn redwood, and pond cypress. As long as you understand those two times. The two times you function inside of that, you're going to have success. When you choose to prune, the response is going to be quality growth and productive production of foliar mass and strength in the tree. Can you air layer bald cypress or other deciduous conifers, and when should that be done? Yes. Very, very easily. Almost effortlessly air layerable, these trees are. They respond well to water. They have the ability to move resources rapidly. And because of that, they can produce that callus tissue around an air layer. That allows them to generate new root mass very, very effortlessly. Now when you think about that, again, come back to the notion that when we're talking about that spring flush, they're dumping all their energy into the production of foliar mass. The time to air layer is not while they're at an energy deficient state. The time to air layer is when they get back into an energy positive, which is right around that late spring, early summer period of time. And when we start to see those elongating twigs turning ruby red. And when we start to see those elongating twigs turning ruby red. And when we start to see those elongating twigs turning ruby red. And when we start to see those elongating twigs turning ruby red. It's a key to partially defoliate and prune back our ramification to get that next fork. But it's also a time to trigger the air layering mentality. That's when we would be looking at the indications of the tree and performing an air layer. Linda was wondering if you could talk about how old this tree is. You know, this tree, this is an oldie but goodie. Definitely not a young tree. The bark on Bald Cypress does take some time to formulate. The knees are an indication of age. It's not a young tree. It's not a young tree. It's a tree of age to be sure. You don't see young Bald Cypress with radical forms of knees, particularly in a stunted character tree like this. I would say that this tree is probably in the 80-year range, 60 to 80 years. And that's, you know, for a tree that's a rapidly growing species, that's a relatively old tree. Now, I'm going to show you a tree in just a minute. Again, I'm going to finish this because we've just come so far, it would be a shame to stop right now. But I'm going to show you a tree in a minute that far surpasses that. And I'm going to show you how old this tree is in terms of age. And you'll be able to see some of the differences. But it also is a Pond Cypress, which has a little bit different bark, a little bit different branching, right? Just some nuances to the characteristics, where they naturally occur, their native range, and some of the aesthetics around the trees definitely change. But they have the exact same timing for pruning, mechanisms, and considerations for aesthetic. But yeah, no, I'd say between 65 and 80 years of age. It feels like a very, very young tree. Yeah. So it's a very realistic, not overly done estimation of this tree's antiquity. All right. I'm going to skip ahead to somebody else's question that's specific to this tree. How long does the... Oh, sorry. Bentley is wondering, how long does the tree wire need to stay to set those bends? Bald Cypress, they grow so fast. And they really do put on meat in terms of tissue very, very rapidly. So they do tend to hold. They can really support the setting of their structure relatively rapidly. Now, because it's a thicker bark tree, and again, I want to be careful when I say these kinds of things, because I don't want people to think that, oh, Ryan promotes wire scars. I don't, right? But I also don't promote having to wire a tree 10 times to hold a branch in a position. I don't like non-productive wire, which is to say, I wire a tree before it ever scars. I take it off. Now, I wire a tree before it ever scars. I take it off. This is fruitless bonsai activity, right? I wire, I unwire, I wire, I unwire. It grows, I prune. It grows, I prune. Everything should have an end goal to the process. Because Bald Cypress has a thicker bark, has the ability to heal over and hide those wire scars, I tend to leave the wire on long enough to where it gets tight. Not to where it constricts, not to where it bites in, but where it gets tight and you can see a little bit of an impression. You can see a little bit of an impression of that wire. That means that the tree has produced enough vascular tissue to at least begin the process of holding it. Now, you might take the wire off and it might return in some of the locations. It might hold some of the other locations, okay? That's totally acceptable and totally fine. We come back in with our second wiring and we secure those locations that didn't necessarily hold, move forward, but we have some that did hold. That is productive bonsai activity, right? And so, I don't promote wire scars, but I definitely do promote leaving wire on long enough to establish vascular tissue that can hold some of the branches in place so that we continue moving forward and utilizing over the course of time less wire and starting to get the tree to really naturalize towards that design we've conceptualized. Chuck says that he likes the broken edge of the trunk chop and the upper third of the tree. I think it works well in this case. But can you talk about the options? Can you talk about the option of making a vertical wedge cut? Right. So, Chuck and Jesus, can you zoom in right here? Let me know when you're there. Okay. You ready? All right. So, this is a very, very organic transition right here and you can see where it's healed. Clearly, this was damaged. You know, maybe this might have been the dominant trunk and this might have grown as a shoot because of this damage. You know, there's so many different ways we can interpret what happened here. Okay. If we're starting to look at this area and the width of this area is starting to continue to swell or starting to create an inverse form of taper, then I could see Chuck's point of when would we decide to come in here and actually remove this wood and create a V-cut. I would do so if this is getting so wide that it's becoming an aesthetic flaw and I would introduce that negative space of a natural crotch. Right? If I have a crotch forming that V, I could introduce that negative space of that crotch artificially with a cut and then heal it so that it does look natural. But I, again, I implement that strategy when I start to have such a big thickness in a region like this that I'm getting inverse taper and I need to cut out that positive space of that tissue to introduce a crotch that otherwise needs to exist for the aesthetic quality of the tree to be preserved. Howard would love to know more about the origin of this tree. Yeah. The bald cypress typically does not have knees that are backed up or part of the trunk, usually some distance from the trunk. He believes that this tree is as of yet unnamed subspecies strictly his personal opinion. I have one given ceremonially from the state of agricultural department for experimental reasons. It has five or six good sized knees that appear as part of the trunk. Very cool, but not normal. I honestly, I have to be... I'm gonna blow my cover here. So this was acquired at the Golden State Collection North, I think it's called the Mammoth Bazaar. I've never actually been. I had some students go, they said, are there any trees that you're interested in? I said, wow, that bald cypress looks really cool. And there's kind of this ongoing discussion at Mirai because we have, for the most part, functioned with pond cypress. And so I wanted to have a true taxodium distichum, a true bald cypress, which this is. Um. And I wanted to be able to kind of work both the pond cypress and the bald cypress in tandem to be able to show and demonstrate the nuances. The nuances of foliage, the nuances of bark, the nuances of just the aesthetics. Because again, physiologically and horticulturally, outside of the taxonomy of their sexual structures in terms of their seeds and their pollen cones, for the most part, they're virtually identical. They do have a different bark and they do have a different foyer type and some of those things. But I don't know the background of this because it was purchased at an auction. And interestingly enough, if Ira and Darlene are watching, when they got here, I purchased several trees at that auction. Some absolutely fantastic trees, right? And you'll be seeing some of these trees over the course of time. But I said, man, the bald cypress looked better in pictures than it does in person. That was the only. That was the only buyer's remorse that I had. Now? Now? Seeing what this is becoming? I'm like, oh, what a score. What an absolute score. So again, all of that long way to say I have no idea where it came from. Okay. So now we're at the apex. Now this kind of flat top form in the structure, I'm leaving it longer because I need that size. I need that size. And we always are sort of faced with this decision making. If I want a highly ramified branch out here, do I cut here? Do I cut here? Do I cut here? Do I cut here? And start building the ramification? The answer is no. Okay? That's a very dangerous way when you have a tree that's this size to try and go about the building process because this tree is already this big. Now if you had a pinky size bald cypress and you said I want an apex like this, well, when it's pinky size, you're going to be doing proportional cutting to the size of that trunk and it is going to be quite small and those branches are going to be quite short and you're going to build it over the time. The trunk's going to build over time. The ramification is going to build over time. And if you haven't heard the Dennis Wojtyla podcast, part one and part two, that's really what he's talking about is you build the ramification over the course of time. But when you start with a bigger tree and you're trying to get the ramification caught up, we need to use this length. We need to allow it to accumulate size and we need to build ramification that we will eventually cut back to. So when I'm here to get a proportional apical region, I'm really using a lot of this length, trying to put some of that up. And I'm going to do that by the way. I'm going to do the same thing on the other side. I'm going to do the same thing here. I'm going to go around and I'm going to create a pattern, some of the lines that I'm going to adjust. So this is where I'm going to add the ramification. I'm going to go up, out, movement into it, okay, and again, bear with me because I'm up close to it so I'll step away so that I can see it and we'll kind of correct this movement. This is just sort of a first stab. And each piece, I really want it to have. I don't want to create a pattern to the movement that I'm putting into this. I want it to have diversity so that I don't create that repetition that starts to make it look artificial. I want it to have uniqueness and interest. I don't want it to have that consistency that we start to see inside of sort of the interpretations we apply to trees and movement. And it's very difficult to avoid that. Over the course of time, there does become sort of these set-in patterns that we find comfort in. That's the way that our brain functions efficiently. Trying to fight that is like one of the hardest things to do in bonsai and also one of the most necessary. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to keep that nice and long up in the apical region. And moving to the left, now this is something that I did not see when we started the process tonight, that the tree would come back to the left. I had thought it would go to the right, but again, your movement starts on the left, circles back here. So one kind of swooping movement. If we kept going that way and we just kind of came here and went there, what an uninteresting tree. When we go here and come back... Which was characterized by this really interesting piece, that was when the tree, boom, changed and gained that quality. So I've got just one more piece back here, a little tertiary division of ramification. And this is an interesting thing as well. Jesus, can you zoom into this little stub right here? Okay, so this stub, although it looks dead, is pushing new foliar mass. That actually is a bifurcated or a fork that's formed in our ramification. I'm going to treat this as a tertiary piece here. I'm going to leave this piece just a little bit longer and give it just... just carry my wire out to a point where I still have that valuable movement. Okay, I lose it right there in that arc, boom. Okay, and that... that is a really, really nice first structural styling of a bald cypress that just needed a little bit of love in a Tracy Francis container. To really bring out its character and quality. Okay? Can you just talk real quick about the masculine slash feminineness of the design? Sarah's request. I mean, I think this is, when we talk... when you talk about what is the nuance and characteristic of a tree that really quantifies and creates the aesthetic. For bald cypress, you have this massive trunk and you move into this beautiful up and out kind of fine, delicate ramification. You have the ruggedness of this bark. And you've got this... you've got the softness of this deciduous conifer. It's like Larch has this nuance. Dawn Redwood has this nuance. Bald cypress and pond cypress have this nuance. It makes them very, very special. And it makes them extremely unique as deciduous conifers, right? So it's just like keying into that and trying to be able to have power while you have grace. Being able to have girth while you have finesse. These are... these are things that we don't get to tap into in a Japanese black pine or a shimpaku necessarily. This is really something that is a nuanced existence inside of the deciduous conifer form. Okay? I'm going to slide this tree aside. I'm going to bring one more in. Oh, Josh, can you show us the before? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Mm-hmm. It looks much happier now. I mean, it just looks... it just looks like it's had that intention put into the design of the tree. Yeah, I'm quite happy with that. I am quite happy with that. That's nice. Okay. Now, let's just understand. This is just the beginning of the journey. And let's take a look at where it's headed. And this is really where it starts to get fun at Mirai. Okay, Jesus. Let's go ahead and adjust cameras in terms of zoom. I'm going to move that towards the front if you can pull that camera back. Sam says she thinks that tree looked very nice as well. Oh, thank you, Sam. Appreciate this. Appreciate this. This tree is a monster. Monster in terms of its provenance, a monster in terms of its quality, a monster in terms of its character. This is a pond cypress that was part of Mary Madison, one of my most favorite people in the world. I've known Mary since I was in high school doing bonsai. She's always been such a positive force. I've been down to Florida and gotten to go out collecting with Mary. The bald cypress forest that we did the repot on recently in the library, I actually collected all those trees with Mary myself. And so having a piece from Mary's private collection was something very special for me. This piece will always exist at Mirai. We call it the Sentinel, or excuse me, the Senator. The Senator named after the bald cypress. That was burned down by somebody with a little bit of a drug problem. Anyways, this tree had been carried to a very high state of development in terms of primary, secondary. And now you can start to see all of these really nice fine twigs. This is the kind of ramified growth and kind of refinement that we're looking for in our pond cypress, bald cypress, our taxodium species. And when we start to get inside of this, just because it's produced these fine twigs, these finer branches, we have not won quite yet. We are still in the fight in terms of elevating and really bringing about that higher level. Now we were working with four, six, eight, ten, twelve, one wire of fourteen on the bald cypress that we just styled the structure on. Now I'm going to be shifting. Now I'm going to be starting to move towards a much thinner gauge of wire and I'm going to be starting to strategically create lines and utilize lines that inside of this ramified ramification start to build. Now I'm going to start right here just because I think it's a really beautiful location to begin in this upper canopy. More than anything though, it just gives me a great talking point here. So you notice this branch growing down. You notice this branch growing up. This piece growing down, if we're going to create this up and out kind of growth habit, we need to bring that ramification up into that realm. If it's left to grow down, it's going to disappear in the big push of growth that's going to occur in the canopy and that's really going to start to reduce its longevity or viability on the interior. And we know that in the effort to get ramification across these branches, we want those interior pieces to thrive. We also know from what we saw with the previous bald cypress, the finer ramification, very delicate, particularly its point of attachment. This is now the tertiary level of our taxodium species or our deciduous conifers that have this growth habit. Max and Danny both asked what soil size you use for taxodium. Nice question. So with taxodium, I'm going 1 16th to 1 quarter inch. I'm keeping those finer particles in there just because I think it helps a lot with delivery of nutrition. I think it also helps a lot with the kind of moisture that the finer ramified roots we're looking for in taxodium. It helps deliver what they need. Now, again, I'm always going to close the crotch and create that acute crotch because even if you walk through, and there are multiple locations in the country where you can go walk through the canopies of taxodium groves, what you'll start to notice is taxodium groves, in order to get that big flattening out top, it'll have a branch growing here and it'll have a branch growing here and then it'll have another branch growing here. So they start to overlap each other. And if you look at the structure that's occurring. Inside of this, you'll notice that there are branches folded back. There are branches folded back, trying to pull on that natural growth habit. Right. But you still notice that each of those crotches is still very acute. That acute crotch is what makes that crotch functional. And I say functional from the perspective of strength and from the perspective of longevity, particularly experiencing the environmental factors that taxodium does experience, which is typically hurricane force winds. And really, really heavy onshore types of storm events. That's where taxodium has to have durability. Okay. So once we put movement into these, I'm going to come back and I'm really starting to look at how long do I want the branches to be in any region of the tree. Okay. We're looking proportionally at the scale of this tree, but I'm trying to think about that ramification is now going to occur very close to that tip. I don't want to leave it too long. If I look at the proportion of the bald cypress I just did, slightly smaller tree, now we're going bigger in this pond cypress. So I'm going to gauge that length to be proportional to whether it's primary, secondary, or tertiary, right? Primary long, secondary moderate, tertiary really short. I'm going to be gauging it on that, but I'm also gauging it to the proportion of the tree. So the tertiary pieces on this tree are going to be a little longer than the tertiary pieces on the previous tree. Jeff was wondering, do you let the wire bite in at times? Do you touch on bald cypress before removal? I let it get a little snug. I let it get a little snug because, again, I want it to be productive. I want it to have had an impact and to have improved the shape of that tree to a degree where I'm not going to have to put the same quantity of wire on the tree the next time that I wire it because I let that wire serve its purpose. Okay. Now this is interesting because you get these remnants of fronds. This is really not a branch here. This is just kind of a leftover piece of growth. There's really no bud swelling on it. I do get my best possible buds on that shorter piece, and I'm going to be pruning those pieces off anyways. And you start to see how we start to build some of that thickness, some of that body, some of that tertiary ramification that exists inside of there. Okay? And so throughout this piece, and let me move to the next one here. Here we see these two pieces here, and I still have a tip that very much is still a long and very much is still alive in a part of my ramification. I'm going to come back in again. Okay. I'm going to be very delicate in my application of wire. I'm going to be very aware of the fact that that crotch where they connect is extremely fragile. Okay. And I'm looking at how long do I want these pieces to be as tertiary pieces of ramification. Okay. I'm going to carry them up. I'm going to close that crotch into an acute, and I'm going to carry them out. I'm going to close that to acute. I'm going to carry that up. Now I'm going to carry them out. Okay. How long do I want those pieces to be? Proportional, but still short. I want these to be tertiary. Boom. I'm going to be cutting nice and short, just adding to that shape of that design. And you can start to see how all of these big, long, spindly pieces, giving them shape and then shortening them is the best way to handle them. If I come through and I just boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, shorten all these, I lose my ability to wire those pieces because now you're dealing with such a small piece that you don't have any leverage. You fracture the branch. You break it off. You lose that ramification. You've really got to massage and finesse this aspect of the refinement process. But again, and again, I want to bring your attention back to the focus. Okay. The pruning timing is the same, whether you're structurally pruning on primary, whether you're reducing the length of secondaries, or whether you're shortening and really trying to ramify tertiaries. All of it happens right now as the buds swell prior to the push in the spring. Okay. But our decision in terms of that length is based on what segment of that ramification is it. Is it a primary piece that's going to be longer, a secondary piece that's going to be moderate, or a tertiary piece that's going to be shorter? And what is the proportion of the tree that allows us to make those decisions? All right. Michael has a question. Since you're using only Akadama, how many years are you seeing on average before repotting? Yeah. Great question. And I don't know if we talked about this. Eve, you edited the bald cypress repotting. That bald cypress forest repotting was the biggest nightmare. It was a five-hour repot when we got into it. We were all here just like, what kind of can of worms did we open? Made for a great short video, right? But it was a total monster. Troy and I barely got it up the stairs, barely got it down the stairs. It was just like every aspect of it was super painful. I left that tree in that container. I left it in that container for seven years. And one of the things that I've always wanted to explore with bald cypress is people say, you got to repot them every two to three years. It's better to repot them every two to three years. Look, if you're using Akadama, the goal in Akadama is to let the roots scale the Akadama so that they get finer and finer, tighter and tighter, and you form this really dense mass of roots. When you use a garden soil, when you use a coarse aggregate, when you submerge bald cypress in water as your methodology for cultivation, you get these big, thick, woody roots that have no fine root mass on them. And if you repot them too frequently, you get big, thick roots without fine root mass on them. So leaving them inside of a container where they fully scale that Akadama and they get finer and more compact and more compressed, that's really where we need to go. Now, there's a limit because bald cypress does like a lot of water, and if it gets too compact, water can't get into the root system. That's the turning point. For me, I found that right around that six-year mark seems to be the sweet spot. Seven years for that forest was too long and a few of the trees got a little weaker. They're already showing much more strength in their spring push after the repot. That seems to be that sweet spot that I've found at Mirai anyways at the growth rate in the Pacific Northwest to really scale the entire Akadama substrate. Okay. David asked, can the tree take heavy root pruning when repotting? I think any tree can be pruned if you're pruning the right roots strategically and leaving the correct roots unpruned, right? Bald cypress, much like a lot of deciduous trees, you need to reduce the thicker, coarser roots, but doing so and cutting back to secondary or tertiary roots much in the same way that we would prune and reduce the canopy of the tree is an important aspect of really refining a root system. In bonsai cultivation to get that reflection in the canopy of the tree. And so making sure that we're cutting back to something is a big part of repotting bald cypress correctly. And again, if you haven't seen that repotting, it's a forest called forest repotting. If you haven't seen that, check it out in the library because that will answer a lot of your questions. All right. So we have quite an active chat because of the quarantine. So we're going to power through quite a few more questions. Okay. I'm going to keep wiring. I'm going to shut it down, but it looks like let's rock and roll. I'm here for you guys. We got some. I'm going to keep working. See you, Troy. Thanks, man. All right. Jonathan says, have you ever thought about making a weeping style bald cypress? You know, I have not personally seen a weeping bald cypress like ever in my life. That's not to say that they don't exist. I'm sure somewhere there's a genetic mutation where there is a weeping. I mean, there's a weeping giant sequoia for crying out loud. There's probably a weeping bald cypress. It does not appeal to me. The previous piece that I styled kind of had that weeping nature. And I feel like the weeping approach is a little bit of like, oh, these branches are kind of drooping. So I'm going to go ahead and make it weeping. I've never really considered it seriously. That's not to degrade or knock in any way other people pursuing weeping styles with bald cypress. It's not something that appeals to me very much. All right. Up next, we've got Brandon. I'm growing bald cypress as seedlings. How vigorous is the species? Oh, so vigorous. So vigorous, it's crazy. But again, don't abuse vigor. Use vigor. Don't abuse vigor, right? Use it to your advantage. Use it to grow healthy, rapid, really high-level trees. If you abuse it, it will come back and bite you. And abusing it means we mistreat the species. We overwork the species. And eventually, we exhaust that strength and the species suffers, right? So they're vigorous. Use it for positive. Use it for the good of bonsai. Use it for the good. Use it for the good. Don't go to the dark side. Don't do it. All right. Michael says, my Montezuma cypress bud out like crazy all over the trunk. Should I always be removing them if they are not in the places where I need more branching? I think so. Yeah, I think that makes a lot of sense. Now, I'm going to say this, okay? It does not make sense. Over the spring season when trees are pushing out, we do have to understand that they're pushing out from all the regions where they have the ability to cellularly divide. Where meristematic tissue, where an apical meristem, right? A meristem being an area where cellular division takes place. Cellular division is what gives rise to or creates foliar mass, okay? So they're growing where they have the ability to cellularly divide. And when they spend that energy on that growth, initially if it's a bud and you rub it off, cool. If it's elongated into a foliar frond, leave it. Because it's already spent energy to create that foliar mass. If you take it off at that point, that foliar mass hasn't paid the energy back to the tree and we lose energy by taking it off, okay? So if it's a bud, boom, it hasn't spent the energy. If it's an elongated frond, leave it. Come back once that growth is hardened, late spring, early summer. Elongating growth, turning that ruby red color on the stems of the pieces that are ramification. Now you can partially defoliate prune because it's back in an energy positive. That piece of foliar mass paid back the tree and now you're good to go again. Farley says that they have a nursery stock pond cypress that's about four feet tall and already has some branching forming a flat top. Where does the new growth come out from that adds height? That adds height. Well, I mean it depends because you have different levels of ramification. You got your structural pieces coming from the trunk. You've got your secondaries coming from the trunk. Your secondary is coming from your structural. Your tertiary is coming from your secondaries, okay? Any one of those on a pond cypress or a bald cypress, if you allow it to become the vertically dominant piece, meaning you let it take off vertically, will become the continuation of the trunk. You have to decide which piece do you want to elongate that's going to actually start to represent that trunk. Which piece? Where is it coming from? What is the design that's guiding that decision? That now becomes your choice to make. All right. Marty says, when fertilizing this year on trees that are in development, if you apply the first application and when it is time for the second application, the first one does not seem to be breaking down. Do you still add the second application or wait until the first application begins to break down? Yeah, so this makes sense and this is predictable, right? Because microbial activity that's going to be breaking down your fertilizer application is going to be based on temperature and daylight length just like the growth rate of the tree. Even though your tree starts to grow, right, the microbial activity that's going to decompose that fertilizer needs a little bit more time. I generally will go two applications. If after two applications it hasn't broken down, then I know that I have a lack of microbial activity and I might move back towards a Dr. Earth Life to try and... Dr. Earth Life is a fertilizer that has a lot of non-plant food-based ingredients that feeds the expansion of the flora in the container. We did a really massive soil research project last year at Mirai and it was a complete failure. We're going to podcast on that pretty soon. Complete failure. This year we have to rebuild all the microbial activity in our containers because of last year's experiment and we're going back to Dr. Earth Life to really re-inoculate with fungi, with beneficial microbial activity and start that process again. So if I get two feeds down the line and I recognize I don't have microbial activity, I would go back to Dr. Earth Life. I would take the fertilizer that hasn't broken down and I would put Dr. Earth Life on there and I would stimulate that microbial activity. You will see that start to cause the breakdown of fertilizer after you rebuild that microbial activity. Gary asks, how can we tell the difference between pond and bald? Did we discover this today? I mean, so... And let me just... I'm not going to move that one. I'm just going to sneak this one on. Take a look at the bark. Take a look at... And Jesus, I don't know if that's possible to get both of those just to see the bark. Very, very different bark characteristics. Different branching characteristics in terms of smooth versus rough, where the advantageous growth is occurring. There's also some age differences here. But you're seeing some of the aesthetic pieces. And the biggest piece that we'll see... Okay, I'm going to go ahead and pull this out now. Okay, the biggest thing that we'll see is when we deal with Taxodium disticum, the bald cypress, it will produce a frond-like piece of growth where all of the leaves lay off of the central stem laterally. Really beautiful frond-like piece of growth. When we deal with pond cypress, pond cypress, although they can produce a frond-like growth, typically stay more cylindrical and rope-like in the structure of their needle. And again, they can go more frond-like, but they do typically tend to have a ropier, foliar shape to them. And that's really where we start to get into this weird area. When we started exploring these species, there was a big, big conversation about you're dealing with pond cypress, not bald cypress. And all of a sudden we were like, oh no, how do we tell the difference? And there was a lot of feedback and there was a lot of discussion in the forum and on the stream itself. And we started feeling like, okay, I really need to dig into this and understand this. Understand regionally, they occur in different regions. They do overlap a little bit, but for the most part they do have a separate growing region where they exist. So there is a regional aspect to that. There was an aesthetic aspect to that and there was a foliar aspect to that. And again, this is a taxonomical difference that is mainly created by the formation of their sexual organs, whether it's their pollen or their fruiting seed structures. But minor aesthetic differences as well. Alright, and Roman is wondering, are shallow containers the best option for this species and why? I think any time you start to talk about a vertical tree, and Bald Cypress is a vertical tree, then you start to talk about shallow and laterally wide containers. We start to bring that depth of the container down and we start to extend it width-wise and it maximizes the impression of that verticality that really reflects the nuances of the species. Aesthetically, that would be where we would be looking at. There's a horticultural, because any consideration has to have function and aesthetic. Sorry, I'm working inside of some very fine branches that I don't want to break off in here as well, so I'm just concentrating. On multiple things at once. There's also a functional aspect to shallow containers, which I think is really interesting. This isn't something that many professionals discuss and I think it's something that we need to understand. Typically, when you put a tree in a shallow container, you're probably thinking, wow, I'm going to have to water that a lot. But there is a definitive dynamic that plays into the shallow container that allows us to cultivate trees that are high water loving, trees that need a lot of moisture for their size. There's a dynamic that exists inside of the shallow container that allows that shallow container to be a good solution to that tree. Here's what it is. This is general across all of bonsai, the shallow container, what makes bonsai, bonsai. When we have this shallow container, we have a very limited height that gravity is acting upon. The more shallow that this gets, the less gravity is pushing water out of that container. When you start to get this really shallow, wide container that we think, gosh, that's going to be tough to water. That container is actually holding more water than a deeper container that has more gravity acting on a taller soil column. That's what allows us to grow a Japanese maple in a super shallow wide container because it actually is holding more water for the size of the container based on that shallowness where gravity is not moving water out of it. That's how it stays hydrated. This fascinating dynamic that is very unique to bonsai, no other horticultural endeavor even remotely taps into this dynamic. It's also what makes it so confusing for us to try and reference common horticultural knowledge and learn from it because a lot of it does not apply to bonsai based on that shallow container. Bear with me. I've got some fun words for this one. Adam is wondering, would all of these practices be applicable to taxodium peave minerate, aka dwarf bald cypress? It's really interesting. I actually have that exact cultivar in my landscape because I wanted to see what is this dwarf bald cypress? What does it look like? What does it do? How does it behave? I don't have an answer for you yet. I just planted it last year. It made it through the winter which is great. I'll be doing more research on that. I really don't know. Typically when we deal with dwarf varieties dwarf varieties do tend to be slightly weaker. Do we need to prune it to get the same kind of ramification? Is the timing the same? Can we go as hard? All of these things are questions that we need to answer. I would assume that it is going to be slightly weaker and we can't be as aggressive on a dwarf variety as we could on a pure genetic variety. I don't know yet. I don't know. All right. Roman is wondering what are the sun and water requirements of bald and pond cypress? In the native environment, obviously you're talking about a southeastern United States, super hot, super humid, tons of sun. That's great and all, but when we put them into this shallow environment, this containerized environment, we do have to be a little bit more careful because they can burn. The foliar mass can burn inside of that intense heat if we're not careful. That's really where we start to see the necessity to maybe give them a little bit of shade when we hit that 90 degrees, 92, I would say 95 is topping out, particularly when they're pushing fresh foliage. That's when they're the most susceptible. They love heat. They love a lot of water. They can be overwatered, contrary to popular belief. People think, they grow in water for six months out of the year and you can submerge them. You can't overwater it. You absolutely can overwater a bald cypress. Depending on where it's at in its state of development, where it's at in terms of its creation of a bone-side root system, you have to be a little bit careful in the initial phases of establishing a bald cypress. I would say they do tend to like more water as opposed to less. They are quite tolerant to heat. If we take care of just those few little nuances, it's one of the very best native species that we have in North America. It's becoming a monstrosity of a bone-side species around the world because of its phenomenal character. Scott asked, do you see any merit in developing a multiple trunk bald cypress? Absolutely. Do they naturally occur in that fashion from your knowledge? Absolutely. Yes, they do, and I see a lot of merit. There is a gentleman, I don't know him. Let me think about... I'm drawing a blank. I was going to say, there's a gentleman on Facebook who's in, I think, Georgia or something, who has bald cypress of all different shapes and sizes and is just an absolute monster with the species. I mean, really understands the nuances, clearly has been informed by their growth habit and natural environment. I hate it when I can't conjure this stuff up. I'll think of it. But yeah, multi-trunk, clumping bald cypress, these are all things that definitely happen in the natural environment. Why would we not represent that in the bonsai form? Alright, couple more. Farley asks, when you're dealing with a flat tub shape, is it the defining branch at the top of the tree? Typically. Typically the defining branch now starts to move to the top of the tree. Now, when you start to create that, and you saw how we kind of pivoted on the bald cypress, when we look at this pond cypress, and I'm starting to get some... I want to get some organization. You now kind of see the organization that exists on the left side. You see the tertiaries laid out. You see how it's just kind of the chaos that exists in here and the organization and definition that exists in there. That's really what we're kind of looking for. But when we start to look here, you know, is the defining branch this branch on the left or is the defining branch let me just square this up here, is the defining branch here? I would say I'm more moving for this being the defining branch. I'm going to be utilizing a little more length here and carrying this out. And I think that up out and that apex, even though it's flattening out, you're still going to have an asymmetrical flattening out where one side's going to be dominant. And I really see this side being boom, this dominant side over here. That's where my defining branch for this tree is going to occur. And I think when you start to look at the flat top form, typically it's in the apical region. Wayne asked, do bald cypress have that much movement in their apical branches? If you go walk through the canopy of a bald cypress, this is underserving of the kind of movement that they have in their apical branches. I mean, a really mature old growth bald cypress and again, what age of the tree is the material allowing you to show also has to inform your decisions, right? If we're talking about a 60 to 80 year old bald cypress, it looks younger and it was handled to look younger. It will mature over the course of time. This is probably a 250 year old bald cypress, right? And that might be maybe 150. Let's go there. I feel safe there. 200, possibly 220, maybe 250. That might have been a little bit generous. I was a little hungry there. So when we start to look at this, the shape of the branches is going to reflect that age. When you walk through old growth bald cypress or pond cypress canopies, it's phenomenal and this is underserving. I think Wayne was talking about the other tree. Sorry, that was from a while ago. Oh, the other tree. Well, I mean, I think the movement in the other tree is definitely I think it's definitely reflective of the lesser degree of age, but that's a really important point that you brought up and you brought it up at a beautiful time, which is to say, hey, listen, every piece of material offers us an ability to hop into bonsai, reflecting only what that material can reflect at that point in time. Now, life inside of a bonsai container is like dog years, right? So we start to see a tree age exponentially faster once we put it into a bonsai container, both aesthetically as well as with that reductive capacity of that shallow container we've been talking about the dynamic of. That really does influence the growth rate and constrict it and start to create a much older looking tree much more rapidly. And you can see this because you say, oh, man, a Yamadori tree, a tree out of the mountains, a collected tree, it's 120 years old. Look at the bark. Well, it's like, well, you could have twice that bark in a 15 year old tree in a container. That's that dog year factor, right? That's that container acting on that tree in a way that we don't typically think about. Steven asked how drastically can you chop back this tree? Do you always need a bud for it to keep moving sap like any other conifer or does it bud on hardwood? It buds on hardwood and that's one of the nuances of quote unquote deciduous conifer, right? It behaves because of its high water mobility to have to replenish its needle supply every single year from a fresh new, right? It has to be able to move a lot of water and from that we do have the capacity to cut back to raw wood without a bud and it will produce new growth and that's where we're saying with these nursery stock pieces, when you top those, when you cut those, there doesn't have to be a branch present. You cut them at the desired height of the trunk, it starts to produce branches that you now wire into. That flat top form and all of a sudden, boom, we're in that flow of creating that design that's going to mature in age over the course of time. Alright, only two more questions. Chuck asks, what are your thoughts about stripping bark on bald and pond cypress? Both aesthetics look great, but what are the considerations for choosing one over the other? I, listen, man, I would have a very hard time taking away bark that has this kind of age and this kind of character, right? There's no degree of contrast that's worth it for me. When we talk about junipers and cleaning a live vein on junipers, you're talking about something that has a function because there definitely is a potential for there to be boring larvae underneath that bark, right? And if you've had enough junipers, you've experienced it where you suffer the loss and you recognize, that's why I clean the live vein. Now there is a beauty to that with junipers, the contrast of the live and dead, that's the value of them. I would say the value of these is the seasonality, the ruggedness with that finesse that we see and we talked about earlier. And so from that perspective, if the value isn't in the contrast, I'm not going to strip the bark, right? That's my own, it's a very personal opinion, and I wouldn't, if somebody wanted to do it, I wouldn't say you're wrong. I would never say that. I would just say, oh, we think differently about that. I can appreciate the contrast in bald cypress and pond cypress, I just wouldn't personally pursue it. Alright, and our last question from Bentley. Does the deadwood on a bald cypress act more like deadwood on a conifer or deteriorate like a deadwood on a deciduous tree? It deteriorates like deadwood on a deciduous, yeah. It's very, very soft. Now interestingly enough, bald cypress as a subject for lumber is a relatively rot resistant, actually potentially depending on where they're at. A highly rot resistant variety to be generating and utilizing timber for building, you know, decks, fencing. You see cypress wood advertised a lot as being a rot resistant variety. Has to be old growth, has to be tight, has to have some nuances to that. It's like talking about cedar being rot resistant. There is no rot resistant cedar anymore because all the old growth cedar is gone. There's some of that that deals with cypress as well, but the deadwood of this, right, although hard, because this tree is old and it grew very, very slow, I have to be very careful with it because it does deteriorate over the course of time, particularly down here where it experiences the wet dry. You can even see where that's getting a little punky right there. We live in a very wet climate in the Pacific Northwest and deadwood is always something that is constantly changing with the evolution of the tree. Ah, I love this tree. So much! I love this tree. I love the naturalness of the tree. I love the history of the tree, but more than anything, tonight was about showing you the differences of approaches to that structural, to that secondary, to that tertiary at this pivotal time of year where we do have the ability to prune, to get our first set of ramification, we come back in the early summer as that growth hardens and we see those elongating stems turning ruby red as the indication that we partially defoliate, prune again, and we get a second set of ramification. And all of a sudden, when we start to think about the timing for the pruning, the behavior, the action, the styling, and the soils that we discussed tonight, you kind of have everything you need to be able to really start to build and create and refine bald cypress, our taxodium species, or dawn redwood. You have the information that you need. I'm so happy we got to do this. I was really looking forward to this one and it turned out better than I imagined. We got one tree styled, got to bring in an icon to show you guys and sort of, you know, how we handle this type of a tree in this stage of growth. Yes, thank you so much everyone for joining us. We just, again, if you did not get to your question tonight, please join us for live Q&A on Thursday at 10 and 3 p.m. Pacific time. Yeah. Thank you so much to the Mirai community. You guys have been amazing. We will continue to be here for you. There is going to be more Mirai live than you can possibly consume. As we're all sort of in this state of being homebound. But we look forward to being here for you. We'll be here with all the questions and answers that we can possibly conjure up. And let's just continue to be a community, get through this together, promote positivity, and utilize bonsai as one of these things that brings a lot of richness to our lives. Love you guys. Thanks again. We'll see you on Thursday. Bye. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
