task and we've recognized over the course of Mirai Live that we need to do it through the eyes of a beginner to truly take you guys on that journey and show you where to start, what material to acquire, and how you can begin the process of learning. We're gonna walk you through Sagawa's with Josh, our onboard bonsai beginner, and show you the ins and outs of selecting your very first piece of material to start the bonsai journey. This one? Josh, if you can put that aside. Okay. We'll go take a walk through the nursery and look at some of the good material we can start to create your bonsai journey with. So not this one? Not that one. Okay. Yeah. What's the key thing I'm searching for? So basically any plant in this entire nursery could be turned into a bonsai. That's where we first need to start to understand that bonsai can be made within any tree, shrub, any plant that exists here, right? But when we come into a nursery like this, we immediately start looking for things that interest us. What catches your eye? What seems interesting? What appeals to you? Is it a pine? Is it a deciduous tree with soft fleshy leaves? Now if we're looking at fundamentals, the conifers over here would probably be the most fundamental place to start. Why don't we just take a walk through the conifers and see if there's anything in there that catches your eye? Okay, if anything stands out? Yeah, let's take a look at the conifers first. Okay. This one's got a bit of a bend to it over here that I don't know. All right, let's take a look. That initial moment of conception, when we see that interesting feature and we go in to take a closer look, that's the moment where we've really got to dissect the material and find all of the components that are either gonna make a great bonsai or leave that tree behind. So you know that there's an interesting bend, that's what caught your eye, but now we need to open this up and see what does this trunk look like where it sort of first hits the soil with that gripping rootage that gives our tree a little bit more of a sense of stability. We've got to pull back that soil and really look at the flare of that base. We're trying to get a flare where that base connects to the roots that actually support the tree. And I'm not super into this now, like I don't think, like I think that's kind of cool, like, but I'm trying to figure out what to start looking for that I actually am excited about. Right, right. I'm just like, yeah, that's kind of cool. It had a cool bend, you look a little further. Yeah. Lost its interest. Yeah. Let's keep moving. Is there any situation where like that graft could actually be of benefit or something? Because that looks interesting. Sure. But totally. Yeah. Just because it's grafted doesn't mean it's bad. Right. Right. But the graft needs to be well done in order to make sure that it doesn't swell. So if we take a look at this, notice how much it swells and kind of forms that bulb. That's called inverse taper. It really disrupts the quality of the trunk line and we already established trunk line is very, very important to the quality of a bone site. Once we've seen that we have a good base, we want to be looking at that trunk. We want to have a trunk that has different changes in direction, different spaces between those changes in direction, and we want a trunk that ideally has some three-dimensional movement to it. Notice the trunk movement in this when we start to spread it out. You start to see this real nice movement up to this upper canopy here. Oh yeah. Once we've seen that good base in that good trunk, we're looking for anything that's of interest. Do we have maybe a little piece of deadwood? Do we have an interesting branch? Do we have something that makes that piece of material unique? And by finding that base, by finding good movement, and by seeing those interesting components, we know that we've selected a good piece of material that with the proper design concepts and the proper technique, we can turn into a great bone site. What is this? This is albezia. This is a silk tree. Okay. Because it looks, I love the color. It's amazing. It's amazing. And look at the flower. It's beautiful, right? Yeah. So like if I was to consider this to be bonsai, and for this to be something that really draws me into wanting to get the tree, like how realistic is it for me to be able to take this on and like highlight this as a piece of the tree? Yeah. So we want to be really careful when we're doing bonsai because we're attracted by the leaves and we're attracted by the flowers. Uh-huh. But, and that's great, we could still enjoy the leaves and flowers if it weren't a bonsai. You know what I'm saying? Yeah. So if we're gonna, if we're gonna treat it as a bonsai, we still want to be looking at, does it have a good base and does it have a good trunk line? Does it have the things that we can utilize to make a cool tree with, right? And even if it doesn't, you say, well I just want to put it in a small pot. Oh, okay, cool. There's nothing stopping you from, from doing that and there's nothing wrong with doing that. Does that make a good bonsai or not? Right. Maybe not, but that doesn't mean don't do it. It just means maybe eventually you evolve out of it in the same way sort of that graft caused some of those discrepancies, right? So now when we get to this point where we've looked through all of the material, this really comes down to what you want to work with. Yeah. Because we've identified several different pieces that have a good base and that have a good trunk and could make a great bonsai. Josh, which ones do you want to work with? Which ones interest you the most? And this is where there's no wrong answer. Yeah, I'm thinking this guy for sure. Yeah? Yeah. So that looks, that bark catches my eye. What is that? All right, so. Honeysuckle. Winter honeysuckle. What is, how do you pronounce this? Yeah. Juana-Sara-Fragrantisimah. See how I did that? Percise. See how I did that. Okay. Yeah. This is cool. This is interesting, interesting characteristics and features. Yeah, like the texture of that, look at that. That texture is really cool. Yeah, and then the color difference as you get the shedding bark. So this is when you see stuff like this, this is some of the beautiful, nuanced things that deciduous trees and deciduous shrubs have and can can sort of be maximized when needed. Yeah. This is da Vinci. No problem. Very nice, very nice. Buongiorno. I love it. Buongiorno some of these leaves. Buongiorno. Very nice. Great job. You can get a nice scrub here. Pretty good squash. So I'm not position for a be maximized with their development in bonsai. Yeah, like this branch jutting out, like I don't know what it is about that, but it just kind of reminds me of a tree you would have in your backyard and you climb on and like, cause I have like lots of nostalgia with trees growing up. Cause like I would just climb trees by myself for hours. Yeah. And like, this reminds me of that. And like, it like gives me kind of like a, I don't know. Yeah. It gives me like nostalgia. Just looking at this tree. Oh, that's pretty rad. What you've just established is maybe the most powerful connection for bonsai. That image of that grander tree. And you see aspects of that grander tree in this miniaturized form. This is what drove people to do bonsai. So now that we've spent some time in the nursery and Josh has really dove into finding that piece of material, we take away a lot from that experience. We know we need to look for something interesting that catches our eye. We know we dive into that piece of material and look at the base. We look at the movement in the trunk and we look at any of the special features to really decide if it's a good piece of material to pursue bonsai with. And then we take all of those features and characteristics, bring them home. And we start this next step of the process of taking that nursery stock and turning it into a wonderful bonsai. We're going to get some here. So we're not going to take our topsoil and try to take some of this off the bottom of the plant. And we're going to take a look at the topsoil and try to get 
