Thank you very much. Watering is complex, and watching Josh try to get a handle on it by following Troy, I recognize I need to step outside and give him a little bit of guidance as to how he goes about watering his tree. Here's that high quality H2O I heard all about. This is the stuff. This is what dreams are made of. If I were to take my tree home and use the water I have at home, what kind of differences does that have compared to using this water? Yeah, that's a great question. Water quality is important. But that shouldn't be something that when we're just learning how to water we concern ourselves with, right? Because tap water will provide the tree what it needs. So when we're just starting watering, two things we really need to know. When we're talking about the device that we water a bonsai with, it needs to be a very fine rose that gives a really delicate water so it doesn't just obliterate all the soil and top dressing that we've utilized in the repotting process. So as I'm walking through the garden. And I'm kind of looking at things, I'm always looking at the moisture content of the top dressing as well as any of the soil particles that I can see. Now once we get into the nitty gritty of does our tree need water or not, we need to go back to three fundamental questions that we ask ourselves. Number one, how many leaves or needles does this plant have? How many pieces of foliar mass in the canopy of the tree are transpiring water? Again, 85% of water is used to cool down. Yeah. To cool this tree, the more needles or the more leaves we have, the more water is being lost. Second, how big is our reservoir? How big is the container that's supplying water to this canopy transpiring? A smaller container and a bigger foliar mass is going to need water much more frequently than a small foliar mass in a large container. The third factor, what is today doing environmentally? How warm is it? How intense is the sun? Is it windy? And is it humid or not? These factors are going to influence the rate at which water is transpired through the leaf mass. When we start to look at these things, noticing that the soil looks a little bit dry, we take a look at our foliar mass, our reservoir, and the environmental conditions. And this helps us make a decision at this current state of moisture level in the soil, do I water or do I wait? And over the course of time, considering this each time we water, we strike that balance and give the tree the backbone for health. I'm not going to water this right now. Considering that I have a lot of particles holding water, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to wait. Now if you weren't going to come back for the rest of the day, like I got to go to my job, maybe we would water it right now because we know we can't come back in three hours and water this thing again. And the dangers of overwatering is the roots would rot or? So we would exhaust all oxygen in the container, create an anaerobic environment, meaning oxygen-less environment, and roots need oxygen to be able to respire. The art of watering a bonsai is truly a game of balance, striking a balance between water and oxygen in the root system. Now when we think about this, this balance is struck over the course of time. Any time we water, we're thinking about the tree, we're thinking about the container, and we're thinking about the environment, but we're also considering how did we water last time, and how over the course of time do we strike that balance? This is one of the paramount things to explain to Josh and help any beginner understand to be able to effectively water your tree and provide that backbone for health. I notice that everything I see is dry, right? Very healthy tree, lots of foliage, everything I see is dry. This is a tree that I'm going to choose to water, so I want to keep my water wand moving as I'm watering to apply that water, not disturb the soil, and get that thorough percolation. And I'm going to want to really focus on watering every side of the container. And I'm going to come back. A few different times to, again, get that thorough soaking through of the water until it's actually dripping out of the bottom of the container. That's when I know that I've watered enough. Now as you look inside here, obviously it's dripping down the sides, but you can see the water dripping out of those center holes right there. That's all I need. Right? I don't need it pouring out. I don't need excessive amounts. Just enough to know that it's thoroughly saturated, the root system, and it is exiting the container. How dry that soil is right up there, and see the fine roots that exist there? This is a tree that's super healthy, obviously is using a lot of water, and is also lacking that water content. This definitely needs to be watered and watered thoroughly. Now another thing to discuss when we're watering is do we water the foyer mass? We would like to avoid watering the foyer mass. Sometimes it's unavoidable. This branch is right in the way of my soil mass. Okay. So we know we're going to hit that branch, but we don't want to be watering the foyer mass constantly and keeping it wet, because it actually slows down the growth rate of the tree. The function of water in a tree is so incredibly interesting, and in fact, when we look at water utilization in a tree, 85% of all water is simply transpired through the foyer mass to cool that tree, much like human beings sweat. Now that other 15% is what we're going to use to cool that tree. And that 15% is what contributes to metabolic processes, and most importantly, the hydrogen and the oxygen from that water molecule, combined with the carbon from carbon dioxide entering the leaves through the stomata, and those pieces are broken down and reformed as glucose, the fundamental backbone of food for a tree. Now during the evening time, when we get into the dark cycle, we have respiration occurring in the tree. This is where that sugar, that glucose, is turned into active forms of energy, and that energy drives the production of data. This is where that oxygen is turned to, and that energy drives the production of tissue, whether it be setting up some foyer mass at the terminal bud, trunk girth in the vascular tissue, or new root tips inside of the containerized environment. And inside of that oxygen in the evening time and water during the daytime, we see that necessity to strike that balance and give the tree everything it needs to be healthy. Let's talk about this tree. It's in a very different container shape, right, very deep. the bonsai container. Contrary to what you would think, oh this container probably stays wetter longer. In all actuality, the deeper the container, the faster water moves through it. Okay, so the more shallow the container is, the more it holds water. So since repotting the tree, I noticed that a couple of the branches were dead, so I'm gonna remove those branches. I've cut off the two dead branches, but now I have to toss them into the burn pile, which there actually is no burn pile right now, so that they're going to begin a new a new burn pile. Thank you for your service. As branches on this tree, you provided photosynthesis, sugars, and things. Does anyone have a lighter? Now that Ryan showed me some of the nuances of how to water, I'm going to try and use that knowledge on this tree through watering it with this fancy hose. Now that Josh has a greater understanding of watering, let's focus on his specific trees and see what nuances these pieces are going to demand of Josh to successfully water them over the course of time. Let's talk about how I need to water this tree. I've actually already watered it. Without your supervision, I was trying to be extremely careful and it felt like I was a little afraid. It's a really hot day today, and I think one thing that comes up especially when it's like in the blazing sun is like whether or not it's in the shade. It's a really hot day today, and I think one thing that comes up especially when it's like in the blazing sun is like whether or not it's in the shade. It's a really hot day today, and I think one thing that comes up especially when it's like in the shade. Or I should put it in the shade. How many times I should water it. Every tree, plant, etc. Loves 85 degrees Fahrenheit, 30 degrees Celsius. This is like the wheel house for photosynthesis, right? Once we go past that, they start decreasing their metabolism to try and keep up with the cooling process. Once we go past that, they start decreasing their metabolism to try and keep up with the cooling process. So when we start to get into the 90s and we've got a small tree or say a species that is a little more heat sensitive. So when we start to get into the 90s and we've got a small tree or say a species that is a little more heat sensitive. a tree that comes from an alpine region, a deciduous tree that has a very thin leaf, a tree that typically exists in the shade in its native habitat. These are trees that once we get past that 85, we get into the low mid 90s, we can bring it into the shade. It's gonna slow down water utilization, you're gonna be able to water less, the tree is gonna be far more successful in that condition. This is the watering dynamic. What is the soil doing, what is the plant doing, and what is the environment doing? I think something else that would come up for me having this at home would be, okay this weekend I'm gonna be out of town and I want to make sure that my tree is gonna stay healthy, maybe I'll put it in the shade. If a tree is outside, no matter how much shade you put it in, it is photosynthesizing, it is experiencing the environment, and it is losing water. Okay, so if you're gonna have a situation where I'm gonna be gone for two days, soak it thoroughly, bring it inside. Your taxes in the container necessitates far more attention because you've already put it into a small pot. But your honeysuckle, here being in a nursery container, totally different, right? Now honeysuckle, being a thin leaf deciduous tree, is naturally gonna dry out faster than a conifer, it's gonna lose more water because of that larger surface area and that thin cuticle, that waxy covering that prevents the loss of water is very thin on deciduous. Okay. and it is gonna be more susceptible to heat and intensity where we wanna protect it. We're gonna have to water it more, et cetera. But your taxis is in a bonsai pot. It's already small, right? You're playing with a different dynamic. Your honeysuckle is in a nursery container, has not yet been repotted. So this is a larger soil volume. This is very organic soil as opposed to the granular soil. This is gonna need less water than your taxis even though technically a deciduous tree uses more water than a conifer. In considering watering for different species of trees, we need to know that conifers for the most part tend to be able to tolerate a higher quantity of oxygen or a little bit of a drier condition in the containerized environment. Whereas deciduous trees, this very thin leaf, this very thin cuticle, rapidly losing water and needing a lot of water to keep it hydrated tend to need to be watered a little bit more frequently. Now, obviously there are other factors beyond species that impact watering requirements as we've already explored. But to understand that the species as well contributes to our considerations helps us further make more detailed decisions that aid in the health of our tree. All right, so with my other taxis that is now, it's now become a bush basically, comparing this guy, which is, you know, it's the same species, I believe, as this one. Yep. What kind of differences in watering would this taxis have being in a nursery container compared to the one in the bonsai pot? Right, so this is an interesting dynamic now because technically you have the same species. You have one in a bonsai container. You have one in a nursery container. But there's another factor involved here. This one has so much more foliage that's transpiring than that one. Larger soil volume, organic, so it holds more water, but a larger foliar mass that's transpiring, right? More aggregate, more oxygen dries out faster, less foliar mass transpiring, so it dries out a little bit slower. And in the end, they probably dry out at the same rate, even though they're in these different circumstances. If I watered when a tree is still wet, and I'm like, it's still wet, and I water it, I'm not gonna kill it, right? And if I did that again, and I did it again, and I did it again, I'm still not gonna kill it. It would take several weeks, maybe even several months, of mis-watering a tree to actually kill it from over-watering it. If you under-water it, you miss a watering once. That could be the end of the tree. If you under-water it, you miss a watering once. If you under-water it, you miss a watering once. Pairing it to the other species, what are the kind of nuances of a pine? So pines are extremely durable, extremely adaptable to drought, to heat, to intense sun, and that means that we have to be a little more careful, because we can very easily over-water a pine, right? Now, it's not to say that with all these needles, this isn't gonna be using a lot of water. Obviously, there's a large mass here, but we also have a big container filled with organic soil. It hasn't been potted into a bonsai container in our more aggregate mix, and so we have a lot of water retention to meet that high quantity of needles. A juniper or a pine is a very common beginner species because of its durability. It's very, very forgiving. Now that we understand watering as a broader concept, let's come back to those three pieces that we refer to when trying to decide whether we water or not. What is the container? What is the tree and its health? And what are the elements in terms of the external environment that are acting on that tree? By pulling in the pieces from these three elements, we can deduce, do we water or do we not, and understand watering as a greater application. Put this information to use, and good luck cultivating a happy, healthy bonsai. Subtitles by the Amara.org community 
