At Bonsai Moriah, one of the biggest things that we're asked about is how do we control insects feeding on the roots of our trees. This is something that's been near and dear to our hearts because over the course of time we've tried every solution possible and we've come up with what we feel is the very best approach to dealing with root feeding insects in the form of beneficial nematodes. When we talk about beneficial nematodes we're talking about nematodes that have the capacity to eradicate soft-bodied insects like root aphids, root feeding grubs, and crane fly larvae. The three biggest insects that do impact negatively the health of our roots of our bonsai trees. Over the course of this video we're gonna walk you through the steps of where you get these nematodes, how to treat them once you receive them, and how to apply them in a way that gives the nematode the best chance of success in the containerized environment to eradicate your root feeding insect issues. Number one, where do we get nematodes? Now there are many beneficial insect distributors in North America in different regions of the country but we have found the best success using Arbico Organics. Arbico is a really educated group of individuals in Arizona. that can answer all of your questions when you call to order their nematodes. And if you give them the specific insects that you're dealing with and trying to eradicate, they will be able to help you match the species of nematode you need for the insect you're trying to combat. Once you've placed your nematode order, you need to be prepared when you receive this package. Nematodes will last roughly two weeks in the package once you receive them if they're refrigerated immediately. Obviously, the sooner you use them, the better the results are going to be. The more living nematodes you're going to be applying to your bonsai trees. But understanding just the nuances of how we handle that package is as big of a part of the success as any other step. Now before we apply our nematodes, we need to go through some nuts and bolts just so we understand how to maximize our success. Number one, nematodes exist between 42 degrees Fahrenheit and 100 degrees Fahrenheit. Two intents of sun shining on the container while we're applying can cause the water to overheat, but for the most part, as long as we keep them out of direct light, they'll stay cool enough to survive and thrive. Number two, nematodes can only survive in water for two hours. That means if we have a massive area or a large bonsai collection, we're going to prepare multiple mixtures of nematodes, apply it till it's finished, and then prepare another one so that we don't leave them in water for up to two hours. We want to make sure our nematodes are alive when we water them into our trees. Number three, if we're preparing a large suspension of nematodes, we're going to want a smaller bucket that we mix the diatomaceous earth into so we fully get the diatomaceous earth to hydrate, to loosen up, and to distribute our nematodes in the water before we dump that solution into that bigger vat of water. It's very difficult to mix in dry powder into a large vat, mix it in a small small bucket first and then put it into your larger quantity of water number four we want to make sure that as we're watering our nematodes into our trees that we're not pushing them through a high-pressure system or too small of a nozzle the fine rows that we utilize to water our trees with a copper watering can or at the end of our hose a dram breaker if you will is a great size for the nematodes to freely move through without damaging them causing attrition of the nematodes so we apply the largest quantity of living nematodes to our tree the most important application concept when we apply the nematodes is to get good coverage over the entire surface of our bonsai container and to not water too much so that water runs out the bottom because if water runs out the bottom nematodes run out the bottom of our container as well if you get that to happen you may want to come back and treat but for the most part be careful saturate the first inch of your containerized environment you're going to be helping the nematodes move through the soil column and feed on any root aphids or any soft-bodied insects that they come in contact with beyond that you've got a two-hour time limit treat each tree specifically getting that coverage being careful of your application rates and don't allow the nematodes to overheat and you should have tremendous success with nematodes knocking down the soft-bodied root feeding insects that you've been aspiring to give to your plants. very easy very simple and now you have all the knowledge that you need to go ahead and treat your bonsai collection with confidence knowing that the success you're gonna have with nematodes is based on all of the knowledge you've accumulated good luck happy hunting for those root aphids those crane fly larvae and any of those root feeding grubs nematodes are an amazing very low toxicity safe way to go about treating our bones so that you can get rid of them. so that you can get rid of them. improving our ecosystem and radically enhancing our capacity to help our trees thrive in the containerized environment enjoy you you you you you you you you you you 
