what's going on everybody oh yeah Mariah lecture series this one has been a long time in the making and I say a long time in the making because you know my knowledge of fertilization was really sort of set in the early 2000s going to school for horticulture in the central coast of California on the central coast of California and in attending school in the early 2000s at that time it was like the peak of educational institutions being supported by industrial agriculture right and I look back on it now and I'm like oh that makes sense because as part of my horticultural degree we had to take several fertilizers and we had to take several fertilizers and we had to take several fertilizers and we had to take several fertilizers and we had to take several fertilizers and we had to take several fertilizer courses right where we learned how to uh or have manufactured to deliver our crop what we were ideally feeding it with. Now, inside of that, the math of that, the science of that, the discussion of those resources being super triple phosphate or urea versus ammonium as your nitrogen source or potassium coming from potash and that being distilled in these different ways, there wasn't discussion of all of the bone meal, blood meal, cottonseed meal. There certainly wasn't discussion of the notion that aggregates could give rise to nutrition. And so, you know, my knowledge of like, okay, this is what we're talking about. We had to learn the 24 essential elements, the 13 macros and the 10 micros. We had to memorize all of these things, but it like, it never like got into that stage of like, what is sustainable, what is regenerative? Well, fast forward 23 years, you know, the condition of the world is rapidly shifting. We saw the meltdown of modern ag at the hand of industrial agriculture, breaking down the carbon content, the carbon nitrogen ratio. Soil structure has been deteriorated. Yield has decreased. Chemical inputs have increased radically. We're seeing the loss of pollinators. We're seeing the pullback, you know, in terms of chemical availability, knowing that it's causing both in terms of human health, nutritional content in plants, chemical and insect pressure, monoculture, hard pants, you know, salinization of the soil as a result of all of these. Constant inputs to try and increase or keep yields, but yet the yields keep decreasing. The inputs keep increasing. Profitability is in the basement. I mean, like, the methodology at which I learned nutrition and fertilization in the early 2000s, 23 years later, is so different than the conversation that we're having right now, okay? And that evolution is taking place across modern ag. One of the, and if you listen to, Karen O'Hanlon's podcast about the use of biology and microbes as, you know, the Danube products, the pro-biocarbon products, she's saying, hey, listen, the big ag companies are getting on board with this microbial source of plant resistance, of, you know, fungal control, of insect control, of nutritional delivery to improve the response and the productivity of crops without adding more chemical inputs. Everybody is seeing that this has to happen. And yet in bonsai, we're still sort of sticking by the, you know, Miracle-Gro, if we're sort of on the old school side of things, or we're going to go with organic application of fertilizer, which ultimately still probably has some chemical inputs or some byproduct that is challenging as a result of it being sort of an NPK set ratio that is delivering, a consistency of something that inevitably, if we're not controlling the availability of each element and the quantity of each element, if we don't know the characteristics of our soil, if we don't know the characteristics of our water, if we don't know what the species of plant that we're nutritioning needs, then it's very, very difficult to hit the mark. And that doesn't mean that we can't cultivate healthy plants in this model, but typically we will over time see some of the nutrition reach too high of a level, a toxicity, right, where that toxicity is antagonistic to other necessary elements, causes the plant to behave in a different type of way. And as a result, we start to get into these scenarios, especially with the longevity of the plant in the bonsai container where that nutritional model stops working or our necessity to care for our plants through chemical means to control insects and disease starts to increase. Right. And so it's from this process that we're Hang on, alright. So it's from this process that we're Hang on, alright. So it's from this process that we're Hang on, alright. So it's from this process that we're Hang on, alright. But it's the doubt, these things, that is what we're doing. And so if we're trying to get to the one, and we're trying to get to the other part of the problem, perspective that we recognized at Mirai that we needed to change the system. Now, is it perfect to change the system? Do we have it all worked out? Absolutely not. But I do think that it is a subject matter that we will continue to learn more about. We will continue to research diligently. We will continue to experiment with. And I think we are at the first point where we can actually talk about this subject matter. And we had David Knauss from Apical Ag come and join us for a discussion that we have filmed and that we have recorded. And we're going to dive into that in just a minute, but I want to set the foundation. Now, I've got Ira on the mic today. Good morning. All of you guys' questions, I want you to write them down, hold them, put them in the chat. Ira will document them, and we will circle back at the end. Jesus is producing the Mirai Lecture Series. And I just want to be very clear before we get into this. I'm going to propose sort of the original formula that Mirai utilized for fertilization to help everybody understand where we came from. I'm going to talk about where it worked, and I'm going to talk about where we found weaknesses. I'm then going to inform you of how we have been conducting ourselves to this point. In the very near future, we're going to be releasing a piece of feature content that shows how you take a sample, how you submit a sample, how you read the sample, how you handle a recommendation, what products the recommendation speaks to using, what rates and formulas these products are utilized at. And that would allow you to take a sample off of a plant whose nutritional needs you wanted to know, submit it to Apical, receive the test, get David's recommendation of treatment, understand the products he's speaking to, understand the dilution ratios, and then how you appropriately apply it through a drench and then a follow-up for your feed to adjust your plant's nutrition and start to correct some of those antagonistic relationships that are occurring inside of your plant. But when we talk about plant nutrition, there's several things that we need to know. So let's dive into nutrition 101. What is it that we're doing here? Okay, first and foremost, this is debatable, and you're going to hear David speak to this in a variety of ways. I thought the more compelling statement that he made when I asked him, is fertilizer food for a plant? He says, yes, it's food for a plant. But more, he says, it's food for microbes, right? And I'm going to continue to maintain that fertilization. Fertilization for a plant, is not food. And you guys just said, well, David said it's food, and he's the expert. And you're absolutely correct. You're absolutely correct. He is the expert. There is no denying that there is nutrient availability that a plant needs to maximize and optimize its metabolic processes. Here's the difference between a plant and a human. A plant can photosynthesize. Okay, when you look at human beings, we do not have energy in our system without consuming food to give us the fuel as well as the mineral content. To meet our body's needs and maximize our cellular activity. Okay, we don't have that capacity. A plant can photosynthesize without the presence of nutrition and continue to generate energy that allows it to continue perpetuating its growth. But a plant cannot continue to do that at a maximum level or at an efficient level or at an acceptable level over a prolonged period of time without the input of continued organic matter, which organic matter, ultimately, when we talk about fertilization, organic matter is carbon-based compounds that, through microbial activity, decompose into anions and cations. Anions and cations, we're saying positively and negatively charged available elements that are bound to what? The charged particle surface of Akadama or the organic content in the soil of our container. And so we recognize that when we talk about the pumice, lava, Akadama substrate, pumice and lava have very little, if any, CEC, cation exchange capacity, the ability to bind these anions and cations as they're broken down by microbial activity on the soil surface with the application of organic fertilizer, right, becoming available forms of nutrition. And so we have to have that organic component, even though we're saying, Listen, I don't want this. I don't want this. And I'll be right back with the next video. Stay watching. Bye. Beer at the bottom. Beer at the bottom. Beer at the bottom. Beer at the bottom. Beer at the bottom. Beer at the bottom. Beer at the bottom. Beer at the bottom. want a rapidly decomposing organic component in my bonsai container why do i not want a rapidly decomposing organic component in my bonsai container because we are cultivating our bonsai tree in a very shallow environment our very shallow environment has a very limited gravity column okay so there's a limited amount of force acting on that column that pushes excess water out of that system okay why does excess water plants like water why can't we have water stored in that system because the water is utilized to cool and hydrate the plant the water is utilized to create the hydrogen and oxygen that the plant breaks up through photosynthesis to create the sugars that feed itself but it also needs the capacity to respire to breathe to utilize oxygen to be able to transition that sugar into usable forms of energy okay and so we have this necessity to photosynthesize which creates the sugars and starches okay this is sugar generation and we also have the necessity for respiration or breathing which creates which turns the sugar into energy or the ability to actually take that reduction from photosynthesis and generate growth cellular division the addition of foyer mass the addition of roots the addition of vascular tissue okay so the water is helping the photosynthesis the oxygen is helping respiration the balance of water and oxygen is essentially talking about catalyzing the two metabolic activities that are most important there's there's tens of thousands of things happening in our plant constantly and we know very massively and continually and we are always looking at things that are important in our plant that we don't fresh water little about most of those, right? We are still very much in the dark ages of plant physiology, learning more all the time, recognizing the more we know, how much we don't know, okay? But if we understand that those two metabolic processes are the exact same thing when we talk about the balance of water and oxygen in our soil, and we recognize that we have to have some sort of capacity to bind nutrition in the shallow environment, which has to come through an organic component, but that organic component cannot break down too rapidly because we recognize when a soil particle breaks down, even if this splits in half, that we don't just double the surface area, which is where water and nutrition is held, we exponentially, this is a factor of three, I believe this is a factor of nine, I believe it exponentially, exponentially increases as we decompose too rapidly. More water gets held, less oxygen gets held, our balance of water and oxygen, our balance of photosynthesis and respiration is thrown off, and now we can't have a healthy tree inside of that aesthetic circumstance of the shallow, confined environment. This is what brings us to Akadama, because we say, okay, so I need a particle size that holds its structure, maintains oxygen, allows the roots to determine and scale that particle to the ground, and then we can't have a healthy tree inside of that aesthetic circumstance to determine and scale that particle to the ground. So, you know, if this is the size of the quantity of fine roots that exist inside of that containerized environment, Akadama has seven to ten percent organic matter. The rest of it is inert, much like pumice and lava. That's a very limited amount, but it's enough if we are delivering the nutrition on a consistency and an understanding that allows the plant to get what it needs to continue thriving and surviving inside of that confined environment, okay? And again, that seven to ten percent organic matter, that's the amount of is what gives rise to the cation exchange capacity to bind the anions and cations that are decomposed through microbial activity from the carbon-based compounds of organic fertilization. This is sort of your holistic setup for plant nutrition in a bonsai container. How does it all work? Why do we use the soil that we use? And what is this system of physiology that hinges on this nutrition maximizing the ability for the plant to metabolize, generate new tissue, be able to capture the sun's energy and create sugar that feeds itself, turn that sugar into the energy that allows for that continued production of tissue? This is your cyclical behavior, your cyclical existence of a plant, and specifically of our bonsai tree in this scenario. So this is where we begin the process of understanding nutrition. Now when we kind of rewind, all right? Or when we... When we take this knowledge and we press forward, we have to understand that up to this point, we have functioned with the notion or functioned under the understanding that okay, all right, so is all nitrogen created equal? Is all phosphorus created equal? Is all potassium created equal? Some people say yes, some people say no. We now know that no, it's not all created equal. In fact, it's quite different, okay? And you'll hear David talk about this. But we talked about fertilization as supplemental, okay? And I still believe this to be true, especially in bonsai, because we can override the constriction of the container with too much nutrition. Supplemental nutrition that has two gas pedals for how we behave, we talk about the fact that we have quantity. Perlification. Perlification and we have timing between applications, okay? And we talked about the fact that we have different objectives. We have a light application and a light timing. We have a moderate application and a moderate timing. We have a heavy application and a heavy timing. And we're saying in terms of quantity, half a tablespoon. One tablespoon. One tablespoon. One and a half tablespoon for our light, moderate, and heavy. And we're saying timing every eight weeks, every six weeks, every four weeks, right? And most of that, you know, unfortunately, was built upon this rudimentary knowledge and thinking about, you know, the fact that ultimately when we start to break down this system, nitrogen in the system of the organic fertilizers that we've historically had available to us in the bonsai form. More often than not, we're going to have a lot of nitrogen in the system. More often than not is an ammonium-based form of nitrogen, right? And that ammonium-based form of nitrogen is highly water-soluble. And within four weeks of application, that ammonium-based nitrogen is made available, utilized by the plant, and washed out of the system. And so if we're functioning with the notion that nitrogen is the battery that generates growth, naturally every four weeks, if you're trying to push a heavy pace on your plant, you're going to be applying every four weeks to keep that nitrogen constantly in the presence of the plant. Now here's what we've learned over the course of time. We've learned that nitrogen is not the battery that generates growth, right? And this was revolutionary to me. Because what it takes for a plant to grow is a tremendous amount of calcium as the element that creates this cellular growth. Cellular wall, cellular division, generation of new tissue. And in fact, if you do not have calcium in the system, you can add as much nitrogen as you want to your plant, and the element that allows you to create new chlorophyll, that holds that nitrogen, that allows you to capture that sun's energy, is not there. And it was really revolutionary to understand that without calcium, a plant cannot turn green, right? And it's like, but why? But nobody talks about calcium in the green color. They talk about nitrogen, iron, and magnesium, which we're all going to discuss in this lecture. But calcium was the one that everybody left out. And we've learned, listen, calcium and phosphorus, these are your backbones of plant nutrition, okay? This is the old model, right? And I still think that there is some applicability to this. Now quantity was based on how much fertilizer are we putting in any singular location. And we say in a 12-inch container. Just using a 12-inch container as a reference, typically in a 12-inch container, we will utilize four locations where we would place a quantity of concentrated fertilizer. If we're giving a light dosage, it would be a half tablespoon in that location, evenly spaced around the container, evenly spaced between the base of your tree and the edge of the container in each location that we provide. When we provide a second application. Because the nitrogen is gone after four weeks, this is just when all of the other components start to become available, we would be applying an evenly distributed second application in between that first application, once again, evenly distributed between the base of your tree and the edge of your container, okay? And this is generally how we saw fertilization. Now we would typically say, okay, so if this is where we're at, we would love two to three applications in the spring, okay? In summer, we say, listen, no fertilization. Why no fertilization? Because in the summertime, we don't want to compete with water uptake, and we know that with fertilization, we get an accumulation of salts, salts in the soil system. If we start to look at here's our tree, he's happy, but it is hot out and Mr. Sunshine is having a really good day and our tree is having a really good day, right? But our tree is losing lots of water. So we're putting water into the system and we've got these roots that are sitting here. Now if we just have water in this system, the plant very easily and effortlessly takes in that water. But if we start adding a bunch of salt through fertilization into the system, now all of a sudden, that salt in the soil system makes it harder, creates a resistance for that water to move into the plant because water wants to even out the concentration of salt in water or dissolve solutes in water. Okay? Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. So, we have enough fertilizer on our plant and it's sitting in a dormant state because of the heat in the summer. And we're adding all of this organic matter that's turning into cations and anions and filtering through the system and adhering to the oca doma particle. We get an accumulation of those and they might actually even compete with the tree and pull water out of the tree at a point where the water is needing to move into the tree to cool our tree and allow our tree to endure those hot summer conditions and so we would say no summer fertilization okay and then we would come back in the fall and we would say at least two applications in the fall if not three and this is the most important time to fertilize and then obviously over winter we say listen this is no fertilization okay this is the old model of fertilization or plant nutrition as we know it in bonsai all right now this might be working for you this has worked for a significant amount of time for bonsai in japan and there has continued to be an incredibly high level of plant health and estate uh actualization and there's nothing wrong with this application and this methodology but here's the problem what do you define as sustainable what do you define as regenerative how do we control this concept of we are adding more and more to our tree and although it is green and although it is growing we are having to do more and more to sustain our tree We are having to apply more fungicides. We are having to apply more insecticides. We are having to fertilize with a higher quantity all the time to continue to push this consistency of growth. Right? And you say, over the course of time, the degeneration of modern farming practices, the loss of plant health, the loss of nutrient content in the plant, what that has done to the health of the internal component of humans, eating this food that's lower in nutrition and higher in chemical inputs, has not been positive. It has not been positive. Now, is this metaphorically applicable to bonsai? It depends. Because ultimately, we're looking to create a tree that can exist in this abnormal containerized environment but be able to tolerate the most severe conditions of increasing heat, erratic cold. All right. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Excuse me. Varying degrees of drought, right? Varying degrees of moisture, varying degrees of sun's intensity, and we're going to wire it, and we're going to prune it, and we're going to repot it, and we're going to pinch it, and we're going to partially defoliate it, right? And so all of a sudden, it's like, wow, OK, just because a plant is green and growing from the beginning, ultimate health at Mirai has been a resistance to cold, heat, drought, and wet, and the work that we do through bonsai, as well as resistance to disease and pests. And what we've learned through these nutritional experiments is that this methodology doesn't necessarily get us to a point where we achieve that capacity. And in fact, continuing to deliver a fertilizer that has a set nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium ratio. It's actually destined to get you into a position where we have toxicities and deficiencies, and now we lose resistance in our plant, excuse me, OK? So this was kind of the old-world way of doing it. Now here's what we have learned as we've been testing, as we've learned the soil behavior under different water pHs, as we've seen the water and the soil engage and make different aspects of these characteristics. We've learned that in the spring season, this is our number one time to nutrition for foyer growth, OK? And when we are producing foyer growth, we understand that in terms of the behavior of our tree over the spring season. OK? OK. In the spring, that nutrition is moving rapidly through our tree. OK? When we're getting foyer growth, we have the ability to adjust nutrient content in our tree. Very, very important to understand this in the spring. We have the ability to adjust nutrient content in our tree. Now if we have toxicities. Adjusting the nutrient content in our tree pushes toxicity to the tip. And when we push that toxicity to the tip by applying the nutrition in deficiency, by utilizing nutritional components that are antagonistic to that toxicity, that start to decrease its toxic implications to the plant. OK? By upping the pieces that are deficient to bring them to the level of toxicity, pushing those to the tip mean we have to be able to detoxify the tips of our plants. This is where we foyer silica. Over the spring season, as we are applying nutrition that's addressing deficiencies, the silica is absorbing toxicity and fortifying the foyer mass of our plant. Now if we don't fortify the foyer mass of our plant, what happens? Toxicity is deposited in the foyer mass. Foyer mass is dropped and shed from the plant. That's the way for the plant to poop out all of the things it doesn't need. And new foyer mass comes in from more vigorous interior areas. Adjusting nutrition on your plant can completely regenerate the plant, but it has to start from the interior and work its way out. The way that we preserve what we have on our plant as we're adjusting this nutrition is to foyer on silica consistently once a week would be ideal to be able to absorb that toxicity fortify that foyer mass and allow us to continue to preserve what we have as we continue to nutrition and balance our plant. Now over the summer season, summer is no longer a time to take off of applying nutrition. Quite the opposite. If we had to talk about number one most important season to nutrition. Plant, and listen here, to avoid toxicity. It is the summer season. This is when we are watering the most, which is watering all of our cations and anions out of the soil. Some of our trees maybe two times a day, smaller show heen trees maybe three times a day. Every day. For a majority of the country or a majority of the world. July, August and early September, every day we're watering, right? The pressure on our plant, the character and quality of the water going into our plant has a major repercussion. The bad are elevated and exponentially enhanced in terms of what they leave the plant with. The good are washed away or utilized very quickly as that plant is starting to move more water, which means it's drawing more out of the soil. We've got to be adding the good components to the soil system to keep up with the demands in the bonsai container of this hydroponic growth. We've gone hands off. We said we don't want salts. Well you only get salts when you're applying a broad spectrum fertilization to your plant. That's the only time that you get salts in the system. Because you're saying now I'm adding too much potassium when a plant doesn't want potassium in the summertime. I'm adding too much magnesium when a plant doesn't want magnesium in the summertime. I'm adding sodium when a plant doesn't want sodium in the summertime, and I'm adding chloride when a plant doesn't want and already has high levels of chloride as a result of the heat in the summer. Let's just define that really quickly. Salt in terms of our concept of salt, potassium, magnesium, sodium, chloride. These are the things that are part of a NPK ratio that is balanced. Right? In the summer season, what is it that we're actually using then? Strategic forms of calcium, carbon, phosphorus, and nitrogen. We're probably going to be, and that's in terms of a drench, and we're probably going to be balancing our micros in terms of foliar with iron, moly, zinc, and there's potentially a little bit of a necessity for cobalt. That's kind of the extent of what we're doing. We're drenching on these pieces that keep adding calcium because calcium is the one that the plant is taking in the most and saying, I've got to keep making new tissue. I've got to grow new roots. I'm getting ready for vascular preparation. You've pruned and partially defoliated me. I've got these open wounds. Calcium is how we heal them. I want to heal a trunk. I'm going to use calcium. I want to do this. I'm going to use calcium. We're saying phosphorus. Phosphorus creates energy. I'm photosynthesizing. I'm going to respirate and I'm going to breathe at night. When I respire, I take calcium. When I respire, I take that phosphorus and I put it into ATP or that long-term storage of energy or I put it into a more rapid form of energy that I can utilize for cellular division to keep creating this tissue that's using the calcium. I need the nitrogen to continue keeping my chlorophyll molecules pumped up so that I can photosynthesize. I need that carbon because that carbon is what allows me to continue maintaining the structure of my soil. It holds the toxicity. It allows me to continue that building block of life. That's working through the system and continuing to enhance all aspects of what we're doing in bonsai cultivation. During the summer season, if we are not adding these components, we start to fall behind. We start to see the metals rise. We start to see the salts rise in our tree. By the time we get to fall, if any of us have ever gotten to fall, seen the first fall rains and say, wow, man, that really has a tremendous impact. If you get fertilizer on your tree. And then you see the fall rains, your tree just lights up. It illuminates and you're like, oh my gosh, that's amazing. What's happening? It is so hungry. It's like feeding a plant that hasn't been eating for the past several months or hasn't had the nutrition available to maximize its metabolic activity for the past several months. Now this doesn't necessarily offset the significance of fall because we recognize in the fall, okay, all right, now we get to the fall. And we're having major vascular productivity, okay? Productivity in fall now starts to spell out in one spring, two summer, three fall. Productivity in the fall in terms of vascular growth, guess what that demands yet again? Growth demands calcium to create new tissue. We want to store that tissue full of energy. Well, we need phosphorus. We need to continue to deal with toxicity. We need carbon. We're continuing to keep our plants green. We need nitrogen, right? So this same concept applies as we move through the system. Any time we're generating growth, we have to have these components in play. Geez. No, I'm good. Thank you. We have to have these components in play to generate the cellular division without adding to the negative potential nutritional pitfalls, right? Without adding to them. And that's not to say magnesium is bad. It's not to say that chloride is bad. It's not to say that potassium is bad. It's not to say that sodium is bad. These are all essential elements, and in fact, they're macro elements. These are pieces that are needed in abundance for the plant to maximize its metabolic activity. It's not to say that potassium is bad. It's not to say that sodium is bad. capacity activity and to fortify the plant from the interior as a plant that has ultimate health and resistance to all of these factors and pressures that are applied to it in the bonsai form but we have to have balance and over the summer season we tend to see toxicities rise we tend to see the necessary elements drop and as a result we've had to rethink how we nutrition our plants to fortify and achieve that ultimate health Now one of the things that I never heard until starting this process is what to do in winter. Winter is the only time of the year that a plant can detox any of the toxicities in its system. Am i saying we should be nutritioning a plant in winter? I am saying we should be nutritioning a plant in winter. Where does the plant detox system? First and foremost a plant detoxes its system in the spring as everything is moving up and all the sugars and starches are carried to the vascular tips of the plant to produce foliar growth. That foliar growth carries toxicity, is shed, plant regenerates itself from the interior out, we can use silica to preserve and fortify so we don't lose those portions of the plant as we adjust the nutrient balance inside of the plant system. During the winter the plants move resources into the interior of the plant stored in the cellular structure of the plant and the plant expel toxicity out of the roots. This is where we come back and we say guess what I'm gonna be adding carbon, I don't need nitrogen anymore, I'm in the dormant season, I'm not trying to necessarily drive photosynthetic productivity, I'm gonna use carbon, I'm gonna use calcium, and I'm gonna use phosphorus again to be able to purify, to take away the availability of metals, to reduce the chloride being expelled out of the root system, to avoid that accumulation of toxicity that the plant is naturally decreasing inside of it, absorb it, and give the plant what it needs to continue to fortify itself. Since we started nutritioning in the wintertime we have radically altered the nutrient content inside the internal structure of our plant. And these components of all four seasons and understanding the behavior nutritionally in each of these seasons allows us to customize our process. Understand what the goal and objective is and begin to understand this next level of advancing knowledge. This is cutting-edge stuff. Through these applications I have seen junipers who have droopy foliage go completely upright. I've seen junipers that are completely juvenile turn completely mature. I've seen plants that have apical dominance and a loss of lower branch strength even rove balance their nutrition without any foyer management. In the opening element we've seen radical things like increased backbutting on plants that don't historically backbutt and increased resistance on plants that have had susceptibility. With all of these understandings we recognize we are building from the interior out. A few nuances and then we will get to the debate with David undos the previous event. Q.iga.msh healthy, I wired them all out. They got longer and longer. I would prune the tips. I would shorten the elongated growth. I was not getting back butting on the interior of the plant. They get longer and longer. I get no interior growth. I have to wire more and more. The branches become droopy the longer they get. That was the story of Sierra Junipers. Since applying this nutrition, radical interior back butting, radical interior vigor, building the trees from the inside out for the first time with the change and the shift and the addition of calcium, the purification of toxicity. Rocky Mountain Juniper, what's everybody's biggest complaint? Rocky Mountain Junipers are droopy. The droopiness in Rocky Mountain Junipers is a high desert plant, completely and totally correlated to too much salt content. Are they tolerant of it? Are they green? Are they growing? Absolutely. Is that branch drooping? If the branch is drooping, that's a direct correlation to salt content and a loss of hydrology inside of your foyer mass of your tree. You change out that salt content, you change out that calcium content, all of a sudden you see phototropism take place and that droopy foliage becomes radically upright and suddenly we have to wire less, we have to manage the foyer mass less. We have the capacity to really alter the behavior of your tree. When we start thinking about these things, this is not just a change to how we are functioning horticulturally. It's a change to the aesthetic of the plant physiologically and the change in the aesthetic has been strong. Thank you. So incredibly powerful. Okay? All right. I'm going to take you into the discussion with David. He's going to go very deep. When this starts to become too much, we're going to pull out of it so that I can sort of reframe things, organize things, and help you improve your knowledge of this new age of nutrition and the option to alter the state and health of your tree from the inside out. Enjoy. I was always under the impression fertilizer is not food. Is fertilizer food? That's not a loaded question. I'm just curious. Is fertilizer a food? Yeah, it is. It's food for plants, it's food for microbes, and it's food for the interface between the plants and the microbes. It fuels the relationship? It does. Yeah, yeah. How you fertilize fuels that relationship significantly. Uh-huh. Do you consider the aggregate forms of nutrition to be fertilizer? Because like historically I've thought of fertilizer as like animal byproduct or chemical compositions that would be fertilizer, but like you've introduced me to this like- Calcium fertilization or- Yeah. Well, I mean calcium fertilization, it's like you can apply, well, astenite or aragonite or you can apply bone meal. Those are all calcium forms of fertilizer, right? So are they the same thing? Are they- Yeah. Are they created equal? No. Each one of them is going to have some slight nuances and strengths and inherent strengths and weaknesses. Uh-huh. Yeah. So there's pros and cons to everything. Absolutely. Yeah, yeah. And that's really the art of taking what we refer to as the new paradigm of crop nutrition and implementing it. It's really at a certain point in time it reaches art. There's a science, but then you base an art form on science and then you base a new art form on that science. And so what we refer to as the new paradigm, it's a framework of plant nutrition step by step guide. If you follow that, it will lead you progressively from wherever you are today to a plant that's resilient, high dollar value, organically grown, resilient ... When I see resilient to insects, disease, weather stress, and so forth, not 100%, but significantly more than its other counterparts. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. starts wherever you are today and says okay we're here let's follow the pathway and we'll get to here's our goal getting there requires fertilization of over 20 of learning to fertilize in a cohesive way over 20 different elements potentially okay yeah and when you were talking to me today you talked about stages yeah this is the first time that I've heard this you had a stage one which was what not walking on the brink of disaster yeah so yeah so like state likes like these one or zero I guess you could call it is we're trying to keep the plant from from dying basically starting to arrest death is that when you typically enter a plant's life we get a lot of customers that that come to us um uh from some less than desirable circumstances some some yeah some like hey yeah these are gonna die or are dying or in the process of dying and they're extremely valuable for whatever reason and yeah how do we make it better how do we heal it right so yeah so like that would be kind of stage one and that approach to nutrition is going to be different than stage two for sure for sure yeah so stage one you're typically with reducing reduction of toxicities okay so you're taking you know i mean the the um similar scenario would be like a a patient of a of a really long prolonged um overeating disease right so say you've got an eating disorder and you're prone to eating 17 milkshakes a day right um because you work at a milkshake shop and you like milkshakes yeah you know and and that's where you live right i i like milkshakes too but hamburgers are good but one every you know seven weeks or something is probably a better rate right and so so so you're taking 17 milkshakes a day yeah um what you want to do is you want to get those milkshakes out of the system first right so like the what's built up in the system over multiple years or months or what have you so that your first stage is really about detoxification and then what's stage two so stage two is is you start to um uh work towards rebalancing uh nutrients of um from both macro and micro and um within the same category so like um different micronutrients such as iron or manganese um balancing those ratios to one another um or calcium to magnesium or balancing those to one another once those ratios start to balance out to one another what you'll typically do is take your use those um uh um um um um um specimens to parasite on and to feed on. So once you start to grow a plant with the new paradigm you get to that first level and you reach a moderate stage of resilience against those and so what I'm saying is it looks to you like a healthy plant but it also looks to the rest of the to the environment like that's a pretty healthy plant versus what modern agriculture does is it gives us it's a deception it looks like a healthy plant to the naked eye but it looks like a weak plant to an insect or a disease and it looks like a food source and so it's that distinguishing characteristic that is what we're doing at Apical that really is different from most other frameworks and approaches to agronomy or plant science or hort science. Right, right. And you've said to me sort of on multiple occasions that when an insect attacks a plant or when a pathogen attacks a plant it's actually the plant asking for that to happen to be relieved of some toxicity potentially? Yeah, I mean it may be more of like a subconscious ask I think probably for a plant. Maybe it's not saying like hey over here but they are sending out subtle signals like come hither to the insect Right. They give off infrared or far infrared you know near infrared, mid infrared, far infrared or beyond UV different spectral signatures and those spectral signatures link up with what a particular insect might be looking for. So you're creating a healthy aura I suppose. In this plant. You could look at it like that. That's so good. Reminds me have you ever seen the movie Almost Famous? I don't know that I have. Okay, well you should check it out sometime. Yeah. So when you say sustainable plant nutrition what does that mean? Sustainable is like this big punch word, right? Yeah, yeah, yeah. So sustainable means you're not gonna go backwards or you're not gonna have some sort of gotcha moment later on, right? You're not trading growth for susceptibility. Yeah, you're not trading today for tomorrow basically. Or growth for susceptibility would be another one. Yeah. And so you and I have talked a lot about the common methodologies of bonsai nutrition and I've utilized the treatment that I experienced in Japan which is copious quantities of fertilizer producing big, lush, green, healthy canopies but needing constant chemical assistance because of the disease and the pathogen issue. Yeah, yeah. And you really broke it down for me today in terms of how, nitrogen you can outpace salt toxicities and issues through constantly pushing nitrogen but you keep getting farther and farther and you have to keep raising everything up to keep up with that. And it almost become, it's like a nuclear weapons race, right? It is, yeah. Like at some point the whole thing could melt down. Sure. Could melt down. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, so the plants are wanting to operate off of ratios. Right? And so they're wanting to operate off of one ratio to another. So nitrogen to phosphorus, we'll call it, right? But if we keep applying nitrogen without applying phosphorus, then over time what will happen is we'll create a susceptibility within that plant. It may not happen on the first application. The first application may look great. Second application may look even better. But the third application may be not quite as good as the third. Right? But then the fourth would look maybe not even good as the first. Yeah. But by the fifth application, you start scratching your head going, now I got to apply a fungicide. Right? And so why is that? And so what we found is that the plants have certain preferences and the closer that they can feed to those preferences or work with microbial communities in the soil environment as symbiotic, that relationship creates healthy nutrition for the plant, as healthy as it can be. That's why plants in nature don't have typically huge infestations of insects that are pathogenic to them. Right? And that are destructive to them. Little here, little there. It's nature taking its course, taking out the week or whatever. But some of those like, well, why is that? Why does this happen? Why does a certain oak tree germinate in a certain location even though there's 1,000 other seeds right around it? You know what I mean? So why does that happen? Then why does an insect, it's fate, right? Or it's magnetism, right? Or it's the linking up of symbiotic relationships. And so when that insect comes in, the plant is saying, hey, why don't you take a little bit of my load off of here? because I've got I've got a vulnerability and so that that outpacing it eventually creates increasing susceptibility right and that's problematic specifically it's it's less of a problem in annual crops because you're just gone and before sometimes you have to spray too many fun you know insecticides or something maybe one or two and then the crops go off but in perennial crops or long or older trees or older vines or plants or what have you you have these toxicities and they can build up over one two three four seasons five seasons ten seasons right so who knows how long um an aluminum or a chloride toxicity has been building up in a plant no one really knows those things unless you're tracking it and that's the other thing so how do you how do you know what a plant wants unless you ask it yeah and so that's you know a big part of you know the new paradigm interesting and when you say like so I was taught in college that plant is a plant is a plant is a plant is a plant is a plant is a plant is a plant is a plant is a plants needed what's the number 24 yeah it's like 224 eventual elements yeah and human beings need a few more in excessive plants apparently yeah I mean that's the theory okay and and and these these things that a plant needs where do they come from in nature typically decaying microbes okay yeah typically like decaying microbes is the primary form of form of natural plant nutrition okay decaying microbes is decaying bacteria yeah yeah in the soil environment yeah i mean you know the plants yeah the plants yeah the plants um you know plants in nature thrive on low levels of nutrients delivered by soil microbes okay end of story that's how it's done all day long around you everywhere around the globe and so um it's that balance that they have from new leaf to old leaf and from element to element that provides them with the ability to do that and um because they're balanced they can intake very small amounts of nutrition and and do well and grow extremely healthy doing so so that's really the primary form of plant nutrition in in the environment plants also eat a lot of carbon in in soil environments but they do that through cycle cycle biology and so are these microbes because you had made a you you you and i have talked a lot about plant or excuse me aggregate available nutrition versus uh animal based forms of nutrition soluble nutrition soluble nutrition and you had said that like a lot of the aggregate forms of nutrition tend to come with a lot less baggage than animal forms of nutrition i might have misunderstood that um yeah generally speaking um you know like you know calcium carbonate mine right it should be relatively predictable um um there's less unpredictability in what a mine was fed versus what a you know this cow versus that cow versus that chicken versus that chicken right you know they might be fed a different thing so like there's a big thing in in chicken husbandry where some of them feed a sodium product to them or use sodium cleaner to the clean the pens and versus others that don't layers versus broilers right and so then you have um well this is layer manure versus broiler manure but who knows that right who even looks about it and there's a big difference there huge difference yeah arsenic levels sodium levels variety of things so even when you get to an animal byproduct you're saying listen the same way that a plant is built of what it's fed is it a mcdonald's is it milkshakes oh all of us whole foods and you're saying even the byproduct of an animal being fed something changes the value of that byproduct for sure for the plant yeah i mean to a degree i think it's maybe not quite as straightforward as that but it's it's it is um uh to a degree like that yeah yeah that's a really good yeah i mean healthy you know health begets health and and and sickness begets sickness right so if you're feeding you know sick animal byproduct to us to a you know to a plant does that make that plant healthy necessarily interesting um or if we eat a sick animal or a sick plant does that make us healthy i know that's a tricky one oh wow that's amazing yeah you dig deep my mind there for a minute yeah you yeah you you touch on that um uh on that the hottest button of them all really that is that is the hottest that's like a nerve ending right there that's really interesting so when i'm just gonna i'm just gonna tangentially divert for a minute so when you say listen a plant has a low level of nutrition even though it may visibly look healthy the internal analysis would say that's a plant built on mcdonald's potentially not necessarily so so when i say a low level of nutrition like you know all the trees that are that surround your nursery um they're all building themselves on low levels of nutrition and nature is doing it that way okay so there's a big difference between proportional nutrition correct that's proportionate low levels versus excesses yeah they keep their they keep all their excesses so when you're talking about ingesting a sick plant or a sick animal you're talking about ingesting a food source that has cultivating toxicity toxicities and deficiencies and is not a balanced nutrient resource yeah interesting yeah not yeah um that's a that's part of the reason i started apical a big part of it because of that concern that we're all eating potentially sick plants uh-huh um or sick animals or the sick or animals are eating sick plants and then we're eating sick animals right um right that look healthy when we look at it yeah right i mean it's gonna be deceiving right like what's that movie a shallow howl or something like that so i think there's um you know looks can be deceiving like you know if if you know we could walk out there right now and you know drench you know any one of your trees with a whole bunch of nitrogen and it will push out a big big you know a bunch of growth right but the problem is is that three days later you may have you know the worst mite infestation you've ever seen right um and so you know that's the the you know having seen that in real time many many situations um typically before we had the lab we we found that that the goal is not necessarily to make things look right it's make things be right and that being right we had to we had to take a step back and say you know you know i i think i know something about plant nutrition but i had to actually boom take a step back and be like i don't i have to become a student again i have to learn this this whole new way of interacting with plants that that tells me that more is not better it's it's proper that's that's better right proper nutrition helping the plant digest the nutrients that are there um keeping the roots healthy um and what that really what it's like from a data perspective right right and so from that perspective it's not about the quantity of any one given nutrient definitely it's about its proportional relationship correct to others yeah can you just um and also to itself in different parts of the plant and this is a new one for me that yeah the whole plant is not uniform and i think most of us think nutrition is uniformly distributed but that is not the case not at all no not at all not in fact it's um the opposite of that specifically the opposite um and so like you know i come from more of an agricultural background and horticulture has really um been i came to horticulture from agriculture first right and and so uh the in agriculture folks know like oh if you look at that you see browning leaves on the bottom they'll be like oh that's a nitrogen deficiency and so technically there's some degree right potentially but what we found is um there's a certain degree of assumption that goes with that right and so um anyway not to get too far off track the uh nutrient flows within a plant are more well studied in um in plant science for food right um you know nitrogen mobilizes as a mobile nutrient from the old leaf and the plant cannibalizes and moves it into the new leaf as it grows and so that's a very common thing right um commonly known thing in agriculture science i would say uh but what we found is that's not as cut and dry as that and and a lot there's a lot of books out there that you know maybe give people the wrong impression that um oh well that just looks like a potassium deficiency well is it or was there an over application of calcium right and so was there a change of the proportion yeah exactly it's another way to look at it right so so learning how to interact read read you know read the data that the plant you know first of all access the data read the data and interact with the plant in a way that improves its own habitat through that data is uh is really what it's all about and how have you how have you come to understand these proportions because nobody else nobody else is speaking this way though yeah i mean there's a few people out there around the world that are kind of playing around with uh with uh looking at the vascular fluids of the plant and and analyzing them there's a handful um i think like less than 10 labs in the world less than five even are really serious about it um what about historical documentation was there anybody in the past that started this thought process yeah yeah i mean people um um actually like i found a um that there is some historical uh a record of of people looking at vascular fluids and plants you know in the 1950s and 60s but it just kind of got um steamrolled for lack of a better term by industrial farming yeah i mean it's it's you know when you just put nitrogen on it it just looks better yeah right but is it doesn't mean it is better right you know it looks better but then it came with this huge cost to us as a species really if you think about it like we're all consuming um everyday food that's contaminated by you know genetic contamination and agrochemical contamination of any you know wide variety of shapes and sizes just nitrate itself is a known carcinogen and high levels so you know if we're consistently feeding high levels of nitrate into the plant does that make our levels in the food high and does that you know affect us as you know the health of us as humans we're not really nobody's really studying um that depth of it that much i think we're not really people again studying some of it but it's it's um yeah so wow can you break down the fundamental nutrients and what they do in the plant i think that's a little bit more of a larger um it is at the depth that you want to describe it at but like calcium what does calcium do uh typically creates uh new cells and new cell walls what does phosphorus do it heals wounds okay what does phosphorus do it heals wounds okay what does phosphorus do it heals wounds okay what does phosphorus do it heals wounds okay what does phosphorus do provides just overall energy supply to the plant generally it's the energy molecule yeah and then what does uh nitrogen do it's curious um still trying to figure that out honestly uh really yeah a little bit uh nitrogen typically complexes and catalyzes with magnesium to to promote photosynthesis okay and is it involved in the chlorophyll or the green pigmentation and is it involved in the chlorophyll or the green pigmentation well magnesium is magnesium but nitrogen is also around there it's around it yeah okay yeah it's affecting the magnesium it's it's stimulating the magnesium to work and so what what is magnesium doing then is it magnesium actually is creating chlorophyll so it is the center of chlorophyll yeah center of capturing the sun's energy yeah that breaks the molecular bonds the yes uh but manganese itself is actually the one that breaks the the um oxygen hydrogen bond in water no kidding yeah unbelievable and then reforms as glucose i know which is like this is the whole thing about it's fertilizer food because the way that i came to understand it glucose is food right right glucose is micro food microfood and then microbes become plant food okay and micro food becomes energy through the process of respiration right storable and usable energy okay i mean this i i know this is basic for you but this is like very no that's what makes sense okay uh what does potassium do it moves nutrients from one plant sorry one part of the plant to another typically so one thing that i've observed circulation help circulation okay so one thing that like blood pressure one thing that i've observed you described potassium as a heartbeat to me one time and that really helped me understand it but one thing that i've observed is we'll stock up on potassium and we'll stock up on the energy and we'll stock up on plant for calcium and then you give a dose of potassium to push the calcium through the plant so when you see fertilizers that are balanced nitrogen phosphorus potassium and you got a five five five is that too much potassium can't say it very well could be but i can't say without understanding you know look at a test understand the plant how's it doing that's it you know that sort of thing i mean it might work perfect in certain environments you know um but it also may um come with uh significant imbalancing tendencies sure yeah yeah that's really interesting i was always told the balanced fertilizer is what you want to be yeah 2020 it's the it's it's the stuff you know yeah pete's 2020 right yeah i mean um what is a balanced fertilizer right and and i just don't know that there is such a thing right a balanced fertilizer because every plant's different every soil type is different even in the same field um you'll find inconsistencies um so you know trying to make those uniform i think is more of like a human um humans trying to simplify something that's innately um more complex than we could really fathom right right what what does sodium do on a plant raises the electrical conductivity okay keeps it from freezing in the winter to a degree lowers their frost point okay um so those are kind of the ra ra shish kumbha part points on the sodium but there also comes at you know just like with um sodium would normally do you know dehydrate that's a big one um that's kind of the double-edged sword of sodium right compete for water mobility yeah it has a tendency to antagonize calcium okay um which um it can be problematic on a number of levels okay yeah what does chloride do in a plant uh it balances osmotic levels it balances the osmotic levels of the plant uh it balances the osmotic levels of the plant uh it balances the osmotic levels of the plant it balances the osmotic pressure and within the plant's vascular system generally there's some other there's some other things that it does but that's its main function and balancing osmotic pressure is to say it either reduces or increases the gradient that water moves across yeah so essentially if a plant's trying to excrete um uh if a plant's been overfed and it's trying to excrete nutrients um and by overfed i mean it could be any one nutrient it doesn't have to be nitrogen yeah it can be any nutrient at all um uh as a plant desires to excrete that nutrient um it's it's like uh you ate a bunch of pretzels you're thirsty you're pounding water but then you then you got to go to the bathroom then once you go to the bathroom then you need to drink more water and then it repeats his vicious cycle so um during that process chloride is what's keeping your um bladder for lack or the plant's bladder for lack of or the plant's bladder for lack of or the plant's bladder from basically imploding or exploding as the case may be as it's going through that as it's going through that shrink swell shrink swell shrink swell shrink swell yeah so the cells of the plant um as it's being affected by a low medium or high rate of nutrition are going to do shrink swell shrink swell shrink swell okay yeah as it and and if it if it goes swell swell swell ooh now i gotta really shrink and so as it starts to shrink there has to be upload up um an uptake of chloride to balance out the osmotic pressure so that so that those vascular channels don't implode gotcha and so you know that creates or it can create additional pressure so it relieves the cellular micro micro pressure but it creates um uh cambium pressure within the plant and that cambium pressure then is where a lot of these um pathogens or potentially insects mites small pests come into relief so you see chloride toxicity being potentially a major catalyst for insect and disease uh yes absolutely yeah different and it affects different species differently right yeah what does sulfur do um sulfur actually is really helpful in low doses uh to kind of kickstart um amino acid synthesis um and it also helps to balance excessive rates of nitrogen fertilization or lower ph um those are generally the helpful characteristics of sulfur okay but sometimes that lowering of the ph can be quite detrimental for sure yeah it can especially if it's in a soil micropore or something like that um um you know if you push soil out of the desired root zone ph um you can have significant problems a lot of that leads to root disease or root compaction or soil compaction root compression right what does carbon do and why is carbon not measured in nutrient tests with plants yeah so carbon is you know it's the number one macronutrient but just as it's a macronutrient you know it's all around us in carbon dioxide but the plant can be a good host of other nutrients uh so you're not necessarily a factor of the plant health your biography and ability to maintain it and improve the health of the plant can only access as much carbon dioxide as it can feed to microbes, right? And so there's this catch-22. That's why, you know, everyone's always like microbes and, you know, soil biology, right? Because if you increase that, you increase the rate of photosynthesis. You technically can. But carbon comes in many forms, right? So obviously CO2 is a gas or carbonated beverage or carbon monoxide. There's a lot of different forms of carbon. And what also people don't know is that things like, you know, hydrocarbons or essential oils or sugars, all these are made from large amounts of carbon. So carbon, carbon, carbon, oxygen, hydrogen. Carbon, carbon, carbon, oxygen, hydrogen. Carbon, carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, hydrogen, right? Large amounts of carbon, complex molecules, resilient molecules that are capable of resisting stress. So carbon is the key to... Proper fertilization, proper plant development, and so on and so forth. Plants will scavenge carbon in order to avert death all the time. So like if you have, say, you're a plant that's under stress, the plant will take all the carbon it can and shove it into a plant's stressed organs. Even so sometimes to the point where the nitrogen ratios just go berserk, right? So in other words, it pulls in a ton of carbon, assuming so it pulls in a ton of nitrogen as well. That doesn't mean it's healthy, right? It's just responding to stress. Right. So, but at the same time, like, the goal of plants is to access, recycle, feed carbon to microbes and have a good time. Right. Right, that's what they want. Partying. Everyone's partying. That's, well, I mean... You know what, though? It's a balanced, moderate party. What is it, we are plants, we are healthy plants, right? Yeah, yeah, yeah. So like we are healthy, we are happy, healthy plants, right? Right. So, like, a plant wants to accumulate carbon by exchanging it through the soil, the soil rises sphere, right? The soil, the interface between the soil. This is that magic spot at the tip of the root. Exactly, yeah. And so the plant wants to, you know, access carbon through the root zone, access carbon through the foliage, access carbon through the underside of the foliage, access carbon through the bark, take that carbon, you know, mix it up. You know, feed it back to the microbes, then they're going to take that carbon and make a higher level carbon, right? So like a simple sugar, feed it to the microbes, then they come back with a complex sugar, then we take that, siphon off some more minerals, feed it back to the microbes, then take an even more complex form of sugar, you know, use that, put that into the fruit, make that fruit resilient, then feed it back to the soil microbes, feed it, you know, cycle it again. Feed it back up to the plants, make waxes, oils, super high constant complex molecules that are impenetrable to, you know, in some cases like fire or, you know, ice or certain things. Interesting. Yeah, so I mean, you know. So this is the cuticle then? So carbon, right? So like, you know, carbon fiber or like carbon nanotubes, like, you know, like that's what they want to build, you know, they build, you know, carbon fiber. It's extremely strong when it's carbon on carbon on carbon on carbon. Yeah. Right? And so that complexing of carbon into large resilient molecules is what you're doing in a plant when you're creating a resilient plant. Right. It's really no different. It's just on a slightly micro scale. Sure. Yeah. So yeah. That's cool shit. Yeah, I know. That's cool shit. Yeah, it's pretty wild. That's good. It's pretty wild because yeah, like, you know, if you think like, like mint, right, a mint plant. Okay. Well, there's a mint plant. Yeah. And if I feed that mint plant just straight nitrogen, I'm going to get a lot of mint. Right. But I might not get that much mint oil. Right. But then if I feed, if I take that mint plant and I say, hey, mint, I want to talk to you. I want to get to know you. I think you're cute. Let's hang out a little bit. Let's get to know one another. Right. I want to work with you. Yeah. I like you more than just the way you look. Yeah. Yeah. I want to get to know you. Yeah. I want to get to know you. Yeah. I want to know you. I want to, you know. Yeah. And so now you're entering into like you're going steady with this mint plant. You're talking to it. You're saying, okay, mint, do you want more sodium or less or do you want more calcium or less? And theoretically, if you're treating the mint right, the mint is then going to respond by not only just giving you better, the same or better growth that you would get from just more nitrogen, but you'll get more oil and you'll get more resilience and the plant won't be susceptible to insects or disease. And so the ultimate goal of the plants is to grow the maximum amount of its highest level molecules as well as the largest amount of biomass. And in doing so, you create the best next generation of plants through its fruit or seed or what have you, because it'll always put it into the fruit for the next generation. Right. Right. Just like you treat your kids better than you treat yourself or whatever. Sure. So, but on the flip side, and this is kind of the, you know, sort of the catch 22. There's always a catch 22 with nature, right? There's always a little twist, right? Nature's never just fully straightforward, singular, straight line, right? Nature doesn't work like that. What you see is the plants will sacrifice biomass for nitrogen. Right. For resilience. Right. Okay. All right. So if there's one that's got to go, they'll sacrifice growth for resilience. I'll drop that leaf. Yeah. I'll drop that leaf to preserve one seed for the next generation. Right. I'll drop all my leaves to preserve one seed for that next generation to flourish. And it does so by concentrating carbon and so forth in the seed. So what does it look like in your observations of bonsai cultivation where we're using, you know, largely inorganic aggregate soil situation, which if you break down inorganic aggregate, very limited carbon. Right. Very limited carbon situation. What does that look like in terms of plant nutrition challenges, et cetera, from your experience? Yeah. I mean, it's like the most challenging environment you could imagine, I think, to grow plants, probably. Would you consider it hydroponic? I would consider it beyond hydroponics. Okay. In terms of its technical difficulty. Because you're growing woody-tissued perennials in a virtually hydroponic environment void of carbon, and carbon is the backbone of that woody tissue. Yeah. So there's no carbon in the soil, or very little. There's very little space for roots to recycle and so on, so there's a lot of potential for, you know, root disease. And then there's, you know, through the inherent mineralogy and the clay aggregates, there's potential for some degree of soil compaction in there, or to sort of collapse and suffocate roots. Right. So, yeah, I mean, bonsai is a huge challenge. I mean, it's been probably the biggest technical challenges we've dealt with as a company, is getting into bonsai cultivation and helping the bonsai community start growing. Helping the bonsai community start to realign their practices with nature. That's a huge step forward for us as a company, because we're working, first of all, in non-food crops. You know, typically the system is designed to work in food crops on large acres. Right. So there's a lot of inherent things that need to be just treated slightly differently than bonsai. Yeah. Yeah. Cool. That's a fantastic challenge, right? So, you know, with the carbon, if you don't have access to carbon, you're going to get it, you're going to try to scavenge it any way you can. And so, you know, I mean, deciduous trees or evergreen trees even more so need a large amount of carbon. Right. And so it's like, you know, the plant can access a lot, plenty up here, right, through respiration, but where are the microbes that it wants to feed it to? Yeah. Maybe they're not there. There are only very few of them. Yeah. So if you don't have that microbial ability to cycle, then you're left with one of two things. Either you take carbon out of the equation and you just put the pedal down with nitrogen and hope for the best. Right. Or you have to start spoon feeding carbon in as part of your fertilization program. Right. And to answer your other question, like why isn't it really talked about much through general plant sciences, it was really forgotten in the NPK revolution. Yeah. There's some... There's a lot of people now that are waking up to the understanding of what carbon does and how it works and how it complexes nitrogen and sequesters it and releases it later on and so forth. But really, carbon was forgotten when soluble nitrogen came to the market. Yeah. Okay. So we're having a revival, a carbon revival. I would say so. Yeah. Are you leading the carbon revival? You're one of them. I would be part of it, I would say. Yeah. James made it very clear that carbon needed to come back. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, I mean, there was an article that I did about a year ago in Acres USA magazine that was called Bringing Back Carbon, and then we talked a lot about in there how soil testing for carbon is really pretty marginal even to this day. We do a couple of different carbon tests in our soil tests there, but there's not a lot of carbon testing that's done worldwide. Interesting. Yeah. Okay. So what does iron do? Yeah. What does iron do? Iron is more of a photosynthetic stimulator, right? So it also helps to, yeah, so it helps to catalyze photosynthesis from two perspectives. One acting as a symbiotic nutrient to magnesium and just the general chlorophyll. They're buddies. Yeah. They work synergistically together. But then it also... Yeah. Works in the soil environment as a primary driver of a certain type of microbe that releases phosphorus from the soil, and those phosphorus-solubilizing microbes can't happen without iron, and this gets into some pretty deep agronomy, but a lot of iron out there, but how much of it's non-oxidized or non-kyed up through oxidative molecules. Right. You know? Yeah. Yeah. I got you. And so if iron is so functional in the soil, why do we only foyer the iron on through the apical application process, at least as what we've experienced at Mirai? Right. So you guys, when we first got started, we were dealing with some potential lower pH driving issues in the root zone. Right. And so most iron products have an inherently low pH. Yeah. And so to mute the potential negative effect of taking a low pH soil and driving it lower, we try to limit that by applying a small amount through the foliage. Do we now realize that the low pH was largely caused by an overabundance of ammonium in the soil system? I mean, I think as part of it... That's my hypothesis. As part of it. Yeah. But really, it's like when the academic collapses and the aluminum releases and some of the other little nuance things, right? Those big fat cations start popping off of the soil and just get broken apart. Right. It's not a stable aggregate anymore. Now it's become a micronized, less than one UM, so it can get taken in through the plant pore. Right? So every time you water, then the plant's releasing manganese into the soil profile. And you didn't know that. It was happening for how many years? One, two, three, maybe? 10. Maybe. Yeah. Maybe more. Right? Well, I mean, I think this comes down largely to the grade and quality of Akadama. But then I've also recognized that there isn't a grade of... Because from our tests, which you and I have talked about, 7% to 10% of Akadama as a clay particle is carbon or organic, and the rest of it is just additional mineral content. Right? So there's a lot of magnesium and a lot of manganese there. Right. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And when that carbon is eliminated from that, the backbone drops out and your Akadama crushes, right? Yeah. So probably higher quality Akadama has a higher percentage of carbon, I'm guessing, and it depends on how much... Interesting to look at that. Yeah. And I've got actually some bags to test that theory that I will be sending your way. Yeah. I mean, we can test it in a couple of different ways, but yeah, there's different forms of carbon out there, right? There's stuff that the plant can take up. There's stuff that the plant can't take up. There's stuff that keeps the iron and manganese in check, or yeah, the iron, manganese, and aluminum in check. And then if that goes, that's when you see that release. And as you've seen in the leaf test, it just all of a sudden, the soil gets depleted. And as that soil gets... But what does that depletion mean? It means that the carbon is gone, that buffer is gone, and now all those minerals come flooding into the root center of the plant. Right. And the plant's like, whoa, what are we going to do with all this? And it does the best it can, like they always do. Plants are programmed to live and operate in a certain way, flow nutrients up, down, create seeds, drop those seeds, create new plants, and so forth, very predictably. It's just that we've been approaching plants slightly, maybe selfishly as a species perhaps. Right. Using them a little bit more than fostering them. Just lack of communication. Oh. And lack of real, true observation. It's like, anybody can make a plant look good by bumping nitrogen to it. There's very few people out there that know how to make it look good, provide resilience, and create optimization, right? So you've got... Is optimization the third stage? That would be considered the third stage. Yeah. It's get it off of the brink of death. Yeah. Keep it from death. Second stage is you move towards full stabilization of the patient is stabilized, they can move around the hospital, they're meeting with their loved ones, they're getting back to doing the things that they like to do. They've detoxed 300 milkshakes. They got another 150 to go, but they've detoxed 300 of them. And you said that's pretty much 95% resilient to pests and disease. Yeah. So your final level of level two is when you hit about 95% resilience. And then what's that level three? Tell me about level three. So level three, yeah. So level three is you'll see... You don't have 100%. It's very difficult to get to 100% resilience. Sure. But you'll go out there and you'll see very, very, very few little insect or disease pressure. You'll see good, steady growth of the plant in a habitat that looks like a healthy plant. You'll see typically increased leaf size that's 20 to 50% or even sometimes 100 or 200% larger than what you're used to seeing. You'll see the plant grow more rapidly than you're used to seeing. And so you get everything that you would with regular just large amounts of nitrogen, right? With your 20, 20, 20, but you get more. You get that resilience where it just... It grows like crazy, but it also keeps that growth. It keeps the growth from being cannibalized later on. It pushes out that new branch that you've always wanted on your Japanese maple, and then it keeps it for the next six years. And it keeps it from insects or disease coming in from scale or thrips or... And the lower branches don't get weaker and the apex gets stronger and you have... It doesn't sacrifice... Yeah, it doesn't sacrifice... The bottom. Yeah, it doesn't... Old to new. It doesn't cannibalize itself. It doesn't sacrifice new growth or old growth for new growth or whatever. I can't imagine what that looks like. That's very exciting to me. That's the most exciting part. It's a cool concept. It's very... It can be more difficult to achieve and maintain. We see people can get there quickly, but maintaining it is... That's the challenge and it requires commitment. You have to commit to your plants. And really, at the end of the day, it requires a touch of humility, I think. And that's maybe one of the missing ingredients from a lot of the people out there. They think, well, we know a lot about growing plants because I went to PhD school or I went to this or that. But how many PhD classes actually talk to you about learning from those plants, taking feedback? Working with the plant. Taking that feedback and repeating and repeating and repeating and repeating. You guys have been into the last two years, right? And so now... More intimate than I've ever been with my trees. Oh, by far. You're communicating with them in a way that... When I was in college and things like that, my friend and I, who was one of my horticulture friends, we would always have this... A phrase, becoming one with the plant. And that's really ultimately what it breaks down to be. You're like, I know why that plant is expressing X feature and where that's coming from. Oh, well, this plant right here has double the manganese as this plant over here. And so that plant over there has twice the iron in there, so therefore it's twice the height. Right? And it's a little bit leggier. This one's more compact. It's the why of why the plants look the way they're doing, why it's doing what it's doing, and how you can change and work with it to create a better, healthier outcome for the plant itself, or for you, or both, ideally. So I'm going to avoid talking about moly, zinc, cobalt, nickel, copper, and all of those things, right? Because they all have... You save those for later. Yeah. They're a little bit... They're a little more nuanced. And some of the more obscure micronutrients and trace elements, it can be really helpful to focus on the basics, calcium, phos, so on. I would encourage you to maybe talk about the sodium, the chloride, the aluminums of the world, because we've found that the excessive feeding is what drives a lot of the susceptibility. Now, you brought up aluminum. Is aluminum an essential element for plant growth? It's the opposite of an essential element. There's almost no known research studies, peer-reviewed, known to man, that have found a beneficial effect of aluminum. There's a few that I've found that show some anecdotal, sort of moderate, maybe some five and 10 percentage bumps from aluminum. But when you really dig deep into the research, they leave a number. I'm not sure if that's true. Yeah. There's not enough room for obscurity where, like I was saying before, maybe aluminum was being applied to lower pH or do something obscure that... Sure. It provided an ancillary benefit, maybe, but there's a lot of other ways to skin that cat. And it just so happens to be the most abundant metal in the Earth's crust. Yeah. So for me, you get back to first principles. Right. You get back to first principles, or whatever, of soil science. It's like, well, wouldn't you look at what the most abundant element of the soil is going to do? Wouldn't that be the first thing you would start to look at when you're learning about soils? Sure. No one does that. Right. No one. Yeah. And so everyone's like, oh, it's just everywhere, but don't worry about it. It's only available at low pH. Yeah. Is that so? Huh. Because now, once we've started to talk to the plants, the plants are telling us a whole different ballgame. Right. So the soil, the aluminum starts, it can release at high pHs, it can release at mid pHs, it can release at low pHs, it can release sometimes kind of sort of on Tuesday if a low pH product is foliar sprayed onto the plant. It can, you know, there's all these different situations. It can just, if the plant has a pathogenic root system, so if it goes under salt stress, all these are situations where the soil can release aluminum, it can get into the vascular system of the plant and present a significant problem. Yeah. And one of the most interesting things you and I have talked about is the presence of aluminum potentially being a stimuli for borer susceptibility. And talking about the fact that with less and less rainfall, you're seeing potentially root death or salt, with less and less rainfall, salt increase in the soil system, and that is a catalyst to aluminum intake. And then when we did the foliar samples of the old growth redwoods, one of the big outcomes of that foliar sample... One example that James' agent spoke specifically to is, I am shocked at the aluminum levels in a native old growth redwood tree. And I thought that that was really enlightening about the plague of the changing of conditions shifting, you know, via whether it's, you know, root death because of a lack of water in the shallow root environment of a coastal forest, or whether it's increased salt concentration that leads to the intake of aluminum or both of those things. Or another mechanism. But nevertheless, this insoluble aluminum in the soil system somehow managed to make it into this tree that's been here for 1,000, 2,000, 3,000 years. And for the first time, we're seeing borers in giant sequoias. We're seeing borers in the bristlecone pines, which were thought to be immune, even to the degree that two years ago, there was an article published about their immunity based on their resin content. And yet, if you look at the White Mountains, you understand that they've found their first borer infested death in the ancient bristlecone. So really interesting as I look at trees that have borers, and we look at the tests and see aluminum in them. It's like kind of full circle knowledge for me. Yeah, I mean, you know, if you look at the number one, two, and three elements on almost any soil test, if you really just tear the soil apart down to its brass tacks, it's iron, it's aluminum, and it's silicon. And to the extent that the aluminum and silicon are linked up. With the iron and all kind of in one happy family, like that's where carbon can kind of, you know, wrap itself around those aluminum, iron aluminum silicates or aluminum silicates or straight silicates or straight aluminums or straight irons or whatever. And prevent that, you know, present that buffer. But you know, I don't know, you know, what is the mechanism behind the giant redwoods? I can't necessarily say. Sure. But I would... Yeah. I mean, you know, for those people that might be wanting to find out why that, if there's a connection or why, I'd encourage you to maybe just try testing like, you know, test a non-affected, non-bored with a board. Yeah. And prove it to yourself. Yeah. Because this is what we did over and over and over. For hundreds of tests to the point we were blue in the face. And then we started to say, you know, we're on to something. We're on to something here. And we need to start speaking out about it in whatever channels we can because we do feel like that it's a valuable information for folks that, you know, are in agriculture or in environmental work or what have you. Because there is precedent, right? People have taken crop dusting planes and sprayed, you know, sprayed elastinite or sprayed, you know, different types of silicate clays or aragonite or things like that on crop dusting on large scale environmental projects. It has been done. And so like, you know, is that the cause and is that the solution? I don't know. But I can say that when we take plants of a variety of species, large numbers of them, and we find that they're being attacked by significantly large pests, beetles, moths, so on and so forth, and we take those plants and analyze them, they'll typically have an elevated level of illumination. If we lower that aluminum, we decrease susceptibility generally. And or, you know, like I mentioned a second ago, we take susceptible, unsusceptible, affected, unaffected, and over and over and over again, it's aluminum is in the affected. What's all the rage about silica? So silica has quite a few modes of action. I think the rage about silica is... Yeah. Yeah. Silica is just the lack of rage that we've had for the last 50 years. So people have really not understood, kind of taken it for granted what it was doing to the soil. Same with carbon, right? Did they know or did they not know? Okay. So it was easy to forget just like carbon was easy to forget. Yeah. Yeah. I think the soluble silicon levels of soils, you know, I don't have any...this is 100% speculation, but I would venture to guess that the soluble silicon levels of our soils have been dropping steadily for many years and leading to a steady increase in aluminum presence. So, you know, back to your question, what's the rage about silica? So it works on so many different levels. So decreases saline stress, decreases osmotic stress, decreases metal stress, complexes aluminum and takes it out of the plant, you know, in a detox sort of way, competes directly against chloride. And sodium helps shuttle phosphorus across cell membranes and into the cytoplasm, helps to build cell wall resilience in coordination with calcium. The list just goes on and on. So silica is a big deal. It is. And folks are starting to realize it. Mm-hmm. It was recognized in the last 10 years as a beneficial plant nutrient by the International Institute of Plant Nutrition. And a lot of studies have been done academically on how silicon builds resilience or limits stress to a wide number of species of plants. So one of the things that you said to me long ago when we were looking at these, like, tortured, stunted junipers growing on this rocky outcropping in the Rocky Mountains, and you said, you know, we talked about the dryness of that region being high in salt and all of these things. And you said, look, without silica, that plant doesn't survive in that environment, because you're constantly having eroding aggregate that's decomposing and providing free silica, which the plant is using to fortify and buffer itself against the toxicities of the aridity, right? Mm-hmm. And I just... Yeah. I mean, when you bring that tree into domestic cultivation, the needles are hard and they're firm and they're dense, and we start to give them a lot of nitrogen and a lot of water, and all of a sudden it becomes soft and herbaceous growth and very... It's like an aphid, you know? Oh, I love that. It's like a soft-bodied... Yeah. Yeah. And I just... You see the difference between those two. What about iodine? Iodine is also one that we talked about earlier today, but I don't think people are aware that iodine is a really... Iodine is a really functional aspect. Maybe not... I don't know if it's considered an essential plant nutrition or not. It's considered beneficial. Okay. Beneficial. Again, yeah, it's in that same category as silicon, cobalt, molybdenum. I think molybdenum is even essential now. There's a handful of them now that they've recognized in the last 10 years. It's nice because for a lot of years that wasn't the case. Right. So iodine, it's antibacterial. So if there's any sort of negative bacteria, it's a natural antibacterial, right? So even water molds, root rots, stuff like that. Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. All that stuff. Yeah. It also works as an aluminum detox. And so there's a lot of studies that have shown how iodine detoxes aluminum in animals and humans, but not necessarily so much in plants. We found some significant effects in detoxing aluminum. We found some significant effects in detoxing aluminum through iodine in plants. But it also competes with chloride. It synergizes with iron. There's a few other little things that it does that are generally helpful. Beautiful. But it really does help to clean out the inside of the plant. It's like the cleaning lady for the inside of the plant, I guess. Gotcha. The vascular, Mr. Clean. There you go. Okay. I'm going to shift. Female. I'm going to shift. Yeah, right. Okay. So we understand this is all about ratios. There's protagonistic and antagonistic relationships amongst all of these nutrients. Okay. There's too much to go into. Too much. All right. I'm just hoping you can break down some of the fundamental relationships and ratios that you see as a general behavior across plants. And I'm going to start it off by saying I have observed the calcium-magnesium ratio being a critical component to seeing a plant. It may not internally be healthy yet, but by having calcium in an abundance over magnesium for every plant that we cultivate at Mirai, and I know there are outliers like you talked about a peach, but for the most part, calcium needs to be above magnesium in what ideal ratio that you have observed for the majority of plants. Yeah. I mean, the ideal ratio sort of depends on the species. Sure. But the calcium to mag ratio is pretty critical because, you know, magnesium is, you know, it's more often than not it's available in the soil, more often than not. And calcium is maybe the opposite to a degree. More often than not unavailable. Yeah. Or less than desirable levels. And so, you know, like I mentioned a few minutes ago, calcium is really important. It's really used to build strong cells and resilient plants and so forth. Magnesium is meant to make things move and grow, right? And so, you know, the combination of nitrogen plus magnesium really makes plants take off, right? And so, if you make a plant take off without creating, you know, like I said a minute ago, resiliency and strong cells, you're missing the boat. So you jack it full of nitrogen, but you don't have the calcium in the system. You jack it full of potassium, but you don't have the calcium. It'll grow, but it won't be resilient, right? And so, or if you take the nitrogen out of the equation, just have high magnesium and low calcium, the plant just won't grow because there's nothing to stimulate the new cells. And the plant says, well, I've got plenty of opportunity to photosynthesize over here, but I got no support. Right. And so, that support has to come in the form of calcium. Yeah. Got you. There's some other things that calcium does in the soil environment, you know, i.e. flocculate soil particles because of its nature as a two plus cation and some other things, but it's... What does flocculate mean? Create space, create oxygenation. Oxygen space. Yeah. Oxygenates the soil. Yeah. Cool. Thank you. Yeah. Yeah. So, yeah. So, caldamag is pretty key. Caldefos? Not necessarily. More than just like, you know, you want both high. Okay. You know, you generally want a lot of both abundant calcium and phosphorus to have the optimal... Calcium to potassium? Yeah. There's definitely a ratio there that needs to be examined. Calcium is, again, creating cells. Potassium is circulating those cells to, you know, new and exciting frontiers within the plant. Right. And when you... What we've been looking at is there are times in certain species where you want to lower the potassium and have the calcium high, and then there are certain times where the potassium can be a little bit higher. Correct. Yeah. The difference of those typically is lowering the potassium when you're in the flowering and fruiting stage, raising the potassium when you're in the foliar stage. Right. In the vegetative stage. Vegetative stage. And so, we were talking about a four to one potassium to calcium ratio as a vegetative growth three to one, four to one, five to one. Yeah. Again, it depends on the species. Sure. You know, it's rare that we see a plant want more magnesium than calcium, and then it's even rarer that we see one that wants more potassium than calcium. I don't know that we've ever seen one. Wait. Wants more potassium or wants more calcium? Yeah. Or wants more calcium than potassium. Okay. Cool. Plants, you know, there's a lot of potassium in plants, right? There's quite a bit there, and it's just important that you don't have too much, just like anything else. And what does too much become? Wide-graded. Wide-gradient, from the new leaf to the old, you know, i.e. you'd have- Imbalance. Equals imbalance. Yeah. Huge imbalance. You might have like, you know, 3,000 in the new versus 12,000 in the old, that would be too much. Catastrophic. Yeah. Insects? Disease? Oh, yeah, yeah. You'd probably have- All the stuff. Yeah. You'd probably have, well, you'd probably have very little growth at the top of the plant, and you'd have, you know, the plant would probably be discolored and probably have really small leaves in the new plant. New part of the plant, be relatively stunted, things like that. Wow. Yeah. Okay. Any other ratios? Yeah. There's a whole bunch of them, actually. And so- Anything that is paramount? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Just to understand basic. We got to keep it basic. Yeah. So I would just encourage everyone when they, you know, if they look at the detailed comparison report on an apical test, you know, we've done a lot of grouping of antagonistic or synergistic nutrients to one another. So in other words, we- So that's how they're grouped, is- Yeah. So, like, if you group, you know, iron, manganese, copper, zinc, and cobalt, they'll all, to one degree or another, compete with one another. Similarly, you know, iron, or sorry, aluminum, molybdenum, iodine, boron, and selenium- Selenium. There it says, selenium. They all, they would all, to one degree or another, compete with one another in jockey for position. So for, in other words, when you see aluminum high, you typically see boron high. Yeah. Boron, and molybdenum, depressed, right? And so those, you know, similarly, like we just mentioned, calcium, mag, potassium, will kind of jockey for position. And they're all together at the top. Yeah. You put that at the top of the test for a reason. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Okay. And then you've got, and then you've, on the other side, you've got phos, chloride, sulfur, and- Sodium. And, well, sodium actually fits in the potassium, calcium, magnesium quad, quadrant. Okay. But the- Phos, chloride. Phos, chloride, sulfur, silicon. Silica. Silica. Those four will push each other around too. So like, in other words, if you have a lot of sulfur, your phosphorus will be depressed. And so, you know, back to this concept of balance and not necessarily overfeeding, it's like, we can ignorantly overfeed nitrogen and just hope for the best and grow, you know, relatively unresilient plants, or we can learn from the plant what it really wants and maybe do our best to get there. And in doing so, build that resilience, get the growth, and have our cake and eat it too. How does plant nutrition change over the seasons? So, yeah, plants generally have a annual life cycle, which consists of a cell initiation and cell division stage, a cell elongation and cell expansion phase. And then, of course, you've got the phos. Phos. Phos. And then they'll have a sort of a finishing stage, where those cells then either become seeds or some sort of reproduction for the subsequent season. And then, I guess, there would be a fourth phase which would be rapid vegetation. Each one of those stages is going to be interspersed in different times of the year through different plants. Sure. So everything goes through something different, in a different way at a different time of year. Ah. with you know harmonizing plant nutrition with growth stage preferences of a plant how do you identify those demand points of a particular nutrient and use your feeding program to supplement those and that's really where you know a lot of this new leaf to old leaf sampling comes in because you can the plant will reveal that to you it'll say hey I've got you know you watch a plant over the course of a month if you say you sampled it once a week right and they would say it was going from a you know reproductive stage to a vegetative stage you know you might have the potassium going from you know 5,000 over 8,000 new leaf to old leaf then it goes 5,500 to 7,500 and then it goes 6,500 to 6,500 and then it goes 7,500 5,500 and so what the plant has done it has taken that surplus of potassium that was in the old leaf and it gradually mobilized it into the new tissue but once it hits that 75 over 55 that's a stage where the plant could use more potassium or even really that the signal is when the when the plants are when the leaves are harmonized that's when you can feed that that's when you should feed a forthcoming deficiency interesting and are there seasons where a plant wants less potassium definitely yeah I just speak from experience being in phase one of balancing nutrition and having applied potassium last fall it was not a favorable outcome right and I was thinking okay so if potassium is like a blood pressure and my plants if I'm thinking about this winding down of daylight length and this decreasing of temperature and I'm trying to increase their blood pressure was that counter to the behavior of the plant I don't know if that's the same kind of thought process that actually applies because I recognized that it's tough to say you know some people like circulate at that time of year you know we like to circulate the nutrients and move them around on but it's really good to know if your plant has too much calcium not enough or you know we got so environment if it's the changed towards you know potassium efficiency or calcium deficiency or whatever because that can be a you know it's a it's very crucial right it's it's building new growth then expanding that new growth build the new growth expand the new growth right and so if you expand the new growth before it's really built and resilient that's going to create the susceptibility uh-huh so even in these times where maybe it's seasonally not optimal the ratio trumps everything else all the time in terms of the plants don't operate in absolutes nature doesn't operate in absolutes it's it's comparisons it's ratios it's it's balance it's imbalance it's it's more um it's more slippery than that yeah and it's not nature or you know it's nature it's not as reductive as we want to make it as humans um it's but yeah really it's all about ratios it's this the art is that the art yeah yeah it gets there right so it's yeah i mean it's new to old it's ratio to ratio it's it's it's it's macro to micro it's it's um you know it's it's synergism to antagonism you know all of these ratios are happening it's you know we have we don't we're pretty good at what we do but there's levels that we can see that we can't mentally process that the plants are showing us that we can't really understand until we improve our uis and things like that and so that's one of the things we're working on is improving those uis through our website and so forth so that you have that you know deeper layers of control all the time we know that that that's absolutely because it's operating off ratios um because that's nature's language it's ratios so this is your ability to give what you learn to everybody else yeah i mean we're we're doing that you know we're doing okay with it for now but um but there's you know just as you're always wanting what's the next thing how to what's the next challenge where's the next level to get to um that's the way we are as a company as well where we're always continually trying to use our technology to improve our own understanding of how to of how to be better of better plant scientists but how to um learn more from the plants themselves um you know we've learned a tremendous amount i mean it's it's been probably like the most gratifying experience of my life that i could imagine really um to have that uh interaction with the plants and just be that fortunate to understand it in that way but it just breeds more like i want to learn more about the plants and i want to learn more right i want to learn more from nature well nature says well go down we'll teach you right but we've got to teach you in the right way it's and so you know um it takes a certain pace i've realized you know you have to you can't rush nature um you can get rapid response but you can't rush it you have to let nature talk to you in its own way in your own time and you have to be receptive in that way um you know through data has been uh been you know i have always been a person that's relatively plugged into plants and nature and so on and and you know this phrase you know becoming one with a plant was long before long before the lab but but communicating with through through through numerical data through the mineral kingdom has provided a just a whole new lens um to to do that so let me ask you something yeah okay so somebody listens to this discussion of plant nutrition and they say cool i want to apply a good form of calcium i want to apply a good form of nitrogen i want to i want to i want to i want to nutrition my plants and get to know my plants the way that you're speaking to how do they know what to apply there's a lot of products out there there's a lot of you know this any other thing but i i would definitely encourage anybody that wants to learn from nature to you know number one you know commit to being a good student first and then second like start to learn and start to try to communicate with nature in whatever you know sort of clumsy way you can you know even if it's just straight observation you know you know when that insect lands on your hand don't don't kill it don't swat it watch it what are you doing why are you here yeah why are you fated to be together at this moment right like some some sort of zen uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh thing right like we're one right right now me me and that bug right um uh but you know those were the things that that's that allowed you know if you if you get away from an instinct to kill first i think that's one thing that actually helps to open the door to nature communication yeah or close it as the case may be um so that is one piece um you know obviously running an apical leaf test you know you know have to give a shameless plug there's a lot of people that are there you know we there's a lot that you can learn there yeah uh so i'd encourage you to do that follow our bonsai sampling guide if you're in the bonsai community or any of our other crop sampling guides if you're in other crops um try to stick to the process as best you can the more you deviate from the process and want to impose your own thoughts feelings intuitions considerations the the quicker you'll get off track um and and the more you learn to let go and trust the process the quicker you'll probably have results yeah um that's i think the the best approach um you know like i said we have this new paradigm of crop nutrition framework that if you follow it it's step-by-step process that will lead you steadily towards where you want to be and i think pretty much everybody wants to be beautiful plants that aren't that aren't susceptible to you know outside influences that are negative yeah insects disease stress right so if if you follow the steps it will get you there and and it doesn't you don't necessarily have to be a genius or or whatever you just have to follow the instructions and the instructions come from testing yeah so you so you follow so you follow the sampling guide you submit the tests and then you submit for a recommendation you follow the recommendation you apply the recommendation wait for the plant response watch that do follow the recommendations and then once that's done then you repeat you repeat the process until the plant's where you want it to be yeah very good yeah thank you yeah thanks for the pleasure yeah that's great yeah cool i can't even tell you how hard it was to get him to sit down and do that that has been a a life a lifelong pursuit actually the past two years i've been i've been trying to get him to sit down it took me a long time of following the process before he would finally say all right we can sit down and talk about this um but all of this all all of the you know information that he's talking about in their sampling guide it's available at apical and uh what's their website ira is it apicalag solutions or apicalag solutions i'll drop a link in yeah he'll drop a link in the profile um you know we've been testing it's a little bit more challenging again david's geared towards food crop which uh they're herbaceous they respond rapidly he can regenerate a plant in a few weeks we're dealing with woody perennials it's tough to keep sampling and sampling and sampling and that is the biggest limitation to this for most people that are going to take this on is you get a sample out of a sick tree you can build a tree the next tree is going to grow rather thinly after planting now most boundary trees can be  can barely squeeze it out of it maybe you can't even get a sample out of it and you're like I can't this tree is already embattled enough waited a little bit too long we've got to we've got to somehow get some information to begin this process once we start the process he's only going to give you recommendations that start to alter it he can't see the future he doesn't know how your plant's going to respond there's so many different components that contribute to this sort of plant existing in this ecosystem under the pressures that exist in your unique environment and that is really something that we're continuing to work at he's continuing to develop different testing methodologies for plants that don't have the ability to be foyer sampled you can talk with him about that he's got bark testing capacity he's got some other things but I did want to walk you through a few of the broader concepts just to leave you with a notion of plant nutrition okay so he talks about plant nutrition and he talks about plant nutrition about phase one which is basically pulling a plant back from the brink of death saving the plant healing the plant through a reduction of toxicity and a rebalancing of nutrition and the big indicator that a plant is starting to heal is the regeneration of growth from the interior of the plant healthy strong highly ramified mature growth from ideal locations that is growing with a vigor that the external portion of the plant is not okay stage two phase two is balancing that nutrition now that we've taken toxicities down now we can start to really fine-tune that balanced nutrition this is what we're working on right now and the only way to achieve balanced nutrition in the beginning I'm not taking new leaf and old leaf samples like he's suggesting I'm taking samples across the tree I'm not dividing them in and when he talks about new he's talking about the top of the tree when he's talking about old he's talking about the top of the tree when he's talking about old he's talking about the bottom branches of a tree okay and you'll generally see that divide in an unhealthy tree because the bottom branches are weaker the top branches are stronger and you see that firm delineation between strong and weak right if you're able to provide new or strong old and weak in a singular sample that you send into apical the amount of information than the corrective measures he can take are exponentially greater than taking those two merging them and giving him that but if that's the best you can do that is better than nothing and will definitely get you started on the right foot but it's almost a guaranteed you're probably going to be applying carbon calcium phosphorus and balancing with some of the trace elements through foyer okay so when we talk about that balancing now we're striking ideal ratios which we're starting to build for the species that we utilize in bonsai now that we're off of phase one we're into phase two we're starting to set these ratios we still don't have them because again his testing is geared towards primarily food crops we're starting to build these for the woody perennials that we use in bonsai across the board that's going to take more time we didn't want to start introducing this to you until we knew that it worked I can tell you beyond a shadow of a doubt it works and it works incredibly well it builds resilience and he's saying 95% resistance there is no perfection but that kind of resilience that kind of ability to fend off and resist is exactly what we're looking for and then that phase three this is where we want to get the optimization of our plants steady growth limited pressure increased productivity I think that's really going to be the payoff for all of this but this is a several year process right and what he's saying you got to dedicate to it I'll give you the I'll give you the pathway although you may have and right now I can tell you Ira and I have been talking I'm fighting assumptions about what a certain plant is dealing with I'm reading online about what that particular leaf expression could mean for a nutrient deficiency I'm telling David hey I think it could be this and he's saying don't do that that's not what we're doing anymore right we're not web MD'ing this the tests say this we're following the process stick to the process if you don't stick to the process I can't help you we continue to stick to the process and we continue to come out ahead as a result of that okay so just giving you the idea of what is new what is old this is where we are at in phase two of fine-tuning and tuning our nutrient systems. We have successes. We still have failures, right? Correctly timed thing, poorly timed thing. Too much time in between applications, not enough time in between applications. We've been learning for the past several years. The benefit of you being tuned into this right now is you are going to take advantage of all of the mistakes, much like with every other thing that we teach at Mirai. You get to benefit from all the mistakes we've made and what we've learned from and what we've been able to educate him through our dedication to his system and what he's learned from us. Now you jump into the process several years ahead of where you would have started had you tried to bite this off yourself, okay? Excuse me. But I just want to leave it at this. A new paradigm in plant nutrition that offers the ability to elevate the health of your bonsai to a degree that I don't think we knew was possible, but also elevate the aesthetic as a result of the process. I'm going to open it up to questions. I hope you guys enjoyed that. That was really hard fought to get that conversation with David. And I really do appreciate the fact that he was willing to sit down. And again, I just want to reiterate, there will be feature content coming out in the next few weeks that sort of follow the process of how you take a sample, how you submit a sample, how you read the rec, how you take the rec and apply it. What products, what dilution ratios, how you drench effectively, how you foliar effectively, the timeframes between. We're going to lay it all out there. You'll have the ability to use this system. Apical is waiting for you and all of your needs that your plants may have and you haven't had the ability to correct or solve. Okay. Opening up the questions. Yeah, there's quite a bit. Thanks for chiming in. First up today is Danielle. She asks, I've had my water tested through Apical for that knowledge. I'm not having any immediate problems with my trees. Should I still do any other testing or only when there seems to be a problem? Don't wait till you have a problem. Test and know what's in your plants right now. Because again, a plant can look healthy and not be healthy, right? Once you get a problem, now all of a sudden you can't test because you can't cut that foliage off because your plants deteriorate because it's dropped all its leaves. Test now when your plant is healthy and know where it's headed, know where it's going, know what it's got inside of it. Biggest thing I can say first is get your water tested. He understands the Akadama Pumice Lava. If you have any questions about these articles about is lava good or bad, is pumice good or bad, is Akadama good or bad, test it. Test it. Test your lava. Test your pumice. Test your Akadama. Test your water. Know what you're dealing with and then test the foliage mass of your healthy trees. Develop your baseline. This is what it looks like when it visually gives me these clues. He's going to come back and he's going to tell you how to improve it, to fortify it, to increase its resistance, toxicities to balance that plant. You will see a change in the behavior. It will potentially come with, man, it used to look a little bit different. Maybe I liked it better. Now it looks like this. Is that the transition? Is that phase one where we're healing, where we're reducing toxicities, trying to get to phase two? This is a process and you decide. You guys all have to decide. I made a decision. I don't want to be spraying chemicals on my trees. It doesn't mean that I'm completely free of that. We have two steps forward and one step back. Sometimes we have to come back and correct and buffer that transition while we're balancing. I don't want to be chemically dependent. Maybe you say, I'm not chemically dependent, so do I need to do it? If you want to know where your plant is at and if it's truly fortified and resistant, if you have the healthiest plant or if you have the capacity to elevate it, I think you have to test. It's the only way and it's the first time in the history of bonsai we've been able to see what's inside our plants and how they're behaving. Up next, many of us are located outside of the US and therefore it's difficult to source a company such as Apical that does sap leaf soil testing along with recommendations and providing products. Therefore, I'd be interested in knowing what have been the most common deficiencies found at Mirai through the testing and what have been the recommended nutrients supplements to apply. Yeah. First and foremost, Apical has permits to import plant material for a majority of the world. If they don't have it and you submit a request, they will work on it. Right now, we are trying to open up Europe to testing. We're trying to open up Japan to testing because I want to see this traditional bonsai model. I want to know for sure the hypothesis and the assumes that I have in my head of how does it work in Japan, why does it work in Japan, and how does that translate to what he's doing here. Right? But the other thing is, yeah, I live outside of the United States. How do I do it? Talk to Apical. They probably already have a permit and if they don't, they will get one. He goes up next, says, hey Ryan, hope you're doing well. My question is about the making and usage of keto, keto slash fertilizing. In early end of summer, I started making my own keto to apply on top of my bonsai soil, especially conifers that have sunlight available for 12 hours a day. I tried different tests for making keto, but so far my formula, one-third shredded sphagnum, one-third shredded live moss, one-third shredded akadama, plus shredded bio gold. It worked fairly well as moss grew easily after application, kept the pot cooler. It also retained more moisture, especially on the upper portion of the pot. In that scenario where roots can be kept under a certain temperature range, would you continue to apply slow organic release fertilizers in low quantities? And for example, would you do this every five weeks of applications throughout the summer? Okay. And I want to just answer a tidbit of the previous question I didn't. Biggest deficiency, calcium, calcium, calcium. What's the next biggest deficiency? Calcium, calcium, calcium. And after that, what was the next biggest deficiency? Calcium, calcium, calcium, right? And then after calcium, carbon, carbon, carbon, carbon, carbon, carbon, and phosphorus, those three, right? Calcium, carbon, phosphorus, three biggest deficiencies. Keto. Keto is muck. Muck is designed to adhere roots to a stone on a vertical face. It should not be used in your bonsai cultivation anywhere else. It is not ideal. It is a very low level of oxygen and very anaerobic, which decreases your ability for respiration. It shouldn't be put on the surface of the soil. It is not a nutrient. The organic fertilizer that you put into the Keto, that is the nutrient, right? The first thing I would tell you is, before we went wrong, where we thought putting Keto on the surface of our soil is positive, that is the worst thing that you could do. Keto is a terrible environment to cultivate a bonsai tree in. On a flat surface, Keto will absolutely starve and destroy a tree over a long-term period of cultivation, okay? Now, the fertilizer itself, on a monthly basis as organic fertilizer, was the fertilizer methodology that has been applied and continues to be applied in bonsai. I'm offering a different level of information. Understanding the capacity to test, regardless of where you live in the world, through apical, so that you know you develop a custom understanding of how you treat this tree to maximize its productivity. And again, we're working on developing those ranges right now, so that the world has a baseline to function off of. Even though we don't have those, David will absolutely be able to improve the health of your tree with his recommendations based on the tests he gets from your plant. So I would say scrap the Keto unless you're creating rock plantings and you're trying to get it to stick to a vertical face. I would say organic fertilization is the current application methodology that we've had and can continue to use. But you should, after that lecture, understand why it is limited, because eventually it will form a toxicity and deficiency, and that's when we start to see insect and disease pressure and all of the things that start to lead to a lack of sustainability. Gary's got a question. So on the point of importance of summer fertilizing, what do we do for something like a Japanese maple that's in refinement? I had thought that we fertilize after partial defoliation and then again only in the fall. Yeah, and what I'm saying is, so you guys really have to separate yourself from what we talked about in the, and I'm not saying abandon that, I'm not saying abandon that, right? This is your choice. And David said it himself, I'll tell you from my experience, you got to dedicate to this. This is an option, it's not a direction. It's not you need to do this. It's, hey, this is here, and I've seen it produce something that I've never seen in my career as a bonsai practitioner, right? Take it or leave it. Everybody wants to know, hey, how do we do this better? How do we nutrition things? What's the next level of information? This is it. As far as I'm concerned, this is it. It's changed Mirai for the better, right? And so now if you're saying, yeah, but you said this about Japanese maples. Okay, well, everything that I've said to date, if you're going to shift this new system does not apply. It does not apply. Okay, this new system is completely different. Why can we then fertilize in the summer with this new system? Because we're not applying salts. We're applying things that are continuing to enhance the fortification of the tree's vascular system without adding the components that made summer fertilization dangerous. And so for a Japanese maple, and we're saying, okay, but it's in refinement, aren't we going to get too much water, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera? No, because the components that add to that productivity are not what we're delivering. We're delivering things that fortify the plant, that support its vascular system, that continue to decrease toxicities, that balance its nutrition, et cetera. And that is where the value is. And that's where you have to make the change mentally. And I know it's tough because you've been fed this and now you're saying, dang it, Ryan, you're doing it again. But this time we tested it for two and a half years before we gave you any of the information. And I can tell you it works categorically. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Right. It is a defined system. This dude knows what he's talking about. It will improve your bonsai if you want to go this route. It is not easier. It is not more cut and dry than taking a commercial product and dumping it on the surface of your soil. It takes work. You have to study. You have to learn. You have to observe. It is different in every way. It will create a higher quality of growth on your trees and a more fortified, sustainable tree. It's up to you. I'm not saying go do this. I'm saying, here's what i've found this is what we did here's what i've found here's the dude that knows from the horse's mouth bentley's asking what products are you using for calcium supplementation so when you get a rec from david he's going to offer a recommendation of what to apply to this tree to bring this tree into ideal ratios because it is all about ratios if you did not get that from the lecture ratios is all that matters right and he's going to give you products that get you that ratio that don't make it's not a sick plant being eaten by a sick animal being eaten by a human that's destined to be sick it is a healthy piece of of nutrition being digested by a plant that will gain health as a result of that nutritional component and most of those pieces are blue eden products not all of them in fact the longer that we do this the more that we have diverse products from different companies here's the most important thing to understand david as a savant level under you know practitioner of agronomy is creating is creating proprietary blends that are different than the same name of the same blue eden product i don't buy from blue eden not because i don't believe in james or don't believe in his product but i want the proprietary blend that david has created to minimize some weaknesses and maximize the qualities of the product that he recommends so i source my product from apical not i don't have any relationship to apical beyond i test with them i use his recs and it's made my trees much healthier but i do know that those proprietary blends are important for behaving in the way that the rec is meant to behave that's what i'll put out there take it as you will there are a number of different calcium forms out there there are enough a number of different phosphorus a number of different potassium you could buy those products you can test them and find their strengths and weaknesses through apical they can test fertilizers they can test liquid applications they can test biological inoculants they can test soil they can test water they can test leaf matter right so if you want to develop your own by all means go for it i don't have time i don't want to buy all those products and having them sit have them sitting around i want to know what works i know that they've tested them i know they know what that it works and that's what we've been applying gary's up next i feel i have heard somewhat of a mixed message from you on silica perhaps due to my own misunderstandings i feel like in one video you might have said that it can be magical and should be used to heal and protect growth and then maybe it was a forum q a you said well it's part of the complete apical nutrition regimen so it's really hard to say something about how it can stand alone without the testing protocols etc so if we aren't going to be going with the clinical route would you could you please clarify the roles of silica if any without the testing protocols yeah i think i think david spoke to silica super super clearly uh in the lecture silica is really uh transformational um i can tell you you're going to apply silica and you're not going to see any difference and i think one of the biggest things about it is to is to recommend silica you apply it and you see no difference and you say dude what the heck you know he's told me this was going to be revolutionary okay well as you're treating and changing nutrition going with this understanding of your vascular liquids and what the nutrient content that your plant is digesting out of the soil and water that you're applying uh this silica has the ability to buffer a lot of things if you're not going to go that route can silica still help help absolutely are you going to know how it's helping absolutely not so you know i think i think silica is going to be a great tool to help you with that so far talking to david they've never seen silica toxicity i don't know if you can achieve silica toxicity i don't know if that's a thing but i don't think so and he does not believe so as well from what i understand of what he's discussed i see any of these nutrients being a pivotal part of a complete system of nutrient balancing but silica definitely can help your plant whether using the apical system or not always pushing the envelope of knowledge and david for being courageous enough to work with us bonsai weirdos yeah right that's great it's been a learning experience for him and us this is huge given the unlikelihood of being able to get enough foliage to re-test in a single season how do you approach second and third treatments what changes might you make for treating heading into dormancy and how late in the season would you make your last application i mean i'm treating year trees are going to be in a greenhouse uh they might uh they might lightly freeze or you know i think they're probably kept from getting that that uh that cold where they would actually freeze we we were treating year round we i think we applied three or four drenches over the course of the winter because it's the one time of year that a plant can detox right it can shed its foliage and get rid of uh of excesses but in terms of truly inside of the plant system you know cleaning out it it would be like it would be like a fruit cleanse or like a juice cleanse or like a um what do you call it when you uh fasting or something right the winter time is when the tree can expel a lot of that chloride expel a lot of that aluminum and that's bound in silica and it's deposited out of the plant here's the problem with i can't test what should i apply we know that carbon we know that calcium and we know that phosphorus are important you can get too much phosphorus in a plant you can get too much calcium in a plant you can get very little and then you can average it out of the plant but it's time consuming so you're going to be dealing with really healthy plants and we can increase the quantity of functional nitrogen in a plant in general though when you have really unhealthy plants as long as we know what the lack of health is is it chloride is it aluminum is it manganese is it magnesium right is it sodium there's others but like chloride magnesium going to be using calcium silica to decrease aluminum or we're going to be using calcane to decrease chloride we're going to use carbon to purify the system we're going to use phosphorus to up the energy those are relatively safe additions that we have seen in the plant system as a general assume now i am not saying go apply those i'm not saying the rate that you apply those that i'm not saying that that is a an end-all be-all you've got to be careful anything can become toxic but if your plant is unhealthy and we have a test that tells us the lack of health that is how we start that process and understand the things that we can apply sort of when we don't have a sample to be providing that keep us on track tree beard steve some of us even in the us are a long way away from apical if we were trying to rely on geographically closer testing such as as an extension office what specific tests could we ask for can't do it can't do it i mean there's the the the mail works magically you know i mean stick a sample in the mail mail to apical there is not another sap testing process that's proprietary to apical they use a water extraction methodology they've had to refine it they've had to refine it since they've started working with us they've had to change their protocol when you go to an extension office to an extension office typically or you go to a university they're using a cornell extraction method that's an acid-based methodology it gives inconsistent results the same sample tested multiple times multiple results and it will inevitably tell you that your plant has enough calcium i can tell everybody your plant is calcium deficient i can tell you beyond a shadow of a doubt there might be one in every 200 samples that has enough calcium in it 199 out of 200 samples are going to be calcium deficient that's the ratio that we have found over the course of time testing at mirai testing with our students outside of mirai across the country across water phs across different uh species across different environmental conditions it's almost inevitable and if you submit a test to your extension office and they tell you your plant has too much calcium or enough calcium you automatically know that it's false i can beyond a shadow of a doubt tell you that is absolutely true and that's the case by the way i want to say this to people who are looking at this and i want them to understand that um you know you're not talking about uh a lab that is different than other labs around the country but most of them can do the same thing you're talking about a lab that is one of the only labs in the world doing what is happening to the degree that david i don't think people realize how special it was to have him here because he's in brazil he's in japan he's in south africa he's in europe he's in australia he's great agronomy issues of wine cultivation, dry land wheat farming, citrus, nut crops. The olive issue in Puglia is his next project, and we're going with him. This is sort of the scale and scope that he's functioning at. For him to sit down here and talk about bonsai, talk about a gift, right? That was really something. Who goes up next? Hey, Ryan, I heard talking about calcium, that it's present in, for example, organic fertilizers. Can I assume calcium in tap water is also used by the tree? I'm asking because this year I'm using a filter on my tap water to water my trees that's supposed to reduce mineral chlorine that's present in the water. Knowing the tap water in my area is fairly good from my last repot, would you consider continue using the water, or does the calcium present in the water, is that enough to bring a certain amount inside the pot? Not at all. Not at all. Not available form of calcium. And David said it in the lecture, right? Almost all magnesium is available, almost all calcium is unavailable. There's only a very, very limited amount of calcium resources that the plant can actively take in. One of the reasons, and again, I just want to be very clear, I don't have a commercial relationship with Apical, okay? I'm just telling you what I've learned from the past two years. One of the hard things to find is available calcium. That the plant can take in. One of the unique things about the Eden products is the Eden base solution is made up of 200 plus plant hormones, saponins, and odd additives that allow the nutrients that are combined with that base to be accessible by the plant. It is very, very measurable. It is scientifically proven. Nobody knows what, James. It is scientifically proven. Nobody knows what, James. Agent did to that because it is proprietary, but that is a magical moment, right? And there are a few plant-related products that have struck this kind of balance. HB101 from Japan had a similar nuance of elements combined that had the ability to enact great change on plants. Different in every way from what James is doing, but same concept of taking all of these, you know, natural plant hormones, putting them together that allow it to be taken in by a plant without causing a stress response and be received in the microbial environment in a way that symbiotically allows microbes and plant root to engage in a positive relationship. So, when we start to talk about the calcium availability, those calcium products are literally priceless. They're literally priceless in terms of knowing that that's a calcium that's available to the plant, but also knowing that that's a calcium that has the ability because David's talking about calcium creating new cells, but one of the things that calcium does is as calcium levels, because most of our trees are deficient, as they're brought up, they bring toxicities down. The majority of the first phase when you apply calcium will not register as a calcium increase in your plant. It will register as a toxicity decrease in your plant. Only once your toxicities are down will you see calcium go up. Even though you're applying calcium and calcium and calcium, your calcium levels don't rise until your toxicities come down, and then we start to see that improvement. That becomes phase two. So, know your tap water, that calcium, not in a usable form to the plant. I would say the only way to know your tap water is good is to test it. Looking at it, assuming the plant is doing well, is not saying that your tap water is good. And I really, the first time this was brought to me, I want to defend Steve. I want to defend Hugo, because I want to defend David. I want to defend David. I want to defend David, because I think we're probably all thinking this. God, testing seems like a lot of work. Maybe I could go to my extension agent. I mean, my plant seems healthy. My tap water must be pretty good. When Ian Hunter did the compost extract and we didn't have any more solutions after it kind of melted down, he's like, man, the only thing you can do is test. And I looked at my garden, and I'm like, Ian, I can't test all these plants. Well, two and a half years later, guess what I'm doing? I'm testing all of those plants, because it was the only solution to know and to understand. And so, listen, if this is too much work, don't do it. I'm not telling you to go do this, that you have to do this to be a student of Mirai or anything else. I'm saying this is what Mirai's doing. We've continued to share when we have successes and failures. We've learned from our failures. We share our failures, because nobody did that for me, and I had to go to freaking Japan to learn bonsai. Now, 13 years into this, I'm telling you, this has revolutionized my bonsai approach entirely, changed my focus, changed my understanding of aesthetics, changed my understanding of horticulture. It's up to you, and it's totally your journey, whether you take this on or not, but to not talk about it is to keep doing the thing that led to a tremendous amount of chemical application and continue to decrease the health and viability of our trees in the internal system that allows them to have the resistance, so you be the decider of how you want to handle it. But there are no workarounds to it. There are no shortcuts. This is the solution. Roberto is up next. Hi, Ryan. Now that it's very hot, can potassium, be given to increase the resistance of plants to high temperatures? No, potassium is not what increases resistance to high temperatures. That is actually the exact opposite. And again, it is all about ratios. So if you haven't tested your plant and you say, all right, it's hot, I'm going to give it potassium, that could be the exact thing that kills your tree. That could be the exact thing that catalyzes a spider mite infestation. There is nothing that you can apply to your tree without a test that you know will benefit it. I'm guessing, right, and I'm going to go ahead and pull back and say, I'm going to guess 99 times out of 100 applying calcium would be good, but just calcium alone does not get it done because you don't have the test to know what else along with the calcium your plant needs. And so if you are not testing, there's nothing that I can say you should be applying because I don't know and I do know that you don't know. I know that we don't know what's inside that plant unless you test. Gary O., given the importance of silica, was there any discussion with David about adding some diatomaceous earth to the soil mix as a source, or is it not in a form that is accessible to the plant? Correct. Not in a form that is accessible to the plant. All right, Kathy is up next. Because let me just say that. Oh yeah, go for it. He talked about there is a continual decreasing quantity of soluble silica, right? It's been decreasing for a while. It's been decreasing for a long time in our soils he said this is hypothetical but he's willing to bet and i would i would bet with him right silica that's engaged in diatomaceous earth and a lot of other things is locked up right it's locked up as a aluminum silicate is one of the most abundant compounds in soil you don't get the silica you don't get the aluminum they're tied together for forever available silica is much like plant available calcium it's a very rare and very specific form and chemical um what do you call that chemistry that allows that to be available and again if you're looking for that that's where i go to that eden product kathy is up next can you clarify aggregate versus animal nutrition and provide examples of each please aggregate forms of nutrition uh in the in what we discussed with david our mind from uh our mind is our mind is our mind is our mind it's our mind our mind is our mind it's our mind it's it's our mind it's our mind it's our mind it's our mind it's our mind it's our mind it's our mind from rock. Calcium carbonate would be a perfect example of a rock form of calcium carbonate mined, pulverized, now you have calcium carbonate in a dust or a powder. That calcium carbonate is then applied with or mixed with Eden base that allows it to penetrate the plant and now the plant has a usable form. Now not all calcium carbonate is created equal, not all calcium carbonate has the same impurities or toxicities and that's where knowing the mine and that's where James agent and the quality of his product is very very unique. So if you take that and you say okay calcium carbonate or bone meal, bone meal is a form of calcium from an animal byproduct, that animal byproduct and that calcium and that bone to David's point about the egg laying chickens versus the meat chickens, the broilers versus the layers are fed different things. Some of those are fed with high sodium and that calcium comes with high sodium and now you apply that calcium carbonate to the plant and that calcium comes with high sodium and you apply that bone meal that has high sodium and you get high salt plus calcium. Well that salt is antagonistic to calcium. So does that calcium from that bone meal actually become a benefit to the plant or does the sodium become a negative to the plant and make the calcium unavailable? You don't know. You have no way of knowing that and that's the problem with animal based byproduct is you have no idea what was fed, you don't know what the negative aspects of each of those are and the problem is nobody does. Nobody does and that product that you buy off the shelf, that bag of bone meal, that bag of blood meal, that bag of cotton seed, any of those things, you have no idea what that came with, what it was treated with, what it was fed with to be able to understand the protagonistic antagonistic relationships of just buying a bag meal and saying that's my form of calcium. There's so much more that goes into it. Roberto, is it useful to add humic acids to a soil made of aggregates to introduce some organic substances? There are times where humic acids are positive and there are times where humic acids can be utterly destructive and negative. You wouldn't know unless you tested. There's also humic acids that are high in linardite that are chock full of soluble aluminum that will pump your tree full of toxicity and there's humic acids that are derived from linardite resources that are low in aluminum and can benefit your tree by increasing cation exchange sites in the container. It depends on what your source of humic acids are, where they come from, the aluminum content, and it also depends on what your nutrient system in your containerized environment is, what you're going to continue to be adding, whether or not that humic acid will benefit or potentially catastrophically impact your plant. I've had humic acid benefit plants. I've seen humic acid almost kill a tree based on the fact that the condition in the containerized environment was not positive. We added more cation exchange sites which actually held more toxicity and took us farther down the hole of health. Alright, Kathy's up next. From what you've said in previous streams, it sounds like you need a fairly large amount of foliage for some of the testing. Where does that leave those of us who have mostly shohine or choohine size trees? Yeah, so David's developed better and better testing methodologies to be able to test off of lower and lower sample quantity. For a broadleaf tree, you just need enough leaves to cover the palm of your hand. That will be enough. For a juniper, you need a half of a sandwich baggie to be able to test. For pine needles, half of a sandwich baggie. So, it used to be a full sandwich bag, plump full that we had to provide and that was tough on trees that were sick. We had to take samples from multiple trees of the same species just to get enough to test and understand a very, very broad overview of that species. Now we're able to take a minimal amount when we prune and do our normal thing because plants are growing and we've worked through this process and it's very easy for us to test as a routine part of our bonsai practice. We're not going out and sampling to get a sample to test. We're just pruning and then we send that off. We prune, we send that off. We prune, we send that off. That's how the process has become. But two years ago, we were having to take a sample from five different Japanese maples or ten different Rocky Mountain junipers just to get enough to be able to test and barely understand what are my Rocky Mountain junipers dealing with. Sylvia's up next. Is it advisable? Is it advisable to use calcium with BioGold Fertilizer? Well, BioGold Fertilizer, one of its shining characteristics is that it has 13% available calcium. One of the challenges with BioGold is it has an equal or even greater amount of magnesium and the calcium magnesium ratio is so incredibly important, right? And so when you use BioGold as more and more of the cation exchange sites in your bonsai container are occupied by potassium and by magnesium and by phosphorus and by these other elements, we get less and less calcium being held in the soil system, more and more magnesium, and you get a lopsided ratio of calcium and magnesium. But in the beginning, the calcium and BioGold is super powerful after a tree has been repotted and it's developing new root growth and we start lightly feeding. BioGold is a really good. Nutrition to add. It's just over the long run, the calcium magnesium ratio, some of the other elements, which there is quite a bit of aluminum and BioGold and there's quite a bit of sulfur. There's quite a bit of sodium in BioGold. It can accumulate in toxicity. BioGold is still a really great. I mean, it's a it's a brilliant whoever made it brilliant creation. It does come with any other fertilizer that has a lot of L.A. elements added. And as a one size fits all, it comes with limitations. Ben's up next is the Mega Cal Sil from Blue Gold, a good product to use throughout the summer and winter seasons. It is one of two calcium resources, Mega Cal Sil and Cal King, right? Mega Cal Sil is great at providing calcium that will bring aluminum level aluminum toxicities down. Cal King is great at bringing chloride. Toxicity is down. So depending on which of those two common toxicities and bonsai you're dealing with, Cal Sil is good for one situation. Cal King is good for another. Sometimes using them both is also a great solution, but you can get to a point where one or the other is equally as detrimental as it is positive. And unless you know your calcium ratios and you know what your toxicities are, you don't know which one of those is going to better benefit your tree. Again, you got to test to know. Brennan, is there a safe way of lowering pH? I'm concerned that using products based on phosphoric acid would contribute negatively over time. Would vinegar, acidic acid, be our best option? I think vinegar is the safest option for sure. All right, Kevin, when looking at ways to introduce carbon to the plants, has he looked at the use of urea triazone? It has a ratio of one to one of carbon to nitrogen. Also has a low toxicity. And burn potential. So urea is a manufactured product. And I don't want to speak for David, but I think the whole goal of sustainable nutrition, regenerative agriculture is to not be leaning on industrial farming produced components. And urea would be one of the great destroyers of soil profile, regardless of what you combine urea with. From what I understand. So I think that's probably actually counter. I think that's like David's here. That's like over here is like that's a don't do for this system. It seems to me, you know, the purest form of nitrogen, nitrogen fixing microbes that pull out atmospheric nitrogen and they fix it as a straight into without any associated byproduct. When you're using sustainable forms of nitrogen. Typically, those are complex amino acid chains and most of the time those will break down into multiple forms of nitrogen from ammonium to ammonia to nitrate to nitrite. And you want an even distribution of nitrogen forms in your plant because nitrogen is going to turn into a lot of different forms with heat, with metabolic activity through the action of the plant over the course of the season. And having that diversity is important. But ultimately, it's not. It's not. It's not. So probably the most oxidized form of nitrogen is the most preferable, which is nitrate. David did say, hey, listen, nitrate is a known carcinogen. It's why you try to get nitrate free bacon or sandwich meats, deli meats because it is not good for human consumption. Too much nitrate is just as bad as too much ammonium. We want a balance of things. And again, it's all about the ratios. Roberto, I've read that some Japanese masters fertilize their bonsai with a small amount of fertilizer at each watering. Is that true? and what do you think about it? I think there's a lot of ag-related endeavors that fertilize a little bit constantly. I think that's an awesome way to go about it. And in fact, I think that is more closely related to nature than like big doses and then no doses, right? It's just this constant little trickle would be the most ideal. What is that solution? You know, what is that dilution? What are those elements you're delivering on a continuum? I think that system has not been worked out. It's a system we've definitely considered at Mirai. I think the more we go into those systems, the less accessible it becomes to everybody. But maybe someday that is what we do. I don't know. We're not quite there yet. And actually, the solution to that is to find a pelletized form of dry, solid nutrition that you can apply and supplement with liquids. And that is actually where we've focused our efforts is working through dry pelletized formulations of the right forms of nutrition that we can apply to the surface and supplement with liquids. And we are getting closer with that. We're experimenting with pelletized fertilizers a lot right now. And these are custom blends that we're working with David on, proprietary blends. Renny's up next. David stated that when a plant achieves stabilization and then optimization, one of the signs is increased leaf. Has Ryan ever discussed with him how to balance the need for good nutrition with the desire in bonsai to have reduced leaf size? Totally. And here's the thing. When you're talking about, and this is where you have to understand, you've got the island of bonsai, the rickety bridge that crosses over and the world of horticulture or what we have now sort of expanded to the larger scale agronomy, right? He's seeing that for an uncontrolled root system in the in-ground environment where you're trying to maximize sugar starch productivity to increase the yield and the nutritional content of fruit. We're dealing with a aggregate soil system that has a particle size that causes roots to bifurcate in a controlled and confined environment. Even when you are achieving optimization, the leaf size and needle size of our plants will not increase to a degree where we see that type of reduction. What we get through foliar management practices, partial defoliation, decandling, candle pinching, is we have the capacity to take that and distribute that energy over and over and over again. And so what that equals is first flush has large leaves, we partially defoliate and prune. Second flush has slightly smaller leaves. If we have the increased vigor of optimization, we partially defoliate and prune again and we get two, three, four sets of ramification on a single year of growth. That's a lot of work. That's a lot of work. That's a lot of work. That's a lot of work. That's a lot of work. Ending with the small leaves and short internodes that we want, that energy of the big leaf, we use technique to transition that energy to get the kind of scale and proportion we're seeking. We just get more productivity of the growth over a year than we would with common fertilizer practices. So technically, this would help you build a better bonsai faster. Morgan Jeff, he's got kind of a two-parter here. How does silica work to detoxify? Can you explain how that works? What is TP that you spoke of earlier and can you provide any charts of ratios? TP. What's TP? The TP. I don't know the TP. I don't know what TP. Jeff, let us know if you can clarify that. Yeah. TP. Silica. Yeah. So silica. So let's just take aluminum silicate. You've got all of this aluminum and it's bound with silica. Right? And he talked about carbon, these carbon chains, a little bit of oxygen, carbon, carbon, carbon, carbon, nitrogen, right? Like these complex chains of carbon and the more carbon you get, the more stable the environment. And carbon fiber was the example. Inside the tree on a microenvironment, the more complex the carbon chains, the more complex the amino acid chains, the better and the more fortified the plant is going to be, okay? So when you start to talk about, okay, so I've got aluminum or I've got chloride or I've got sulfur or I've got iron and you add silica, silica binds that as an insoluble, inaccessible, less toxic compound and the plant through the vascular system expels that out of the roots. Right? And that's exactly how we talk about silica purifying. And this is one of the things that I was not aware of is in the foliar mass, if we apply silica and I've got a tremendous amount of aluminum and it grabs that aluminum, that's going to go all the way down the plant. When plants shed their old needles, pines drop their needles, junipers shed their needles, deciduous trees shed their leaves in the fall, a lot of that is aluminum silicate. That's being taken out of the plant, right? A lot of that is iron silicate being taken out of the plant. And so we recognize that either through that leaf shed or through that detox out of the root tip over the wintertime, those are the two moments that we're able to actually physically remove toxicity. And you clarified, I guess it's ATP. Oh, ATP is stored usable energy, right? We take glucose. We run it through the Krebs cycle of respiration. It's combined with phosphorus through a series of processes, very complex. I had to memorize the Krebs cycle in its entirety in college, very, very complex. And what you get out of that, the phosphorus molecule at the center of long-term stored energy from that short-term glucose produced through photosynthesis. That's what ATP is. All right. Melissa is up next. Ciao, guys. This is so interesting. Here in Europe, it's quite popular. They're quite popular. Foliar spray products derived from algae or from seaweed, of course, not all products are made the same or have the same quality. But what do you think of a prolonged use of these products? And also, which concentration of silica do you use? Well, it depends on what the silica product is. But if you're using Eden Gold silica, we just follow the dilution ratio. We follow the dilution ratio David gave us, honestly, which is something we're going to have to publicly provide if we're promoting this kind of nutrient system, which we'll figure out a delivery mechanism for. But currently, I don't have, like, Melissa, it's one tablespoon per gallon. I don't know. Right? And you're functioning in liters anyway. So then all of a sudden, that gets super complex. Here's the deal with ocean-based products, okay? In order to maintain the complexity of fish hydrolysate or of seaweed or kelp extracts, when you boil them, when you heat treat them, you break down the complexity. Okay? And that's when the amino acid chain becomes much more complex. Okay? And that's when the complexity of the amino chain becomes much more simple. And more than anything, it effectively becomes an immediately plant-available chemical form of nutrition because it is so simple and not complex. The plant can take it in. It moves. It does all of its things. And you say, oh, my gosh, that's great. But again, the inside of the plant is being fed McDonald's. The outside of the plant is showing you what you interpret as health. Okay? So then you say, okay, to maintain the complexity of those amino acid chains, to maintain the complexity of the hormones that are valuable in fish and seaweed, you run it through a cold-press cycle. When you run it through a cold-press cycle and you don't heat treat it, you maintain the sodium and the chloride content that comes with ocean-based products. And so consistently treating with it, although it may have beneficial aspects and there may be times where it does benefit the plant, to continually do it does apply a large amount of sodium and chloride. And so you have to balance that with all things in your nutritional system because if sodium gets high, now it antagonizes calcium. Calcium deficiency means your plant stops growing as much or starts to show issues. You get a rise of magnesium. Now all of a sudden other things start to take on issue, and then we see insect and disease susceptibility. I'm not saying kelp is bad. Kelp is great. I'm not saying fish hydrolysates are fine. I'm not saying your fish emulsions are bad. Fish emulsions are great. But there is a complex conversation or a three-dimensional consideration of using these elements as it pertains to balanced nutrition inside of the vascular system of your plant. And if you know that, you can use them, you can test, you can see how it benefits or detracts from that nutrient balance that you're striking to achieve. And then you responsibly have the ability to handle that as a resource or a potential nutrient that you want to decrease or completely eliminate from your nutrient applications. And for us, where we are at with our pH and all of the characteristics at Mirai and what I've seen sort of across the board in North America is that those are not necessarily what we want to be applying in bonsai because they can be quite dangerous. And that's counter to what people are saying. And that's fine if you're having success. I don't want to impact that. I don't want you to stop. But I think if you tested, you would have a much greater understanding of how that's impacting your plant by the sodium and chloride levels and potentially even the magnesium levels. Okay? Second thing, second most abundant element in the ocean besides sodium in terms of dissolved solutes is magnesium. Magnesium and calcium, that ratio is imperative for plant health. Bentley, how did you come to learn about apical ag? I came to learn about apical ag through Ian Hunt. Ian Hunt is a mountain hunter. And he, from the beginning, really recommended that I test. I didn't want to test. He believed in the soil food web and Dr. Ingham's science of biology being the key. The confined environment of the bonsai container is incredibly unique. You heard David say this is the most complex system that we've dealt with in terms of apical ag's sort of stable of clientele. Bonsai is number one. This is a... Everybody, be really clear here. Be really clear here. We are doing something that is a horticultural anomaly. It is completely crazy. And yet, in doing so, the aesthetic value of a tree and its ability to connect to people is astronomically elevated, okay? But the horticultural system to create this aesthetic and the confined environment is a horticultural nightmare, right? And so, as such, the soil food web didn't quite apply because we're using an aggregate system with low carbon. And the biology inside of... The soil system hinges on the presence of carbon, right? And so, that's where David said or Ian said, look, I've taken you as far as I can. I don't know what else to do. You need to test or else we're not going to be able to figure this out. We started testing. Lo and behold, it's been a completely different perspective on what's going on and how we go about handling it. And I knew that there was a new frontier. I've talked about this a lot. There was a new frontier in bonsai. Was it going to be a technique that altered things? Was it going to be an additive? Was it going to be a soil shift? Was it going to be a tool? Was it going to be a personality? Now, it turns out that plant nutrition is something that we don't know that much about and this dude does. Bentley, do you happen to have any long-term before and after pictures of the changes that you're seeing in the trees? That's a really good... Yes, that is a really good point. I actually have the trees documentary that comes out. In December, through HBO, when I got to see that, there's a really world-class juniper at Mirai and it's chock-full of foliage, Rocky Mountain juniper, and all the foliage is just hanging off of the plant and I'm moving it around on the dingo. That same tree right now, without any of that foliage having been wired since that was filmed, is completely upright and perky. The color is entirely different. The density is entirely different. I didn't touch a single thing. I didn't do a single thing. There are some references that will start to show. I have several ponderosa pine that had not back-budded. I have Sierra junipers that were long and leggy. All of those trees regrowing from the interior out. That might be something that in the future we put together. It isn't necessarily something that I have accumulated yet. I like that idea. I like where you're headed. Treebird Steve, maybe I missed something and if so, I apologize, but during the lecture on watering, you'd said that summer was the season to balance between over and under watering. If you inadvertently overwater, hold back a bit the next time. Today you were saying that we should water every day in the summer. Could you clarify? No, I'm not saying you should. I'm saying in the summer you typically do water more. Because of the temperature, more transpiration, more water being moved through the tree. I'm not saying you should be doing anything. I don't know your tree. I don't know balance water and oxygen. Exactly what I said in the watering lecture stands. It's totally accurate. I'm not reneging on any of that. I'm saying when you're watering more because it's hot, our common thought process is that we wouldn't be fertilizing, but you have to realize you're watering more and you're not fertilizing. Therefore, your plant is needing more. It's taking in more. We're washing out more. If you're applying salts at that time, it is counterproductive. If you're applying appropriate forms of nutrition, it's the most important time to be nutritioning your trees. Bob Muller, I'm planning on retesting leaves from my deciduous trees at the very end of the season just as the start of the color change. Given that the leaves are old, what do you think of this approach? I don't think so. I don't think it will tell you much if the color has started to change because the plant has already physiologically started to break down the compounds and reabsorb what it can. I think you would be far better off and more informed to be testing prior to. We know that you're not supposed to be reducing foyer mass on your broadleaf trees at this time of year. It's not the time. We're past that time. There is a limited amount of information we could obtain unless you have a really dense tree. Even a handful of broadleaf will get you that test. I think you can decide how to handle it, but waiting and once the color change starts or waiting that late in the year, there's not much you can do at that time anyways. That is really important to understand. The fall season, you're building up energy, but your ability to correct toxicities and deficiencies is kind of disempowered. The most you can do is help the plant detox, and there's a fairly straightforward solution to detoxing, which is calcium and carbon. Kim, could you repeat? Could you repeat the biochar product that you alluded to in the beginning? I was impressed with the podcast. They said there's different qualities of biochar according to the production methods. The biochar that we alluded to is the pro-bio-carbon from Karen O'Hanlon out of Ireland. Good biochar is created by the right beginning substance being handled at the correct temperature, under the correct pressure, for the correct amount of time. That's what we're looking for. That creates usable porosity and the right kind of behavior on the surface of that particle. The olive stones that Karen and her team are using have been highly scrutinized. I think David Apical is also working on a biochar that they really find and have tested to be really good. You might inquire about that with them. Also understand that biochar is a highly, highly, highly, highly, highly water-retentive component. And that's where Karen and everybody that will tell you about biochar will tell you 5% of your soil mass. That's your max biochar content that you can put into the bonsai container with a shallow gravity column before it starts negatively impacting the water-oxygen balance. But ask Apical about their biochar. I know they've been working on it pretty diligently. Gary O., bone meal seems to have fairly large amounts of phosphorus, calcium, and carbon. Not as a substitute for an Apical test or rec, but do you think that bone meal is a useful product for bonsai? Absolutely. Absolutely. I mean, I think bone meal is probably because we don't have large amounts of biology and the aggregate forms of calcium demand biology to break them down. So if you're using an aragonite, if you're using a wollastonite, you have to have the microbes in the soil. And the bonsai container in the aggregate situation with low carbon content typically doesn't facilitate that kind of biology, as we learned through the experiments with Ian's science. The bone meal can be a really reliable and good form. I think the problem is knowing whether it's a high quality of bone meal or whether it comes with a lot of negatives in addition to those positives. But that is something that we're asking. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. So we're actively experimenting with the forms, the supplier of bone meal, which bone meals work better, how they alter the calcium, phosphorus, and nitrogen content, because there is nitrogen in bone meal as well. And so these are the things that we're testing in the solid proprietary blends from different fertilizer manufacturers that source their resources from different ag-based situations and scenarios. Melissa is up next. You said your aesthetic has changed with this nutritional knowledge. That's very interesting. Can you explain a bit more about that? Yeah, sure. So if you're having to wire a tree because you're handling droopy growth and you've got to balance that growth, or if the growth of your tree is elongating without internal back buds, that's a different branch formation. That's a different technical application, and that's a different aspirational goal to wiring than if you are getting tight, compact growth that is upright and much more durable and rigid in its form. And so when you start to talk about the technical application of bonsai, you know, the reasons for wiring and the way that we handle the appearance of the foliage accommodates what you can match in terms of the natural behavior of the tree in its current state. So if the behavior changes, now your technique changes, now the aesthetic that you create in the pieces that you're wiring changes to match what the tree is giving you. And if the tree is giving you more perky, upright, sustainable growth, that's a different aesthetic, right? And if you're trying to take that into a much more rugged demonstration of growth, there are different ways that you can now wire, handle, manage, twist, turn, prune, pinch, and elicit those kinds of aesthetic responses. What I find is that there are a lot of different ways that you can now wire, handle, manage, twist, turn, prune, pinch, and elicit those kinds of aesthetic responses. What I find in trying to represent the natural form of a tree is that I'm having a far easier execution of those rugged forms from those far-flung places with a better nutrient balancing giving me that more fortified growth than I was having with the common bonsai model where I was trying to wire all of that behavior into the tree. I'm now getting that behavior. And I have to do far less to elicit a far more. Natural gesture in my trees. That's the change of aesthetic that I've noticed. Rob, not sure if this was asked already, but what's the role of pH in this? A large part of the calcium issues in nature are caused by the acidification of soils. What is the role of pH? So the first thing that I tell you guys to test is your water quality. If you don't adjust your constant input of water, then you can nutrient yourself, nutrient apply or nutrient balance yourself. Until you're blue in the face and it won't really do much. It's everything. It's everything. It's why we started with water and then went to nutrition. Your water pH being in that optimal range for greatest availability of all resources in that neutral position or slightly acidic of neutral is incredibly necessary. With acidity comes a complexity to the availability of certain things you don't want as well. So you sit in the sweet spot. And I would even sit on the slightly alkaline edge of neutral in order to decrease the negatives. And maximize the positives. But water pH from the beginning, water quality from the beginning, if you do not correct that, it doesn't matter what you do nutritionally. And so it is everything. Now, does Apical address water? They'll address water first. It's the most important thing you can do. I talked to David about nutrition because we talked about water last time. And I think water is relatively simple. Send him a water sample. Know what you're dealing with. Take the corrective measures he offers. And it's simple. Now you can focus on nutrition. We did that. We confronted that. Now we're here. In the lecture series, we did that. We confronted that. Now we're here in terms of nutrition. We already addressed that. And that's the assumption in this conversation. Just a couple more questions pending here. Danielle is asking how big of a batch do you guys mix for nutritioning? Do you guys water all the trees with the same batch? With David's Rex, I'm trying not to waste but also mix a batch that has a manageable conversion from the 50 gallon ratio that he gave me. Yeah. So David will say a mid-rate of HCF carbon, right? A mid-rate of Cal King. That is the quantity of material per acre. Per acre is per 50 gallons of water. The smallest batches that we measure out are five gallon batches because the concentration of a lot of the products that we have is meant to be applied to acres at a time. And there's no negotiating this. This is just what Eden is making because this is an agricultural, agronomy-based concentration. So we dub it down to the five gallon level even if we're just drenching one plant and then we take the excess and we water plants in the landscape with it or the lawn with it or the veggie garden with it, right? And that's been really fruitful as well. But when we get to that point. When we get a wreck, because we have 300 Rocky Mountain junipers, we're going to get five Rocky Mountain juniper wrecks. We're going to see what he recommends across our five Rocky Mountain junipers. And I'm going to take that information and I'm going to synthesize what the commonalities are that we can treat all Rocky Mountain junipers with. And I'm going to take the outliers of those five wrecks and I'm going to treat that one that does not abide by the commonalities of all the others and I'm going to treat that one specifically with its own five gallon batch, okay? If you are treating a very small collection, it would be ideal to sample every single tree and know exactly what it's doing, okay? But again, that is a challenging thing to do and we're working with the information we can obtain and we're doing our very best to deduce from the water plus the nutrition of these different pieces the common pieces we can apply to our trees. Inevitably what you're going to see? Calcium, phosphorus, and carbon. You almost can't go wrong. In the beginning of bonsai that have been cultivated through common industrial fertilizer means you will not need nitrogen. There's too much nitrogen in our bonsai. As a general rule, you're going to have high manganese, you're going to have high chloride, you're going to have suboptimal levels of aluminum and manganese. Those are the pieces that we're correcting in the beginning almost across the board from all the tests that we've seen across the country, across the species. Once you get past that point, your tree starts growing, producing more, the seasons go by, now you can start sampling more, now you can start to optimize balance and get into these different phases. But in the beginning, we just need to know where to start. All right, we just got one more that was an off-topic question from earlier. Bentley had asked, I did a partial defoliation on my olive earlier this year and just like last year, it's only really pushing new shoots at the tips even though I've laid all of the branches down. Generally, it's healthy. But the shoots overall are young. Is this just the nature of younger shoots or am I doing something wrong? Or is your tree just jacked full of chloride and the nitrogen has to bypass the chloride barrier and that's what's causing just the tips of your plant to grow? Or is your plant jacked full of magnesium and the only place that it has enough calcium? Is that the location where the greatest amount of water is transpiring? What we have found is happening is as we nutrient balance, what we thought were limitations to techniques were really just nutrient deficiencies or toxicities. What we thought as common behaviors of plants are really just nutrient deficiencies and toxicities. Again, floppy Rocky Mountain juniper foliage, everybody says, oh, that one's floppy, it sucks, blah, blah, blah. It just turns out it was a nutrient-related issue. That's what we found kind of universally across the board. It's been revolutionary for us. Sierra junipers don't readily backbud. It turns out it was a nutrient toxicity. I had no idea. I don't know what to say. I can't offer any more information than what I know I've scientifically seen, proven, and validated on my own through this process and application. You can't make a plant do what you want it to do if you haven't set it up to optimize and behave in that fashion. If your vascular system is full of garbage, that's like feeding a marathon runner a Big Mac and saying, go break the one-hour barrier. It isn't going to happen. The fuel in the tank is not there to drive that kind of performance. I want my olive to heavily ramify, and I've got a bunch of toxicities and deficiencies. The fuel isn't in the tank to do what you want that plant to do. I'm not saying that nutrient balancing solves all situations. This is not the silver bullet. To balance nutrition is hard. David said to do it, you can do it, and keeping it, that's really challenging. It is the commitment that we can make. I've seen it work. I've experienced it work. It's the commitment that I'm making. I'm sharing it with you. You guys take it and use it as you want. I have to be really honest. I would like to see people have more success in bonsai. What you guys do with your bonsai trees, I honestly don't care. I honestly don't care. It's up to you if you want to use this information. What I do care about is putting it out there and bringing attention to something that I've found to have radically altered the challenges that I've experienced as a bonsai professional cultivating 700 plus trees on an annual basis and the issues that I had to deal with. It's up to you. It's up to you. I'm just putting it out there. I'm saying I did this and it worked, and this guy has consistently produced results. You want to use it? You want to believe it? You don't want to believe it? You want to keep doing what you're doing? You want to use somebody else to test? You want to assume that? Rock out, man. Rock out. This exists. That's it. That's all we got for today. Yeah, yeah. And I'm not saying that you guys are resistant to it, but there is a huge resistance to it. There is a desire to not acknowledge this thing. There's a desire to pass it off as pseudoscience or woo-woo in the realm of fertilization or my trees are healthy. They look healthy just because some guy is saying that. Again, the inside is not healthy. He's full of shit. What does he know? He just grows vegetables. There's any number of ways to discount it. That's totally fine. Listen, again, I could not care less. Do what you want to do with your trees. People constantly ask me though, what's wrong with my tree? How do I fix it? How do I give it these things? How do I take care of this? How do I suppress this insect? How do I solve this fungus? How do I get this ramification? How do I maximize the benefit of my trees? Blah, blah, blah. How do I fix, fix, fix, fix? And I'm saying, this is what I've found. This is where you start. This is the beginning of it all. You decide. All right? I think we did it. Nutrition. All right. I love you guys. Thanks for tuning in. I hope that was a valuable use of your time. If it wasn't, you probably shouldn't tune into Mirai anymore, honestly. That's literally the best we can do. It's been tried. It's been tested. It has been validated across the board, across every species that we cultivate, across every student. We've recommended it to. We're not the right fit. If this kind of scientific proof doesn't work, we're not the right fit. I'll just tell you that right now. It does work. And use it as you see fit. It is now a tool that will exist on the platform that you can continue to reference. There's a company out there. There's a system out there. There's a methodology should you choose to use it. Okay? We're going to go drench. Love you guys. Mwah! Subtitles by the Amara.org community 
