What's going on, everybody? Hey! Ooh, been a hot minute since we've been in the studio. There is some slight PTSD slash very fond, familiar vibes going on here this morning for the next installment, first installment of 2024 of the Mirai Lecture Series. And the fact of the matter is, we have more to discuss. We've got more information to cover, more topics to solidify your bonsai practice with, more depth to be explored in the subject matter that I think a lot of us sort of fly over the surface of very superficially, you know, and I wouldn't have the ability to explore in depth if we weren't thinking about it from every angle that we could try and look at it or every angle we can facilitate. Anyways, got Lonnie producing the Mirai Lecture Series from home today, somewhere out in the ether, and you're as truly alone in the studio. Before we begin, a few announcements. The Michael James Podcast is up on Asymmetry, curator of the National Collection. Very interesting conversation had with Mr. James. It was nice to get to know him. I really do hope we get to work with the National Collection in the future. East Creek Ceramics are up in the web store. If you don't know about Joe and Aubrey, too, incredibly talented people. The East Creek Kilns and Joe and Aubrey helped us with the Triscally event. Their expertise and knowledge of ceramics combined with this facility that they've created and manage and run in terms of this wood-fired epicenter of ceramics in the Pacific Northwest, the fact that they started making bonsai pots, we are so fortunate. Got some Ron Lang vibes in there, some very artistic pieces from Aubrey. It's really, really beautiful work. Their first foray into bonsai. And it's only going to get better. App continues to be worked on. We're getting so close to the Broadleaf calendar. I'm so excited because when Broadleaf launches, it sort of opens the door for pro content and things to be on our doorstep. So stay tuned. You'll have a winter recap podcast coming up. I'm going to walk you through the epic ice storm that Mariah experienced, followed by the tropical river that we also had coming through here. But first, I want to thank you all so much for watching. We'll see you next time. First, let's focus this morning, okay? I don't want to be long-winded about this, but I want to be thorough about the subject matter. Bonsai process. Now, I walked you through repotting. But when you start to think about the art of bonsai, bonsai is a process. And when you start to say, okay, what is the difference between art and craft? I'm going to break it down for you real simple, like right here in the way that I perceive the difference between art and craft. You can disagree. You can yell at your monitor. Or you can say, oh, maybe he's got a problem. That's not the point, okay? Craft is the repetitious creation of a pattern over the course of time, right? With the pursuit of trying to enhance the quality and the beauty and functionality of the final outcome, okay? It is a duplication. It is a patternized approach. Craft is to execute sort of a continual pursuit of improving the final product, enhancing the efficiency. It is a duplication of the techniques and the steps so that you end up with a slightly increasingly more beautiful product over the course of time, okay? When you talk about art, what takes craft into art in my mind is an understanding of the highest level of technique in the craft, okay? So you have a mastery of craft to be an artist, number one. Number two, in order to get to that mastery of craft, you have got to be an artist. Number three, you have got to be an artist. You have got to be an artist. You have got to be an artist. You have got to be an artist. You have got to be an artist. You have got to be an artist. You have got to be producing a prolific body of work. Now, if you look at any insane artist, any game-changing artist, any artist whose work has that kind of power. I just watched a documentary on Anselm Kiefer. Anybody who wants to see an artist at the peak of their existence, Anselm, A-N-S-E-L-M. Anselm is the name of the documentary. It just came out. There is another documentary about Anselm called Over Your Cities. Grass Will Grow. You are talking about somebody who has pursued such a prolific body of work. His mastery of technique, the craft of painting, sculpture, and expression. He has done it all. And what he can create as a result of that mastery is significant based on the prolific body of work. He has explored his ideas. He has tracked and documented his narrative arc as a creative individual and as an artist who has something to say. Right? You talk about Picasso. You talk about Rembrandt. You talk about Van Gogh. We know Van Gogh for the last 16, 18, 20 paintings he created in his career. If you go to a Van Gogh museum or an exhibition, you're going to see so many crappy drawings and just completely lifeless paintings that you realize, wow, this guy was not the most talented painter in the world until suddenly he had produced a prolific enough body of work, explored himself in the context he's trying to represent. Right? And mastered the technique to get to the brush stroke that created Starry Night. Right? Mastery of craft, prolific body of work. Here's number three. You've got to have something to say. What are you trying to say? Right? Yes, art can be a hay bale in a room. You know, yes, art can be a urinal on the wall. What is the context by which, right? But I'm not, you know, okay? It can be. But then art can be so transported. It can be so incredibly enlightening. It can be so informative. It can be so stimulating. It can be so moving in a positive way. Right? You learn and explore. You tap into nostalgia. You understand something you've never seen. You see the beauty. You see potentially the pain. Right? You hate maybe as much as you like, but it's eliciting a response because the context of the creation has merit and depth in terms of something. That is being conveyed and discussed through that body of work, through that piece of art. Right? Mastery of craft, prolific body of work, and context. Create art. Okay? Craft. You cannot be an artist without being a craftsman. I'm sorry. I just don't believe that you can. And here's why this is important. Here's why this is important. A lot of people want to get into bonsai and jump from craft to art immediately. You can't do that. You can't do that. Right? Right? And what? Allows you to master the craft is understanding the process. Ah, yes, Ryan. Now it comes full circle. Here we go. Okay? You understand the repotting process. I'm going to pull a lot of different themes together today, aesthetically, visually, horticulturally, stages of development in this process discussion. But this process is specifically focused on the above-ground design of the tree. Okay? The above-ground design of the tree. And our process always has to start out with a level of familiarity. How do you get to know? How do you get to know the tree? And this is where cleaning, in my mind, is still the most mispracticed, under-focused, under-crafted aspect of bonsai. To be able to clean the foliage to give it the upward orientation without wire. To be able to get rid of all of the unnecessary things that are clogging up the aesthetic and the beautiful lines of the tree. To remove the components that continue to cause and enhance structural flaws. And then to make the selections that are going to create... To create the kind of structure, interest, and design nuance that allows your piece to have contextual power. This is all part of it. But when we talk about cleaning, this is an introduction. This is an introduction to the tree. Introduce yourself. Nobody has the kind of fluency in bonsai, including Masahiko Kimura. Including any of the great names in bonsai. Including what we do at Mirai. Nobody has the fluency in bonsai to walk up to a living organism and say, Alright, I'm going to start wiring. Right? And even with my advanced students, who have been studying with me for 10 years, when we come into the workshop, still process is an issue. Still it's an issue. Because the cleaning process is what allows you to get rid of all of the unnecessary, the unneeded, the superfluous pieces of the tree. To get to know the tree. And inside of this, in the cleaning process, we're talking about foliage. We're talking about live vineyards. On juniper work. We're talking about dead wood. We're talking about structural flaws. We're talking about weakened dead pieces. And inside of this, if when you're performing this very intimate act of saying, Hey, my name is Ryan Neal. What's your name? My name is Rocky Mountain Juniper number one. The connection that I had with that tree when I first started cleaning it. The front was completely different. I had no design concept when I set it on the turntable. The turntable is like a blank canvas because you're approaching that tree when you start this process and you put the bonsai or the raw material on the turntable. You are approaching this with a state of mind that you are going to give that maximum beauty and you cannot accept anything but the best that that tree has to offer. So as we're cleaning, we're looking at the tree from different angles. We're observing interesting branches. We're seeing the root and the base. The base be powerful from here. We're seeing more line from over here. We're seeing special features inside the canopy that we didn't notice before when we were looking at that tree because we were not intimately involved. There is no more important step in the process of bonsai creation than the cleaning process because it is what allows you to know the tree. And you have to know the tree first before you ever put your hands on the tree with a notion to change its shape and form. You've got to. You've got to know the tree right now. Most of us and we talk about this. The outcome of the cleaning process is not only a tree that is ready to be worked from all of those pieces that need to take place first. You don't want to style a tree and say, you know what? I'll come back and I'll clean the live vein later. I'll clean the deadwood later. Do you know what that is? That's an inefficient process. You know what that is? That's a process that's going in the wrong direction to not do those things first. Now, have there been streams? Where? Where we've done those things first? Absolutely. Because we have a two hour segment. Will we continue with that process? This is exactly why we've moved to the workshop sessions and the greenhouse sessions, because I realized that the production in a two hour window on a world class tree is taking the wrong process. And in order for you guys to evolve past what we've given you at Mirai, you've got to be a part of the process intimately from the beginning to the end. That is the goal of the new live streams. If you missed it on Thursday, we're going to do another one. This coming week where you can join me once again in the greenhouse for more pivotal repots we've been crushing in the greenhouse, but the process of each of these individual endeavors, there's a process for cleaning, there's a process for live veins, there's a process for deadwood, there's a process for branch selection, right? We're not going to go through all of that, but just understand that we have to understand the steps. And if you learn this, you're becoming a craftsman to become a craftsman or a craftsperson, and then to be elevating that prolific body of work. By understanding the context, now you're moving into becoming an artist, okay? The byproduct of all of this cleaning is not only having a workable piece, but this is what gives you the selection of the front. And you've got to work, you've got to dig. So many times in the bonsai creation process, people accept what the tree gives them, not what the tree has to give them, right? It's in this pot. The Yamadori collector put it in this pot, this Anderson flat, this box. This nursery container, because they needed to get the roots as they came out of the field, as they came off the mountain, into a situation and circumstance where that tree can recover. That's the only consideration of a collector or a field grower, is not to decide what's the best front. How do I maximize the visibility of this tree? That's not the concern. The concern is survival. The concern is recovery. So to limit ourselves at that, to not be able to read the material and the opportunities that exist inside of that design during the cleaning process is to do less than what the tree demands to maximize its quality. The outcome of working in all dimensions on this tree is seeing the best base, seeing the best line, seeing the special features, objectively starting to come up with the best of all three of these worlds, weighing out the position of the root mass, weighing out the likelihood and the possibilities of the design. And we've done it time and again on the stream. We've done it time and again with students. We've done it in the studio where we've got to be getting what the tree has to offer. Now does that mean changes of angle? Absolutely. Do changes of angle demand that we assess the root situation beyond a shadow of a doubt? Do we need to know to some degree an intuitive aspect of what we can facilitate in the repotting process to manage the angle that we're creating beyond a shadow of a doubt? Your repotting technique increases, again, mastery of craft, opens the door through a prolific body of work. Repotting a lot of trees over the course of your career to understand the thresholds. How far can I go? How much can I take off? What's the aftercare needed to support the survivability of this tree? Starts to empower you to think farther and farther outside of the box to get that base, to get that line, and to get those features into a position where we avoid parallel and perpendicular lines, circular lines, and we conceptualize the potential to really create something special. Okay? Now let's just go back for a minute and say, do we see that? Do we see that? Do we style first or do we repot first, right? Nursery stock, field grown material, typically we repot first. The repotting bench is not the place where we're going to find the best possible front, but we're going to start the process with the consideration of setting our roots up to facilitate a healthy tree that when we put that tree on the turntable, we're going to absolutely find a new front and it is going to be slightly off and we know we're coming back within two or three years to move that tree probably into a better pot at the appropriate angle with the design solidified. But when we talk Yamadori, the ideal circumstances for Yamadori are definitively to style first once the tree has recovered, give it a year to respond to the styling, and then to repot in that position knowing that with a piece of Yamadori, we're not coming back two years later or three years later, we're coming back five years later. And we want to make sure that that initial repotting sets that tree up for aesthetic success because the age of the material, the complexity of the material demands that we give it time in a container to establish that domesticated root system. Another part of process. The selection of front still to this day, I think is the most challenging aspect of design because we are too willing to settle. We are too willing to settle. We are too limited by what we're being provided by the container it is already in, not what the material has to offer. And if we can separate ourselves from that static line of that current planted position, and really look dimensionally at that tree, you've got to get what the tree has to offer and it has to be feasible in the repotting process. This is a product. So, you know, you say, can Ryan Neal get a better front than most people? Yes. Why? Because I know my repotting capacity, because my repotting capacity, my technical mastery of craft or attempt at mastery of craft, plus the prolific body of work and the experience gives rise to me. So, being able to say this tree sits on a cliff, cascading this tree is not the best use of the material. I'm going to have to work with the roots if they're up outside of the container, coming up with creative solutions to reduce the width of a crack root box, et cetera, okay? But the byproduct to understand this cleaning, not only preparing the tree for the styling process to end up with a finished product to the best of your capacity, the initial time that you design it should give rise to the selection of front. It should give rise. It should give rise because now you know the tree intimately, okay? So to bypass the cleaning process, to sort of think of the cleaning process as this rudimentary negotiable step, biggest mistake that I continue to see made in all of my most advanced students, not all. That's a very black and white answer, and this is a great discussion. In a majority of my students, that cleaning process. Still to this day, I've got raw material down in the workshop, and I have finished material down in the workshop. On a finished piece of material, guess what? I got to get to know it again. It's probably been a year or two since I've touched it. Whenever I approach a finished piece of material to take it to that next level, that next level of refinement from development to secondary, from secondary to its initial tertiary, I'm nervous because I don't know the tree as well. It's changed. It's evolved. It's grown. It's matured. I've got to go back in. I've got to clean, and I've got to see all of those opportunities, understand where the weak and strong exist, start to reform my concept of what the proportions of the foyer mass to the trunk and to the branching, what lines have come about, what new deadwood is there in the opportune composition. Is there a better front? Every time I sit down with a tree, I should always be assessing that. That doesn't mean that I'm restyling the tree every time. At this point in my career, if I'm objectively selecting the correct front for the tree, it should be consistent. I just repotted a mess. I had a massive limber pine collected by Todd Schlafer yesterday, and I completely flipped the entire design of the tree from the front to the back, changed the angle, dramatically repotted into an entirely new container aesthetic. Blew my mind. Blew my mind how much I was able to elevate the quality of the tree based on reassessing something that I had designed back in 2013, have sort of rode that design over the course of time. And in the entire evolution of this tree, an entire piece of the tree has been re-assessed. So I'm really excited about that. I'm excited. I'm excited. I'm excited. Concerning Summit and benefits, the tree is really on thebound. We had this about six years ago, the tree � juveniles had a big illustration to them. I was telling them, there have to be replacements. The trunk turned into deadwood and shed its bark. The base was stronger. The branching positions, through unfortunate circumstances, were broken, twisted, manipulated, and survived, and gave design opportunity. And now the tree actually tapped into that older aesthetic that I was looking for. And Todd sent me an initial picture of it, and then we compared it to yesterday's picture and the new potting angle. The first picture was beautiful. It was billowy. It was full, and it was young. The second picture, 10 years old. 10 years later, looks old, looks rugged, looks ancient. There's no better illustration of that transition than what happened yesterday in the repotting situation. And that was entirely created by bringing that tree into the studio, reconceptualizing the design with students last year, and redesigning the structure of the tree to facilitate that repot. Okay? So number one is cleaning. That's your introduction to the tree. That's what helps us. And I'm just going to grab a paper towel real quick because it's cold in here. Up there. Okay. And I'm going to just, I'm just going to put that selection of front as the byproduct of the cleaning process. Okay? We now know the tree. Tree is now ready to work. This is step one. Okay? Step two, structure. Okay? And I'm going to continue, not like a broken record, but a little bit like a broken record to say, okay, students that have digested. All right. I've got to do this cleaning process, right? There's degrees to the cleaning. The tree's not going to be finished cleaning. When we do the cleaning process, we're getting rid of the stuff that we know we don't need. We're getting rid of the stuff that can't be used and is unnecessary. We're getting stuff, rid of the stuff that's causing structural flaws. We're making branch decisions that contributes to the deadwood. We're doing the live vein. We're doing the deadwood work. We're making the gins. We're stripping the bark on those pieces that we don't need. We're clarifying the lines. We've selected the front. We know where we're lining the tree from. Now that tree in its position angled on the turntable with a concise understanding of best baseline features in the objective best of all three with the sacrifice of the best of any single feature, right? We take, maybe we lose a little bit of the base to get a little bit of better line and more visibility of the pieces that add age, the hollowness, the deadwood, the live veins, fantastic branch that gives character. To get that base, we might sacrifice some of the deadwood, sacrifice some of the line to have that visual stability. We understand that. And then we move into structure. Okay, now when we start to talk about structure, three most important pieces of structure, define the line base to tip. Okay, now define the line base to tip. I talk to you about this a lot on young material, on young material, piece of nursery stock. Are you now completely wide open? I've got some three or four-year-old Scots pine seedlings out there that I'm going to create a forest with. Do I have to or not have to find the best base of each one of those 30 Scots pine that's sitting out there in a flat in little seedling packs? I have to find the best base of each one of those, right? Because if I'm going to wire it, it doesn't mean that that's necessarily going to be the front of a tree in a group composition, but each one of those trees to be in a group composition needs to be maximized in terms of its character. I've got to find the best base. Now, each one of those needs the definition of the line base to tip. I'm going to be wiring the trunk all the way up to the apex to that line base to tip and create the environmental factors that represent the landscape or the elements acting on the tree, okay? Structure is where we represent environment, okay? And so what we'll do is we come back in here, we want to first define the line base to tip. We then want to give character, understanding the environment by the line either we're given, we're not going to change the trunk line on a 500-year-old piece of Yamadori. It's not going to happen. We may change the apical region, right? Base to tip, tip equals apex. So now we have the apex defined. We've already assessed, is the trunk moving to the right? Is the trunk moving to the left? We give character to the defining branch. We create that piece and understand the defining branch creates flow. The defining branch creates asymmetry in the way that it engages because we've already selected the front, which gives rise to trunk direction. We've already defined our apical region and now we're defining our defining branch. Every single branch on the tree is responding to the defining branch, okay? So to not put that four gauge, to not put that six gauge, to not put that eight gauge in play by adjusting the structure, of the line base to tip, and maybe that line is simply the way that the apex is handled. Highest structural element on the tree. Highest structural element on the tree, if I have elements higher than that, I'm either going to take them away or I better have a really good reason that I'm leaving them for the context of representing the landscape, okay? Most of the time, nine out of ten, apex got to be your highest structural element, okay? So now all of a sudden we have that. That may have triggered in the design process a little bit of a return to the core of the tree. So that's a cleaning or their preparatory step because now all of a sudden when we sit down with the selection of the front, we've cleaned out the stuff, we were sort of on the fence, do I want the apex to be here or here? And we start sort of analyzing and assessing. Maybe we start with the defining branch and then maybe the defining branch with the trunk relationship gives us that clue or that hint to how that apex can work. Are we pursuing harmony? Are we pursuing tension? Are we pursuing dynamic? What are the characteristics of the material giving you? Where is that defining branch going to create that asymmetrical flow and how is the apex going to work with that trunk and defining branch? Or how is the defining branch going to work with that trunk and that apex, okay? But the defining branch, that is the branch that shows environment. Does that branch start up from the trunk? Does it come up first and then down? Does that branch come down first and then up? Coming up first and then down suggests coastal. Coming up first and down suggests broadleaf. Coming up first and then out suggests wind. Coming down and out suggests snow. Coming down and out suggests alpine, right? So we start to recognize, oh my gosh, the structure of the tree is what tells the story of environment, okay? When we start to talk about environment, that structure as we handle those first two pieces informs every other branch that emerges from the trunk, your primary structural pieces. Trunk and branches emerging from the trunk, that defines the structure of the tree. Defining branch and that environmental context is what informs the placement and the position, the angle of emergence, and how we handle the movement in every other branch that emerges from the trunk on the tree. So we start to say, okay, I've decided on my trunk. I understand my apex and my defining branch relationship, which gives rise to harmony, tension, or dynamic. And now we start to say the supporting structure, every other structure, structural piece on that trunk that's emerging from the trunk needs to be wired and positioned before we ever put a finer piece of wire on the tree. Now, let me just backtrack and let me tell you what my experience in the bonsai process is. I see somebody wired the defining branch or the lowest branch on the tree with structure and immediately move into secondary tertiary wiring on that piece. Apex is undefined. Every other structural branch is undefined, and yet we're trying to form a pad on the tree as if we understand what that tree has to offer. We are not informed enough to go into that process of secondary tertiary because we haven't done the steps and committed to that process of really working out the concept of the structure. And a lot of us are saying, well, Ryan, that's easy for you to say. You've done a lot of bonsai. Okay, let's go back. What separates craft from art? A prolific body of work and a mastery of craft. If you don't train yourself in this process, if you don't have discipline in this process, how are you ever supposed to stop or know where to go when you get lost? The understanding of process is so that you know where to go in this winding road, in this circuitous path from unstyled to a realized vision that maximizes the potential and the unique capacity of every single tree. You've got to be disciplined. This is the craft of bonsai. You've got to be disciplined. This is the craft of bonsai. You've got to be disciplined. This is the craft of bonsai to know the process of styling. And this is not the first time that I've said it, but I wanted to dive into this in detail because I still find it mispracticed by even advanced practitioners. Mr. Kimura set the structure of every single tree that went through his garden. He did the branch selection. He helped with the cleaning process and he set the structure and then he gave the tree to apprentices to wire because that is 90% of the work. By the time you're done with these two steps, you're 90% of the way through the design. He used to say, a monkey can do the last 10%. I could train a monkey to do this. I've got apprentices. It was a little derogatory, but he wasn't wrong. As a bonsai professional, I truly do realize how important the structure is. If you're not finishing, if you're not defining the structure, and this doesn't mean it's concrete, you're going to be tweaking as you start to see the proportions and the pads or the billows of your tree actually realized in an aesthetic fruition, but if you haven't put it in to play and defined the environmental reflection through that structural element, you're lost. You're now navigationless. You're compassless in a big ocean of design. Where you went wrong was tossing the compass overboard by saying, I'm not going to define structure and I'm not going to work out these bigger concepts. We recognize that by the time you're done with the clinching of the structure and creating a base bird and you're ready to go in the guys in the garden, you've decided to start coming to the garden right there. I'm going to try and get the tree to fit in. I would say, cleaning and you're done with the structure, this is what I like to call the octopus phase. There's a lot of branches that are too long. We didn't know if we needed them that length or not in the cleaning process. You're not trying to get to a finish tree in the cleaning process. You're trying to get rid of all the stuff that doesn't need to inform or clog your visual capacity to learn, to understand, and to identify style. That stuff is gone. We define these things. Now we have the information to play on. Now we have the understanding. Supporting structure. Let me get rid of this. Environment. Let me get rid of this. Step three in the process. Secondary scaffolding. Now you're sitting here saying, okay, but I thought secondary scaffolding was like a next styling. Let's just come back to the vortex here. I told you I was going to pull together a lot of concepts today. The vortex here, we say, listen, this first step when you enter the bonsai portal is your initial styling. You let the tree balloon over 12 to 18 months. We do that second styling. Which second styling? I understand that's above the board. Let me just go ahead and bring that down here. This is my second styling. We go six to eight months. We get to our third styling. Now this second styling that we're talking about here, this does not mean that in the first styling we wire the structural branches and call it good. No. Every single time that you wire the tree, it is imperative that you wire out your pads or your billows, that you define those spaces. More importantly, it's important that you disempower all of the branches equally. Maybe that's wiring up weaker branches on the top to strengthen them. Maybe that's wiring down stronger branches on the top to weaken them so that you are able to create. Remember, bonsai is about ultimately in the refined model having an even distribution of energy. In the primary and secondary stages of development, that even distribution of energy is sacrificed to direct the energy into the pieces that you want. Elongation, thickening, healing, expansion of vascular tissue to give back budding, growth of the root, and re-buildment, and re-building of the roots and roots. We understand this and sometimes we use it to rebuild the roots. We let go of the reins. We let go of the rope on trying to keep the tree in refinement because we know it needs more strength to be able to perpetuate, build up the RPMs, stored resources, and capacity for that tree to get to where we want it to go. Sometimes we have to take our hands off for a minute and rebuild the energy system and the tree. Totally fine. That second styling, when we start to talk about this and the discussion of the second styling, that we achieved after the initial establishment of structure that initial design by wiring out that growth and adding to our secondary scaffolding branches well let's just stick to the initial design process okay we clean we handle the structure octopus form for a lot of people it's tough to see the finished tree if you focused on beautiful primary lines branch lines that reflect trunk lines branching angles that reflect your defining branch and the environment that you're representing through the structure then we come back to that bottom defining branch okay always always starting from defining branch because the defining branch not only demonstrates the asymmetry in the flow of the tree in the way it works with the trunk and the apex the defining branch also defines the style of your branching and when I say style of branching defining branch our secondary scaffolding these give us the ability to separate in the multitude of ways that we can do in the structure we can do in the structure we can do in the base remember three degrees of separation front to back side to side or vertical one degree of separation I go front to back I go side to side I go vertical gives me a soft break a soft break does not equal a separate pad formation a soft break breaks up a static line in the pad design so say for example I've got my tree here I've got my branch here okay and I've got a big static line in that branch. That's disproportionate to the tree. Now this is a powerful tree, a masculine design. So I know I need a big pad here, pad proportional to the characteristics of the trunk. I know I need a powerful pad to equal a powerful trunk in terms of balance and continuity of design. But that long static line is very boring. So maybe I do a vertical here where I separate these with a single movement and now that pad has those two levels to it. I take away that singular line and I give rise to two lines. Now the overall pad formation is still going to be one branch because I only performed one of the separation methodologies. Okay. But when I start to say proportionally, that still makes this tree look small. It doesn't look like a big tree in miniature. It looks like a miniature tree because that pad is so big. How do I get two pads always dividing at the secondary scaffolding because the secondary branch can become a pad, a secondary branch can become a pad, a secondary branch can become a pad, and suddenly one pad that was disproportionately large and made that big tree vision look small suddenly becomes three pads where now that small tree starts to look big. This is where we strike points. Proportion in design. Defining branch creates proportion. Okay. Now I'm not saying that you go through and wire all the structure and then come back and wire all of your secondaries. I'm saying you go through, you clean and find your front, you wire all the structure to represent environment and position your structural branches to carry that theme forward with consistency, lines that mimic the trunk, positions that start to put those pieces into play as the environment would reflect. We already understand whether we're going harmony, tension, dynamic. We're not totally locked into that. We may tweak it at the end of the design. The tweak will be from the structural branches. Okay. When we get into the secondary, moving down to that defining branch and starting to work through, do I unify my secondaries to create a bigger pad because my tree is of large scale and has masculine characteristics or do I start to separate my secondaries, okay, with one to break up static lines or watch this. Forward to back, side to side. Now I've got two pads. Forward to back, top to bottom. Now I've got two pads. Side to side, top to bottom. Now I've got two pads. That is where we start to say soft break, soft break is still one pad. When we start to move into this position where now I'm going to use verticality, drop the kids off at school. I tell you this all the time. Now this is a hard break. In my secondaries. Hard break equals two pads. Anytime that we want to get a singular branch separated, we cannot separate in the tertiaries. The tertiary from this pad cannot feed this pad. But we are talking about boom, boom, two movements that give us the kind of position in space to create negative space around those secondary scaffolding branches. Scaffolding branches carrying your tertiary density that will give it the appearance of its own singularity. That is a hard break to reduce proportion. When we start on that defining branch, I've told you from the very beginning, the apex is not the most time consumptive design component for me. Not anymore. For most of us it is. Challenging to master formation of the apex. The most time consumptive piece on the tree for me, beyond the cleaning process, is the establishment of that defining branch because it sets the tone for all scale and proportion and design. It sets the tone for every single structural piece that comes with it. So if we're not clear that that defining branch needs to be worked on, we've got to work on the scale and proportion. We've got to be looking past the octopus style when we start to secondary tertiary wire that branch pad. I'm going to be wiring my secondaries. I'm going to be teasing them out. I'm going to be putting them into spaces where there aren't branching, where I want to decrease the visibility of the line because my trunk is thick, or I want to open up the visibility of my line because my trunk is thick. And because I've got a slender, elegant tree, the most extreme version of that, the literati form, we see the totality of the trunk. We see the longest line of our primary branching in the literati form. But maybe in a short, compact, masculine tree, I don't want to see this big expanse. So maybe one of my secondaries actually comes up and maybe I drop that secondary here. And then maybe I drop a secondary here so that I start to hide some of those lines and complement the character of the tree to be consistent and my design thematic. So on that defining branch, I'm working, working, working. I've already set the structure. I see it. I see the primary lines. I see the trunk line. I see the apex defined. I see my defining branch. I feel good with the lines I've created. I feel good with the environment or the elements I'm reflecting in the design. And now my secondary scaffolding is being put into position. Now, here's the beautiful thing. Again, when we start with the initial design, we're going to use the secondaries and tertiaries that we have. Now, maybe in a few years, we're going to have to elongate and thicken developmentally the defining branch because the lower branches on a field-grown tree are always going to be the thinnest. Totally fine. All good. That piece is still in development. Don't get that mixed up in terms of where we are on the vortex. Yes, we are going to have development. But the time from that initial styling where we make those decisions, we disempower, we unify, we strengthen, we raise the weaker pieces, our tree starts to have an overall vigor and we pump that vigor into the tree, letting it grow unchanged. Really facilitating developmental growth. Changing our fertilization practices to achieve those developmental objectives. When we come back to that tree, now we're going to take the growth that's taken place and we're going to be positioning that as secondary scaffolding to enhance the scale and proportion of the design. In the initial design, we've already wired those secondary scaffolding. We're going to get more of those with the growth that happens before that second working. And instead of cutting it off and taking it back to the initial design phase, which is the most common response to growth is, okay, it grew, now I cut it back. I like the way it looked when I initially styled it. That's the most immature aesthetic that that tree can convey. I saw this in Japan. I saw how this worked and I realized all the pitfalls of Western bonsai where I had gone wrong up to that point not understanding process. Where the workshop model, the demonstration model, never really carried a tree forward, right? Because we saw that and that was our vision of what bonsai is. And our tree would grow and we would take it back to that. And our tree would grow and we would take it back to that. When your tree grows, yes, you're going to have to cut a lot off. Yes, it empowers you to make different design decisions when you come back that second time. You need to be thinking in that second working how you take the growth and utilize it to expand and improve your secondary scaffolding and your investment in the evolution of design and proportion in your tree, okay? But in the initial styling, we are still wiring out those secondary scaffolding branches, putting them into space so they can develop, mature, thicken, take on the movement we've given them, naturalize that movement, mature into that form based on the solid application of design principles that we have from the fundamental knowledge of masculine feminine design. You see how these threads are starting to connect, okay? So after that secondary scaffolding, this is when we really start getting into tertiary ramification. Okay, now tertiary ramification, when we initially design a tree, some trees come off the mountain with a tremendous amount of foliar mass. We let a piece of Yamanori balloon out before we ever do that initial styling. We might have a lot of tertiary ramification that needs guidance and definition. In that initial styling, I'm not saying you only focus on structure. In that initial styling, I'm not saying you only focus on structure plus secondary. In that initial styling, you try to take that tree as far as it can go aesthetically. As far as it can go aesthetically. Because that becomes your new starting point. For the growth that occurs and where we can take it in that second working. Okay? Now when we start talking about tertiary ramification, we are talking about density to define positive and negative space. Because when we initially design a tree, some branches are going to be very dense. Some branches are going to be very sparse. Some branches aren't even going to have a lot of space. We have tertiary ramification on them. In the case of a pine, pines are built, not created. Why? Because to get a pine to transition from the tip and that elongating developing piece back to the interior where I may have needle mass, I may have a small little shoot, but that is not turned into a secondary branch yet. And maybe that's going to be the new tip and I'm going to cut this back and I need growth back here that needs to develop into secondary scaffolding that I can create scale and proportion from. We have to recognize that in the upper canopy of the tree. We might have a lot of ramification. We might have a lot of secondary scaffolding. If we don't disempower that, if we forego that styling to take that tree as far as we possibly can in that process, then those pieces are going to get stronger. The developmental pieces on the bottom are not going to be allocated the strength that they need to actually accomplish the length, thickening, healing, expansion of vascular mass to create the back budding and give us more needles to work with. And all of a sudden, our tree doesn't accomplish that big leap between that initial and that secondary step. We don't evolve. We don't set the ceiling as high as possible to build upon that. We stay down here and our tree just sort of, right, barely creeps along in the improvement of the bone side process. So in this initial styling, we're even going to be taking the initiative to wire the tertiary ramification that has the vertical strength, that has the aggressive tip, that has the big bud, that has the tremendous needle mass, the tremendous leaf mass. To be able to do that. To be able to distribute, put that into space that starts to define the positive of the pad from the negative that exists around it, right? These are the pieces of the puzzle that allow us to build and create and evolve the shape and aesthetic of our tree over the course of process. Now, let's just step back for a minute and let's just say, okay, we're talking process tangentially right here. I'm talking process of the process of styling a tree for the first time. I'm talking process in terms of the process of multiple workings to elevate the quality of that tree. When I sit down in that secondary working, I'm looking at the front again. Did I make the best objective decision on the selection of the front? Maybe I did and we continue stacking upon that. Maybe I didn't and our bone side process has evolved as a first year, second year, third year, fifth year, eighth year practitioner. And we sit down the second time 12 to 18 months later. With a tremendous amount of foliar mass at our disposal. And we say, I missed it the first time. Or I see something that's improved. Or this tree has thickened and evolved in these areas. Movement occurred in this area. Deadwood came out of from under the bark in this area. And that contributes to a change of design to be able to enhance the level of this tree. We've always got to be working on maximizing the quality of that tree. Again, tree in 2012, 2013 that I designed. I completely went front to back yesterday. And the repotting studio based on the input of students last year in the workshop for that tree. Best tree was the initial back of the tree. I missed it the first time. Tree evolved. Gave me more characteristics. We saw a different design. Here's the thing though. I've been growing as a bone side practitioner just like you. But the process of finding those things, discovering those things, actualizing those things has not changed from the very beginning. Right? You say, well then why didn't you find it in the beginning? Because the tree also carries the weight. The tree also evolves. Things happen. Right? Random acts of nature occur and alter our design potential. Okay? Now tertiary ramification is to say, okay, maybe I just have one shoot here that I'm building strength on. I'm thickening. I'm going to eventually at some point prune that tip to transition back to the buds that I created through that elongation. And now I have the ability to allocate resources to distribute energy and to start to stimulate the expansion of my tertiary ramification. Awesome. Thank you. Remember, any developmental goal of elongation, thickening, expansion of vascular tissue to achieve more needle mass, healing of the wound. We want to get 60 to 70% of the way towards our ideal goal of whatever that is before we transition and start building back on the interior. Because you elongate to the point where you want that length. You thicken to the point where that's the thickness that you wanted. When you cut back and you start that process. If you've gotten 100% of it, it's only going to continue to increase past that and you get into a disproportionate position. You see this all the time in broadleaf trees. I'm going to elongate and I'm going to elongate and I'm going to elongate and I'm going to elongate and I'm going to thicken and I'm going to thicken and I'm going to thicken and I'm going to thicken. And now it's the thickness that I want. And I cut that tip and I transition back and that thing keeps thickening with the expansion of secondary, with the tertiary. And now all of a sudden, the developmental piece that you are allowing to develop is now too thick. Too coarse. I now have a giant wound where I cut to transition. And now I've got to heal that wound. Now I've got to build ramification. Now I've got to create a seamless transition of taper. And I am back in a developmental stage of healing that massive developmental piece. Because I took it 100% instead of stopping at the 60-70% and letting that next phase create a better transition with a smaller wound. That doesn't need the same developmental healing. And my branch isn't disproportionate. Now, it's very important that we understand that aspect of development. Transitioning when you're at the 60-70% mark so that you do build in those seamless transitions of taper. So that you do reduce the size of the wound you're always trying to heal as a developmental goal. So that you are allocating towards secondary, tertiary expansion when the branch is ready for it. Not after we've achieved what we want and now we're right back at the beginning building something new. Okay. This is a fluency of the gesture and the physiology of the tree to understand how we work through this process to get to the finished goal. But if you understand it, it will happen far faster than you ever imagined. And if you don't, it's never going to get to where you want it to go. This is part of the maturation and the bonsai action of creation. Okay. The density to define positive and negative space. In my mind. Is that ultimate step towards a potential design where there's a bare branch line, a tuft at the tip, a leaf, you know, a few leaves at the tip. To there is now a ramified pad that defines that space with the same density as the apical regions, the lowest, the exterior, the interior. So that each of those spaces shares a similar density of tertiary ramification. Each of those scaffolding branches doesn't carry the same number of branches. That's not what we want. The defining branch is always going to have the biggest pad on the tree. It's defining your movement. It's defining your style. It's defining your scale and proportion. It's really defining the density of your tertiary branching. Right? And so now all of a sudden, this is really sparse. Everything else is really dense. We would take what's dense down to what's sparse to homogenize the distribution of energy. Reset the system. Which you see me do on the broadleaf genre. Every time I bring them in for leaf drop pruning, unless I'm still trying to accomplish a very major developmental goal, I reset the system. You hear me say that. I reset the system. It's not there yet. But because I have all these other branches and all of these things that I'm considering, that I'm trying to drive strength into, that I have different goals for in the process of creation, I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to reset the system. Zero out the energy, uneven energy distribution. And I'm going to move in that 60% to 70% as my guiding light of taking action on developmental goals. Into that secondary or into that tertiary process of build. Okay? But in that initial design, we clean it, which gives us the selection of front. We set structure, which defines the apex and the defining branch. We come back in the secondary, in the defining branch, set the scale and proportion through the distribution. Is it a hard break? Is it a soft break? Or do we unify our secondaries to create a larger pad proportional to the size and the scale of the tree? And then we move into the tertiaries. To start to disempower the strong, to improve the strength of the weak, and to start to balance out that energy and seek an even proportional density across each pad. This might be small, but in that space, it should have the same number of tertiary branching as this one that's big has inside of those spaces for their tertiary branching. Now the positive weight of that branch equals positive in terms of how the positive weight of this equals positive. Positive and positive. Positive and positive visual mass being similar, now it defines the negative space between them. Right? But if this is moderately dense, this is heavy dense, now I've got two different values of my positive space. Quote, unquote, positive mass. The negative space between them, there's going to be more negative space inside of that, quote, unquote, positive pad. There's going to be less negative space inside of that, quote, unquote, positive pad. So now the negative space between them is blurred because I've got an inconsistency of positive space. The negative space between them is my value for what is a pad or what is an informal billow. That's where we need to enhance the tertiary here or pull back the tertiary here and work towards the density of tertiary twigging in each of those being equivalent in terms of the size of that mass having the same quantity visually of tertiary ramification. And we're going to be seeking that from the very beginning. Now when this grows 12 to 18 months in the vortex in that second working, we have a lot more secondaries. Now we're going to have to have unwind. We're going to have to have unwind the tree in that 12 to 18 months before that second working. I'm honestly going to tell you, most time-intensive styling is the second styling on that tree. First styling, you don't have a ton of branches, right? Second styling, you take all the branches off. Big bends hold. Some of them don't. We're going to have to rewire the structure. Maybe we have some wire scars on a conifer. Maybe our broadleaf tree didn't hold the position and we've got to reaffirm that position, reestablish the severity of that movement, maybe even take it farther. Now that we have a layer of growth or two layers of growth over the initial layer that we set with that first primary initial styling. So that second working, we've got to re-solidify structure. And we've got all of this growth to expand our secondary scaffolding and really push that tree into the design proportion and scale that allows it to look like a big tree in a miniature form. Okay? But we also get a tremendous amount of tertiary ramification. Okay? So now we have to decide in holding those initial pads and that initial scaffolding. I had this branch elongated. I had this bud turn into a scaffolding branch that can occupy this space. But the pieces that already had tertiary ramification have now expanded that tertiary ramification. The second working requires 30% to 40% more wire than the initial working. And in terms of process and evolution, we have to step up our expectations. You have to know how to use that. You have to know how to decide what's going on. You have to know how to decide what's unnecessary. We've got to take out further structural flaws. We've got to clarify the lines. We've got to improve the lines. We've got to tighten the structure. We've got to divide our scaffolding to create the scale and proportion. And we've got to control the tertiary ramification that's been built on top of those pieces as we've let that tree mature. This is the beautiful part though. When we get to this third working where we're really focused on tertiary because we understood process. Not only in terms of I sit down with this tree. No matter if it's an initial styling, a secondary styling, a tertiary third working of the tree. No matter if we get all the way of refinement to the vortex here. And we're going to reduce the scale and proportion. We're going to increase the degree of asymmetry. Increase the amount of negative space. And we're going to leave behind dead wood from the pieces that we eliminated to age the tree in its process. Regain the scale and proportion. And push it further into the vortex. Remember. Here we age the tree several hundred years aesthetically. Okay. But once we get back in there. We have to understand. Every time I sit down here. I sit down here. I sit down here. I sit down here. I start by cleaning. I come back and I set structure. Now setting structure do I wire every branch out? No. Not if I'm here. No. Not if I'm here. Definitely when I'm here. Probably when I'm here. But I start to decrease the amount of wire. That I put on the tree. Not every structural branch is going to need a new position. Not every structural branch rebounded to where it was. Every time that we get to this iteration that shows the highest level of that initial concept. And we're going to age that tree. We may have to close down some of the structural pieces. Some of them are going to be right where we want. Some of them. And this is where again our process has to step up. Because now you're dealing with a refined tree. Now you're dealing with aging the aesthetic. That's different than initial structural setting. That's different than secondary expansion. That's different than tertiary unification and homogenization of strength. That's different than the maintenance and refinement model. De-candling. Needle plucking. Fall shoot selection and needle plucking. Partial defoliation. And pruning. Followed by leaf drop. Pruning and wiring. Right? Depending on whether we're in the pine. Whether we're in the juniper. Whether we're in the elongating species. Or whether we're in the broad leaf model. So. Our process is evolving to become more and more complex. And demand more and more of your knowledge of how to handle that tree. At that moment. With the parts that it has. And know that process. But even when I get here. I'm cleaning first. I'm looking at that tree again. I'm assessing. Do I have the correct front? Do I have the best design? Do I have the branches in the appropriate location? Do I have structural flaws I need to remove? Do I have pieces that I can take out? To shorten? To create play in the silhouette? So that I move out into the depth branches and back out again? Do I pull in on the left and push out on the right? And drive the degree of asymmetry? Do I shift the apex? Do I need to shrink the apex? Do I need to do things that continue to enhance the style of that tree? And once I've made those decisions. When I get down into the structure. I now have to move the branching that is still left. Into a position that reflects environment. Reflects the elements that enhanced and elevated that design. In the initial styling. I have to set the structure to define those elements. I come back to a restyle to age the tree. I have to readdress those same structural elements. Some of them are going to hold. Some of them are going to be perfect. Guy wire is great for this one. I don't need to wire it with 4 gauge again. Trunk is taking the shape. Apex looks good. But I want to compress. So I am going to have to wire that. Defining branch has gotten a little long. I'm going to shorten. Now I proportionally need to act on the rest of the tree. The rest of the tree's structure and length. To balance out those actions that I've taken on that branch. That sets that system. And then I come back in from here. Because I'm going to be taking the tip off. Now I've got secondaries on the interior. That I might be separating into smaller pads. To create more negative space. That gives rise to visibility of those deadwood elements left behind. And enhances the continued move towards that. Farther and farther degree of asymmetry. To show an older and older tree. So that process never changes when I sit down with a tree. I clean. I set structure. I work on my secondaries to define proportion. And I balance my tertiaries to create positive and negative space. But my consideration of how much manipulation does the primary need. Should continue to evolve. How much manipulation does the secondary need. Should continue to evolve. How much wire does the tertiary need. By the time I'm here. I'm probably not wiring a ton of tertiary work. Unless I make a major change. Now all of a sudden a singular pad. I cut the tip off of that. This was the secondary on the interior. Now this becomes the tip of my branch. Maybe I do a hard break. This is now the tip of my branch in a smaller pad. This is now a second tier. To show a greater degree of scale and proportion. And I may have to redistribute my tertiaries. To cover the branch line. To give that elevation. Because these were together. Now I've separated them. Now I've got to do that tertiary work. To evolve in advance. That context that I'm creating. With that piece. That continues to refine itself. Over the course of time. Okay. So. Bonsai process. Is not just about. If we think about it. In terms of a two dimensional line. Yes we sit down. And we always clean first. And then we set structure. And then we do secondaries. And then tertiaries on our defining branch. And we carry that style. That proportion. That handling. That movement. That division. Through every other structural branch. Secondary. Tertiary levels. Until we get to the apex of the tree. But beyond that. Your bonsai process. Has got to evolve. When you're in an initial styling of the vortex. When you're in a second styling of the vortex. When you're in a third styling of the vortex. When you're in the refinement model. When you get to that disproportionate size. Where your initial concept has gotten too large. And the characteristics of the tree. Look both young. As well as disproportionately large. And the trunk. And the characteristics of the tree. Start to look small. I define this as falling out of love. With a tree. I love this tree. I love this tree. I love this tree. I like this tree. I'm sort of indifferent to this tree. Boom. Take it. Take it that next step. Fall back in love. Meet the tree again. Go through the process. Use the process to keep you on track. When I fall out of love with a tree in the garden. Because it has evolved to a point where it's so dense. It's so billowy. It's so large. The trunk looks small. The tree looks young. And my desire to stop and contemplate the tree. Has basically been completely nullified. To the degree that I'm almost ambivalent to the tree. That's the last. That's the last set of circumstances. That motivates you to say. I'm going to take this tree. And do something special with it. I'm going to take this tree. And I'm going to invest the next six to eight hours. Wiring this thing. To really get this tree to that next level. No. Because you're sitting there looking at it. Being like. Oh. Oof. I'll go find this raw piece of stock. I'll go. I'll go take advantage of this other tree. That looks pretty good. And just kind of tighten it up. And clean it. And do the needle work. And you know. Or I'll partially defoliate and prune all of these other trees. And that tree just sits there. It sits there. And it says. Pay attention to me. Love me. Give me that next step. Come on. Remember what we used to have. It's so great. You know. When you become ambivalent to a tree. That is the clue. That's the communication from the tree. That says. Hey. Let's fall back in love. Let's. Let's. Let's. Let's take it back to old times. Let's see what we. Let's see if we can rekindle that. That spark. That flame. Right. You bring it in. You're nervous. You're sort of like. Yeah. It's not good. And you start cleaning. And you're removing needles. And taking off old wire. And you're washing the deadwood. And you're painting it. And you're going. I forgot how good this deadwood was. And you clean the live vein. You're like. Oh my gosh. The live vein has taken on more movement. It's receded. It's. It's starting to protrude from the trunk. We start to look at that deciduous tree. We clean the moss off of the nebari. We see the nebari is expanded. We see where the wounds have healed. We re-wound the wounds. We paste them. We're saying. Gosh. That's going to be closed in two more years. That's awesome. And you're falling back in love with the tree. Right. You're following that process. Based on the communication of that tree. And you fall back in love. And you take that information. And you see how that tree has evolved. And then you say. Oh my gosh. If I just move this. And I take this out. And I see the depth. Oh man. That depth branch really gives me. Now I go out. And in. And back out again. The silhouette. And now I can turn the apex back. I'm going to make a small tweak. I'm going to turn this into dynamic. It was harmonious. Harmonious got a little. Got a little boring. Or maybe I go from harmony to tension. Ooh. The design now carries the weight. When I was three years into bonsai. And I styled this initially. Harmony felt good. But I've become more informed. And educated. And educated. The material wasn't that good. It was my first bonsai. It was my first. One of my first ten bonsais. Now tension gives this material more interest. And we start to flip flop on harmony and tension. Which is the most common transition of design feel. And we're back in. We're automatically back in. There was a podcast that we did with an artist named Laura Buchan. We have some of her sculptural work here at Mirai. And in the process. She said something that stuck with me. In the podcast. Not process. I'm like in process mode here. In the podcast. She said something that struck me. She said listen. As an artist. Your only job. Is to show up every day. Show up every day. And she said. Because you start cleaning the work. You know. Maybe you show up. And you're completely uninspired. And you start sweeping the floor. And then you see this piece sitting off to the side. And you say. Oh. Excuse me. You know. Maybe you touch a little. Maybe you make a little sketch on it. In her case. Maybe she kind of carved away the wood a little bit. And then all of a sudden. Carving away that wood. Gives rise to this. And then all of a sudden. Carving away that wood. Gives rise to this. Gives rise to that. And now you're in. Now you're in. Now had you not shown up. Had you been like. I'm uninspired. And you've not shown up. You never give yourself the opportunity. Okay. You're uninspired with a tree. If you don't pull it into the turntable. You don't pull it into the garage. You don't pull it into the workshop. You don't pull it into the greenhouse. You never give yourself that opportunity. You've got to show up in Bonesite. You have no choice but to show up in Bonesite. Okay. because that's the door that becomes open and once you get in once you start cleaning once you start seeing once you start having that intimate interaction with this living organism in this medium now all of a sudden you start to reintroduce yourself you start to see how time has acted on this tree you start to see the ways that you've matured as a practitioner and you get to apply that to elevate the level of that tree and the cleaning process reintroduces you the structure re-inspires you re-motivates you takes that tree farther we evolve we improve and this tree bonsai process tracks our evolution as a bonsai practitioner it also tracks our evolution as an individual because the bonsai is a mirror reflection to the individual working on it you can't hide from bonsai it's why we have such a problem with people critiquing our work because that is us in a tree form you had students who have lost family members come to class wired a tree and the whole tree dies can't be wiring a tree when you lose a family member when you're in depths of despair the tree the tree is going to give you back what you give it you're feeling pain the tree's going to feel that pain but you can clean you can take away the compacted surface you can wash the moss off of the base and maybe that starts to move you into a state and position where you can wire that tree you know what i'm saying like this goes deep this goes several levels deep below the surface of just like oh we're going to make some bonsai i'm going to wire this thing out i'm going to prune it up it's going to look awesome i'm going to put it inside my house on top of my tv or in the door no i'm just kidding i think we're beyond that okay if i felt like if i felt like this was subject matter that was being practiced well in bonsai uh i would not be lecturing on this right the problem is is i continue to practice this process to the to the extent that i can port that up because i think it's easy for me and my family to work on mariah live members mariah students etc advanced in the practice of bonsai who have yet to experience members of our community mariah live members mariah students etc advanced in the practice of bonsai who have yet to create the discipline in their process to allow them to continue to accelerate their trees we get stuck we fall out of love and we don't understand how to process. I always say bonsai is a practice. A practice that you have got to commit to, to be the best. Not only you can be, but the tree can be. When you commit to that practice and you prolifically create trees, you start to elevate your capacity to become an artist. But it all starts with mastery of craft and technique. All starts with the discipline of the process. The discipline of the process is the value of bonsai. The journey is what makes it worth it, not the finished product. Finished product, it's great. It's like the cherry on top of a sundae. But you've got to build that sundae first to hold that cherry and have that be the exclamation point. All right? That's all I got. Okay. I've got some questions here that Lonnie's been accumulating for me. And I'm going to go ahead and answer these questions. How should we pot our pre-primary trees? In a huge pot or should it be in a next size up pot? What promotes the fastest growth or should it be in the ground? Okay. All right. So when you start, I'm going to go ahead and I'm just going to clean this off so that we have some space to really rock out here. Because I think this is a major question, right? Like, do I, put it in the ground? Do I put it in a bonsai pot? Do I put it in an Anderson flat or a wood box? Do I, do I, do I? Okay. And I think this comes down to multitude of value systems. Okay. Let's just start here. I have a little two inch pot. I put a juniper cutting in here, right? Juniper cutting takes root. Maybe I even have a juniper cutting in here. I don't know. I don't have a cutting tray. Okay. And I put a lot of cuttings in here, right? And these cuttings take root and these things start to grow, right? Now I'm going to take those cuttings and I'm going to separate the roots, tease them apart. And I'm going to put that cutting into here so that it's in its own two inch pot. And I'm going to let the roots proliferate. Okay. And maybe I even put the initial shape into that piece, right? That becomes root bound. But once that fills that pot, I'm going to move that into a slightly larger container. Okay. Maybe I move it into a colander. Okay. Because I want to keep this tree relatively small. Okay. I move it into a colander and I continue to let it grow. And I've got all of these different propagation methodologies, right? And as this continues to grow, maybe the roots come out to the exterior here and this starts to take on thickness and I'm working this and making, you know, dead wood and I'm starting to wire out some pieces, etc. Maybe I put that into a bigger colander. Okay. What determines this? What determines this action, right? Let me just start here. Maybe I have a piece of nursery stock, nursery can, right? Dead straight Cryptomeria. Okay. Or Blue Atlas Cedar. And I say, so do I plant this in the ground? Like, do I like try to thicken this? Do I, do I, do I, do I, do I, do I, do I, do I, do I, do I, do I, do I, do I, do I, do I grow it in a container? Do I repot this initially? Like, is that what I do? You've got to decide what you're going to make with every single piece of material you put your hands on, right? For me, if I get a skinny, tall piece of nursery stock, chances are I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to put that into a bonsai pot. And I'm going to find the value in the slenderness and the height and the sparseness of branching and the quality of the lines that when I start to wire that out, I create, right? That would be the reason that, I myself buy a one-gallon, two-gallon, five-gallon piece of nursery stock. I'm not buying it because I'm going to take it home, put movement into that trunk and plant it in the ground. That doesn't mean that you shouldn't because maybe you say, listen, I'm going to start with this. I'm going to put movement into this and I'm going to plant, you know, five of these in my landscape and I'm going to watch them continue to grow and mature. I'm going to take the wire off before it thickens too fast, which happens rapidly in the ground. I'm going to be pruning and allocating resources, but I'm really working on thickening of the girth of the trunk. And maybe one of those goes in the ground and two of those go into bonsai pots or maybe four of them go into ground and one of them goes into a bonsai pot. Maybe none of them go in the ground. Maybe all of them go in the ground. Maybe some of these rooted cuttings go into a forest on a rock. Maybe some of them go into a one-inch to a two-inch. Maybe some of them go into a one-inch, two-inch eventually to a colander, right? But ultimately, you've got to be deciding what is the best route. What is the value of the material that you're creating? How do you want to use it to create a composition? That communicates? And the answer is, all of those are totally valid. If we are stepping up the root system to really thrive and maximize growth, though, you have got to go sequentially to a slightly larger, slightly larger. Every time this fills this with roots, we come back in, we do a little bit of the root work, we work on a little bit of the nimbari, and then we come into a slightly larger container, right? But we can't go from here into a big, bathtub and expect it to grow fast. The balance of water and oxygen is not correct. You'll see that tree languish and start to suffer. And all of a sudden, that over-aggressive up-potting to try and increase the rapidity of the growth actually comes back and really bites you, okay? So just understand there's a sequential evolution of the root system, size and proportion of the foyer mass that keeps up with the soil mass that you put around that tree. Nursery cultivation in the field is about up-potting as the trees or the plants have developed the root system to take on that next step of container size and really cultivate it. You go in the ground, you're going to have some attrition. You go in the ground, the smaller the tree, the less developed the tree, the greater the hardship that tree is going to suffer, right? So just think about that in terms of how you're handling it. But taking a tiny tree, putting it in a big pot and expecting success is not going to happen, okay? Danielle, when working on a tree's styling, do you have, do you, when working on a tree's styling, do you have, you had to walk away from the tree for the rest of the day because the design direction stalled out? I find I reach creative capacity on certain trees and coming back to them the next day with a fresh look, and it gets cut off there, but I'm assuming that you find that to be beneficial. There are certainly trees where, first and foremost, you've got to create the space to be in the mindset that gives you the best possible tree, okay? You've got to have, for me, it's the turntable and the workshop. When a tree goes on the turntable, I click in. It's like, okay, my mindset is on the turntable. I'm maximizing baseline features. I'm finding defining branch, apex. I'm getting rid of the unnecessary things, the unusable things. I'm cleaning and preparing this thing, and I'm going to sit down, and I'm going to commit to this process, right? And again, this is really where defined process is going to be. I'm going to sit down, and I'm going to commit to this process, right? If you can objectively find the best of the tree, the tree should be giving you the information you need to really generate something interesting. Now, having said that, there are certainly times that I am not in the right mindset to make the best decisions on that tree. My mind is, you know, somehow, somewhere else dealing with another thought process. I'm not focused. I'm not present. I'm not with that tree at that time. Got to walk away. Got to walk away. And I will also say that I'm not in the right mindset to make the best decisions on that tree. I'm not in the right mindset to make the best decisions on that tree. I'm not in the right mindset to make the best decisions on that tree. And I will honestly tell you, there have been periods at Mirai, maybe even prolonged periods, as in, like, years, where I have had less creative capacity to really take trees to that next level. And I've even had times at Mirai where I've taken trees that were at a level, and because I wasn't in the right space or frame of mind, I've actually done a significant amount of disservice to the design and taken it backwards, which is the worst possible thing to be done. I made a commitment that wasn't necessary because I was not in the right frame of mind. I performed an action or a change that wasn't to the benefit of the tree because I wasn't focused at that time. I think it is always necessary for you to assess where you are at. And if you need to walk away because you just don't have it, walk away. But I also don't want to say that the bonsai creation process means you approach it in a different way. When you're ultimately inspired, because there is a discipline in the process, if you show up and you start with the cleaning and you start to see the tree, you give yourself the opportunity to slip into that funnel that takes you on that design journey, right? So if you sit down with the tree and you don't have it and you walk away and you didn't clean it, then you didn't give yourself that opportunity, right? So there's a balance to the response to this question, which is be careful. Because thinking that you're going to sit down and have an artistic inspiration without getting to know the tree is something that happens maybe one in every ten times. The other nine times, it's about meeting the tree, letting yourself get into the process through the act of cleaning that exposes you to the objective bests of baseline and feature and starts to inform that inspiration that you were lacking and maybe was kind of leading you to potentially walk away. Fight that feeling until you realize that it's not the day. You're not in the correct mindset, but don't let a lack of inspiration derail you from starting the process. Okay? Treebeard Steve, could you expand on the idea of disempowering branches to avoid weakening other branches? How would you suggest doing that? This is the wiring process, Steve. So let me get rid of this. And this happens on every single level of branching from the primary. And I'm going to draw the extreme, which kind of goes back to the initial question that was asked. How do you develop material? Do you plant it in the ground? Do you put it into a big container? And we recognize, okay, well, you can do all of those things, but there's a process to that as well. Okay, so I've got my tree here. And I think one of the best trees to look at in the library is the evolution of the Telperian field-grown Japanese black pine. Because we really took that from initial styling raw tree to, and we repotted it first, it gained strength. And then we did the initial styling, structural, secondary, expansion. We had developmental goals. We even did a stream on not touching the tree because it wasn't ready. It wasn't in a position to advance with touching it. You have to know when to let the tree rebuild RPM. So there's a lot of depth to that tree's process in the library. Okay. But I've got this tree here. And let me just make sure I stay on task. Could you expand on disempower? Yes. Okay. So I'm going to be wiring these pieces down structurally. Okay. And I've got all of this stuff out here. It's, you know, kind of crazy. Okay. I'm going to be with these secondaries that are strong and vertical, especially in the upper portion, because down on the lower branches, almost inevitably when you're building a tree, they're not as thick as the upper pieces. Right? Which is the challenging thing to merge, especially if you're pursuing traditional design or the orthodox design, because the lower branches typically need to be the thickest and the longest. Okay. And up in the apex, I've just got this big coarse log of an apical region, oftentimes past the movement. You know, and ultimately I would love to have buds here. But I've just got this big massive thing here. And you start to say, okay, well, how do I, how do I in these big branches here, how do I empower these pieces that need more strength, more density, more length, more thickening, healing of the wounds around them because we cut off a thick branch and transition to a thinner branch? How do I empower them? Okay. Well, yeah, you can let this run. But this is a lower piece on the tree regardless. You've got auxin, you've got apical dominance. And this is where we say, hey, in the juniper model, people have this contorted juniper. And they've got all these big branches that they're like, I'm going to use those for deadwood. So I'm going to wire this tiny piece out here and have a little pad. I'm going to wire this tiny piece out here and I'm going to wire this piece. And then I'm going to let these grow for deadwood. Right. And what ends up happening when you wire these tiny pieces that are proportional for the design is that you weaken those pieces. The stronger pieces get stronger. These end up dying. And now you just have these pieces. That were going to be deadwood suddenly is the only living pieces on your tree. And this is where I say, listen, you've got to be performing an action to 70 percent or more of the tree. Are we going to decandal 70 percent of the tree? Are we going to partially defoliate 70 plus percent of the tree? For refinement trees, we do 100 percent. Right. But when we're initially doing this, you've got to be wiring 70 plus percent of the tree or you should not be wiring the tree. Okay. Because every piece that you wire, when you take it from here to here, you take the auxin dominant hormone, that's the navigation system that draws resources to that growing tip. You neutralize it with cytokinin. If you're doing that on less than 70 percent of the tree, anything that you do that to is going to be weaker. The pieces that you're allowing to grow are going to get stronger and those pieces are going to be shed. So I'm saying, listen, I'm going to give a continuation of the line base to tip. I'm going to take that auxin out. That's what generates these buds that allow me to start building out that vision. I'm going to wire my scaffolding out here. I'm going to wire my tip out here. Now with doing that, I take the auxin out of that branch. I give rise to these plus I give rise to these by taking the auxin out of that branch. That's what gives me in the initial styling. Why in the initial styling do we wire structural, secondary, and tertiary branches? Because the product of that structural styling over 12 to 18 months is the beach ball effect and we want to use that growth to expand all of the interior branches that give rise to the complexity of design that shows that sense of scale that represents nature in miniature. This is how you get it. So if you don't come in and disempower these very strong pieces by laying them down and shifting that hormonal content, which is what gives you back butting, which gives you the potential for secondary scaffolding expansion and for tertiary expansion, then you never get those abundant secondary branches. Then you never get those abundant tertiary branches. That is the methodology and the way. And down here where I've got this weak branch hanging down here, wiring those up is what gives them phototropic strength. It's what allows auxin to accumulate in that tip to begin that process. And then auxin accumulates, we lay it down in the second working, we stimulate the back butting, and now we've started to create that tertiary level. At every single phase of the game, that initial styling has got to address each of those pieces, structural, secondary, tertiary, where the strength exists or where the strength does not exist. Now do we wire a weak branch that's sitting in an appropriate location? Absolutely not. But do we wire a weak branch that's hanging down that we need to elevate its capacity to accumulate auxin? Absolutely do. Do I wire this big piece, even though this is sacrificial in development, beyond a shadow of a doubt if you need buds behind it because the change of that auxin to cytokinin is wrong? That's what creates that bud. You've got to be managing hormones through position, right? So many of us think I'm going to cut it back and that's what's going to give me back butting. You've got to build the back buds before you transition the energy. You cannot transition the energy through pruning to build the back buds. How do you build the back buds? You change the hormonal content. How do you change the hormonal content? You wire the tree and you lay it down, okay? Now we talk about with broadleaf, the tip always needs to come back up. Broadleafs do not do well with disempowerment, right? They're naturally cytokine and prone to back bud to create interior growth, to bud on old wood. We need to give them that benefit of that auxin when we take that tip up. This was a big part of the Ume styling primer. This was a big part of the eastern native plum work that we've been doing. The tip always comes up. This is the biggest limitation to anybody handling Ume across the world outside of Japan, because in Japan they're not wiring Ume down like this. You don't handle a broadleaf tree like that. You handle a broadleaf tree like this. That's how you keep strength in that branch, okay? Steven, how do you keep track of all the different goals that you have in development of a single or even multiple trees? I love this question, okay? If you master process, you develop the discipline in your bonsai practice when you sit down with a tree, you clean it, you get to know it, you set the structure, then work on secondary, you finish with tertiary. You don't have to worry about what you were trying to do when you sat down with it a year ago. I don't worry about it. Every time I sit down with that tree, I meet that tree again. I have a process that's defined in my bonsai practice. I follow that process. I believe in it 120%. I know that that process will deliver me to the best end goal. I have to focus on being objective. I have to focus on trying to read and interpret what the tree has given me in response to my actions placed against it. And every time I sit down, I'm going to be a little bit better at bonsai because that time and that experience has continued to expand my skill set. And I'm going to follow that process and I'm going to get to the best objective result of that tree's design in that current state with that tree at that moment. Free yourself. Free yourself of feeling like, I've got to write this down and I've got to remember this so that the next time that I approach it, I follow that process. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. That is to say that the old self, your old ideas from a year ago where you've grown and matured and learned from experience and the tree is giving you new responses, you're saying that bonsai practitioner is better than this current bonsai practitioner? So you don't have to remember. You don't have to keep in mind all of these things. You walk through your garden, you look at your tree, and this is really where I feel like the app is going to empower the community because as a practitioner, you may forget, oh, I should be partially defoliating if I need to. You may forget, oh, this is the time of year where I can shorten elongated growth on a pine and not inside a second flush. The app is going to be able to tell you those moments where you need to be thinking about those things. But walking through and objectively continuing to look at your tree as you improve and evolve, you don't have to remember what you're trying to accomplish. Accomplish what you're trying to accomplish then. What you're trying to accomplish then, you might find a better front. You might find a better design. You've learned how to build in a greater degree of asymmetry. Read the tree. You may be able to reduce the live vein, expand the deadwood. You may be able to go ahead and enhance the tertiary strength, right? So don't try and hold on to bonsai as if there is a right answer. Every time you sit with the tree, if you approached it correctly the first time, it should reinforce what you were doing and you should be able to pick up right where you left off, seeing improvements that you're going to continue to evolve. And if you sit down and you say, I don't know what I was thinking, it doesn't matter. Because what you're thinking then in that cleaning process, reacquainting yourself with the tree is what informs your structural setting, is what informs your secondary tertiary scaffolding, is what informs your tertiary distribution. And now all of a sudden you have the ability to make a better tree. Let it go. Let it go. I don't try to hold on to anything in terms of the trees here. When it's time, when I fall out of love with that tree and I bring it back in, now it's me and that tree at that moment in time and I'm going to give it my best, right? To be clear, as a general rule for a first styling, uh-oh, Evan, talking rules here, do you typically wire the majority of branches, primary, secondary, and tertiary as applicable? Okay, here we go. First of all, no rules. Second of all, the more that you master technique, the less damage you do to a tree. Okay? Because, listen, if you don't know how to wire, you sit down and wiring every branch on a tree in the first design process might be more detrimental than beneficial. Now, how do you get to a point where you learn how to wire? You sit down and you wire all the branches. You see what died. You improve your technique. You do it more. You do it more. You do it more. Prolific body of work. Pursuit of the craft. Right? Mastery of the craft is what gives rise to your capacity to become fluent and suddenly start creating art. Okay? But, you know, in this whole process, as a general rule, as long as your technique is proficient, I'm wiring everything that needs it each time that I sit down and style it. So then you start to say, well, how do you know what needs it? Where is your vision? What are the elements acting on the tree? What are the characteristics of the material? And how do you maximize the image and aesthetic that that tree currently has the capacity to offer? That is what determines how much you wire. In general, though, in an initial styling, you are committing and wiring a majority of the branches and taking that tree to the highest aesthetic level initially, which becomes the beginning of the next phase of growth, development, evolution, and improvement. Yeah. Okay. Gary, could you remind us what you mean by the concept dropping the kids off at school? Come on, Gary. Come on, Gary. I tell you to drop the kids off at school all the time. All the time. Okay. So I'm going to dive into a little bit of a deeper discussion here of commercial bonsai versus what I would consider to be more representative creative bonsai, okay? If you look at the work of Mr. Kimura, Mr. Kimura's style is very much here, okay? Down and out. Not a lot of movement in the branches. Positioning of the branches and the way that they occupy space is what makes Mr. Kimura's branches look very beautiful, okay? This is the orthodox model. And I'm not saying Mr. Kimura is orthodox in any way, but if you see a sketch that Mr. Kimura does, it's going to have this kind of branching structure, okay? And it's not to say that he doesn't drop the kids off at school. He does. He just does it less, and I think there's a lot of possibility to enhance character age design, especially with the age of Yamadori we work with in the United States, which is the oldest material in the world as far as Randy Knight's highest level collected trees, okay? So if you want to, if you want to complement the trunk of a really contorted tree, an old tree, you want to show that kind of character. And you want to change the scale from the orthodox model into a more natural iteration, right? Because the orthodox model is a pattern that's culturally created as defined by the kokufu and as practiced through the mastery of craft and the repetition of improvement incrementally towards the pursuit of perfection every day. The definition of a shokunin, okay? Jiro dreams of sushi. Perfect, perfect illustration in a documentary form. Okay? Say, for example, I want to add more interest here. Okay, I'm going to drop my branch down. Now, I had this branch that had these pieces here. Anywhere where I have a secondary, I have an opportunity to drop the kids off at school. But if I'm going to drop the kids off at school to represent a pad of its own, I have to have two pieces of division, front to back, side to side, or vertical. Boom, boom, boom, boom, right? I've got to perform two of those actions. So if I drop down, this secondary is here, I have to come up so that then I drop down again. That is dropping the kids off at school. I isolate that secondary branch by a move that gives me two motions of separation. I come up, and then I come down into the front. I come up, and then I come down into the back. Now I have the kids dropped off at school to create that pad. Now I come back in here. Maybe I have another one here. I again drop the kids off at school. Now I have another pad. I've got this last piece here. I can leave that one as my finished product, and I move from this style of a branch, a very commercial style of a branch, a very seamless, smooth, beautiful style of branch, to a much more representative for the species that has to reflect the trunk movement, the style, the environment, and I decrease the orthodox model big pads for masculine trees. Natural representations tend to have much smaller pads to show the large scale. I've got to drop the kids off at school by creating those two actions of breaking up my secondary scaffolding to create defined pads that give me a much better representation of scale and proportion, big tree, miniature form. That is what I mean by dropping the kids off at school. I come up. I drop the kids off at school by coming down into the front. I come up again, drop the kids off at school, and I move to the back and down, right? These are the methodologies of achieving that division in that separation of pads with a hard break, okay? David, you referred to the use of a guy wire, which criteria do you use to decide whether to utilize classical wiring or a guy wire? Okay, we understand with a guy wire that guy wire only has the ability to enact movement in a singular plane, okay? So say, for example, I've got a fork out here, and I've got all kinds of movement here, right? And maybe there's deadwood and live veins intertwined. Maybe there's significant bark on an aged branch, and I've already got the movement that I want into it. Okay, I've got to find where along that lever arm I have the ability to adjust that branch's position because I don't want to wire over live and dead. I don't want to wire over significant bark if I don't have to, if I don't need to put movement into that because the movement that's in it is absolutely spectacular, then I'm going to use a guy wire to move that in a singular plane. Now, maybe I can piggyback on my fork out here through the wire. Maybe I need a rubber pad to get that correct location of leverage. I've got to find my tie point and the direction that I'm going to anchor to to elicit the desired movement. Maybe I need to put a piece of rebar in that I can pull down to to get that direction of pull that moves the branch in the correct location. But guy wires are what allows you so many people wire branches that the wire has no capacity to bend. There's nothing more ugly than thin wire wrapped on thick branches with no purpose except for to destroy the bark and potentially look ugly because there's gaps, there's inaccuracies in same angle and same spacing, and it has no function to begin with. If it has no function, then why are we doing it? Because wire only spoils the aesthetic unless you can apply it same angle, same spacing, no gaps to have a pattern that disappears. And if you don't need rotation and you don't need lateral movement because the movement's already there, then you need a guy wire to change the position of that branch. That is when I really look to guy wires to enact major changes of position in a singular direction where fundamental traditional wiring practices of wrapping and coiling don't give me any function. How do you get over the fear slash respect one has of changing slash altering something that has been worked on by a lot of people before you? Wow. Wow, wow, wow, wow, wow, wow, wow. This is something that... This is something that I think is a significant limitation to Western bonsai professionals. Honestly, I just... I think that this is one of the great aspects and justifications for apprenticing in Japan because there needs to be an awareness of the history there needs to be an awareness of the aesthetic decisions that were made by another individual as that individual practitioner as that individual practitioner in a certain culture as that individual as a practitioner in a certain culture of that certain time and era that carries forward an aesthetic because if you're not thinking about all of the things that the individual that created or individuals that created that tree before you then you're letting ego override what time and input of a multitude of personalities has created in terms of the depth and richness of that tree. And you see this with a lot of non-Japanese trained bonsai professionals in the West where their only interest is enacting their style on that tree without consideration and that's not what bonsai is about. It's not about you. It's about the tree. And the more people that have acted on that tree the greater the depth of consideration that is necessary to perpetuate, piggyback, and continue to improve that tree. Just coming in and altering a tree and being like, I have restyled this tree is a real negative approach to bonsai. It's why there's a podcast from Australia with David Siegel and Hugh Grant that we did where I really put forward this idea that I do believe collections should put the redesign of big time trees out to the bonsai community to bid. I think professionals should have to submit concepts and ideas. I think that those concepts and ideas in these public collections dealing with historical pieces should take into account and consideration the history, the story, the context and I think that their designs should be expected to respect that and piggyback on those concepts as opposed to it being a I'm going to redesign this tree which is completely counter to the time impacts which you cannot duplicate. You can't duplicate that tree's time as a bonsai. You take all that time out of it, well guess what? You just created another young tree that had the ability to show the effort of time. However, I saw a lot of famous trees restyled at Mr. Kimura's, a lot of national treasure trees which are called Kicho Bonsai and I also saw them styled in ways that was highly controversial where he stepped past the boundary. Right? Where he did not respect that and I've also seen him respect that and piggyback on that and as I've traveled around that to me is one of the most significant gestures of depth of knowledge and understanding of bonsai and a professional is recognizing when you do something and when you don't do something. Right? But how do you teach that to somebody that's never been aware of that? That's very, very difficult. How do you teach somebody to respect what exists in that tree because of the process of time? You know, for me my apprenticeship for somebody else I have no idea. But how do you get over the fear slash respect? I don't think you get over it. In fact, I think you take it into account and then you need to contribute. You need to contribute to that process. You don't need to correct the process. You don't need to stop or restart the process. You need to continue the process as you approach those trees. And I think, here's another one. Blue Atlas Cedar at the Pacific Bonsai Museum. We restyled that tree on the stream. That was a severe action that we took on that tree. And you say, well, Ryan, were you respecting the process of the past? If we go back to that tree's history, I was completely respecting the process of the past. That tree was a formal upright that was donated to the collection and largely handled by Dave DeGroot. Dave DeGroot hired me to come up. He said, I've completely fallen out of love with this tree. I said, I think this has the ability to show a natural cedrus form in the mature structure but it's going to require a dramatic restyling. He said, I have a meeting. And he left. He came back and I hadn't done a single thing to it two hours later. And he was like, are we going to do this? Like, what are we doing? I said, I'm still working on it. He left for another meeting. He came back and over 50% of the branches had been cut off the tree. And he darn near choked on his bag of peanuts that he was eating when he walked back into the greenhouse. I said, Dave, thanks for trusting me. You should go ahead and leave. I'm going to finish this up. You can tell me what you think when it's done. He came back in and that was five years later, Aaron Packard said, hey, this cedrus is sort of getting plump and overgrown. Would you want to restyle this on the stream? Absolutely. We brought it back in. And that was actually the first time it had come around the vortex where I could take it into aging it. I put the weight on the left side of the base by compressing on the left side, elongating on the right side, creating negative space, driving the degree of asymmetry. And that was actually the first iteration that I had in mind when I initially had restyled it for Dave five years earlier. Right? So, those processes were piggybacking on each other. And that really does, you know, that really does matter in terms of answering that question. Maybe more a comment, my boyhood trumpet teacher used to say, practice does not make perfect, it makes permanent. Thinking of your opening remark, it seems that repetition of a process develops our facility and confidence in the process but needs to be done with an eye to constant improvement so that doing it right is what becomes permanent. Your thoughts? The whole reason for this conversation is reinforcing what you're saying here, Steve, because so many people practice bonsai by cutting a few things off, accepting the front that they're given in a limited perception of baseline and features. How many people actually spend an hour or two conceptualizing best baseline and features and ruminating over the angle and position of the tree? I'm going to tell you right now, I have, you know, how many hundreds of students come through to push students to work at this? I have to encourage them. Sometimes I even have to just completely dismantle their less than considerate thought process of the front and say, you're not even trying. You haven't spent time with this. That's the most generic garbage idea of a design and is that a little harsh? Sure. But when we say, hey listen, you have to dig to make good bonsai. People always want to know how do we make better bonsai? How do we make better bonsai? How do we make better bonsai? You got to try. You have to try. You have to exhaust all options. You've got to explore. You can't accept anything less than the best that the tree has to offer. That's, that's how you make good bonsai and then you've got to try by performing the actions over and over and over again. But if your process is not set up for success, if you're not cleaning and putting that time into the selection of the front and you're not setting the structure by defining the line base to tip and creating that defining branch that then informs every subsequent structural piece and then placing those structural pieces to the scale and the proportion of your secondary scaffolding and your tertiary ramification on your defining branch, then you're already lost and you can't come back to it. So when people say, I don't know where to go so I'm just going to start wiring, that's the worst possible outcome. I don't know where to go so I'm just going to wire. It's not going to get any better. That tree's not going to get any better. Abandoning the process, lacking the discipline of the practice, you're not going to find yourself halfway through that piece of work. You have deep knowledge and you have deep railed, my friend, right? And that's why we're talking about this because then somebody's wired this whole tree and they say, I don't know how to make good bone science. It's like, well, I can't help you now. We are off the Richter scale, okay? Okay. Kathy, I lime sulfur two of my pines before buttoning them down in the winter. I know I need to do it again as spring approaches but how do I know when to do that second application? Right as the buds start to swell. You do not want the temperature to increase. You do not want the tree to be in very active growth and I would use my deciduous trees at bud swell as the indication for when you treat your pines. Eric P., on my ficus tree, I've wrapped sphagnum moss around the trunks to encourage aerial roots. The aerial roots are significant in some places. When do I remove and reapply sphagnum to the trunk? So you get the aerial roots. The question is, do you want to guide those aerial roots? You can do that at an environment where you guide them down to the soil line. You could also wire wrap a tube of sphagnum that you then tie to the branch to guide that down to the soil mass. But once you get the aerial roots emerging, you now need to give them some sort of guidance. On a root over rock, you know, we would move the roots over the rock, use the sphagnum to adhere them and let them thicken in those positions. Aerial roots are no different. You've got to figure out a system to give shape to the aerial roots so that as they continue to mature, they improve the aesthetic of the tree. Treebeard Steve, would you agree that the best time to remove an air layer from a bald cypress is after the new growth on the whole tree hardens off? So I would agree that the best time to remove an air layer on an evergreen conifer is in the spring as the tree starts to grow. I would agree that the best time to remove an air layer on a deciduous tree is in the fall as the leaves drop. Because a bald cypress is a deciduous conifer, we always err on the side of the coniferous behavior when we handle the roots. Therefore, I am going to be removing an air layer on a bald cypress as the buds swell but before they tend to open, just like I would on a juniper, just like I would on a pine. All right. Hey, thank you guys so much. Nice to be back in the studio live. My fear in this lecture, my fear in the discussion in general as I work with students is that this will go in one ear and out the other. And the only way that you improve your capacity to do bonsai is by committing to the discipline of the practice and by abiding by the process. It is what allows you to find your way when you get lost. You always have a consistent home to return to and it's how you re-find yourself every time you approach a tree without trying to remember what you were thinking. Discard of that. Approach that tree with who you are at that time that is offering you. Let the tree carry a majority of the weight. Be objective. Assess. Always try to improve but you've got to follow the process to really become an artist in bonsai. All right. Enjoy the rest of your weekend. Get your hands dirty. It's a great time of year repotting. Check out the pots in the web store. We've got a lot of them but I'm gonna be using a lot of them as we continue to progress. We'll be here doing the lecture on a monthly now. App updates are coming very soon. The new streaming launched this week on Thursday and we'll do it again next week. Time will be told to you through messaging in the app and if you didn't see our new email check out your inboxes if you haven't subscribed. Subscribe to our new letter. The new email setup is awesome. Shares with you the things that inspire us and the people that inform our practice. All right. Love you guys. I'll see you in the next video. 
