what's going on everybody how y'all doing happy saturday morning oh man mariah lecture series what number is this ira number five this should be the fifth one mariah lecture series number five this is mariah live member generated uh lecture series i'm not sure who came up with the idea of an aftercare lecture but it was like when it was said the light bulb like ding went off and what better what better time than to be discussing aftercare than one of the pivotal points in the year where aftercare is of paramount importance uh of the utmost i would say the utmost sensitivity and i think also a very obvious subject matter coming out of the repotting season but but the challenge as i took it to the discussion of aftercare was not to simply look at aftercare as sort of a singular thing that applied to post repotting even though that's such a pivotal point but aftercare across the board for these actions we perform in bonsai or these things that we fortunately or unfortunately experience and have a we get that tree through that process now when i started thinking about it i was like okay so this is pretty simple subject matter i should be able to talk about this without really going into the spider fractured shattered windshield effect of mirai and then unfortunately as i was making my notes last night and i was thinking about this and on the drive-in today as those notes got more robust i was like oh man okay i'm going to have to do this again and again and again and again and again and again and again all right uh buckle up everybody buckle up because this is going to get a little complex okay we got ira on the mic today good morning jesus producing the lecture series and uh i've got a wonderful group of students in this workshop as well as in the studio with me live studio audience so uh yeah okay here we go um when we start to talk about the fundamentals of bonsai for me everything goes back to a singular concept and another understanding okay um singular concept is ultimate health is created by balance of water and oxygen you know and i hate to i hate to continue to no i don't hate to continue to do this i hope it is with welcome all of you and i hope that you have a great day and i hope that you have a great day and i hope that you have a great day and i hope that you have a great day arms that we continue to circle back to this piece because the silver bullet right the the the the witch's brew that makes everything better these things do not exist in bonsai and i can tell you they don't exist because you know we've been working on soil for a very long time you know even to the degree of testing akadama that was harvested off of mount hood looking at soil maps working with companies that could find a solution and a substitute to akadama when importation was very challenging uh and that led us down one path of bonsai we've been looking at the ceramic vessel playing with metal glass wood uh clay in every single form possible the the the lack of a containerized environment we've been playing with training practices wiring styling pruning pinching knot pinching partial defoliation needle plucking strength balancing working with succulents working with tropicals working with temperate climate trees you know we've been working with nutrition for the past uh going on 20 months and looking at all of the things we didn't know about nutrition and diving into water and and none of that has been the the the solution but let me tell you all of those things have been facilitated by a balanced water and oxygen right of those things are supported and driven by a tree that's healthy enough to be pursuing all of these different levels of dynamic research that dissect the bonsai model on every single strand of possible potential in every direction on a three-dimensional model. We do not have a tree that is capable of being pursued as a bonsai subject without a balance of water and oxygen. And this is important because I'm going to come back to this every single time we talk about a new nuance of aftercare, all right? But let's just break it down so that we really ultimately understand what this means. Now, ultimate health is not green and growing. Ultimate health is resistance, which automatically, when we start to talk about aftercare, resistance to heat, resistance to cold, resistance to drought, resistance to wetness, okay? Resistance to what we call the actions of bonsai, repotting, styling, etc. Again, it's saying that that root system is the epicenter and the source of our tree's immunity. And inside of that, we could look at the biological microbial highways and those connections in the endo-ecto environment and how they're going out and finding resources, how that connection point of the biology with the root mass starts to create that initiation of the enzymatic reaction, that allows a tree to compartmentalize decay, stop an embolism, respond to a pathogen or an insect. All of it still comes from that location. And you say, well, then what does the balance of water and oxygen give us? The balance of water and oxygen doesn't give us healthy roots. The balance of water and oxygen gives us an environment. It creates the environment inside of this artificial shallow soil column with an aggregate system that is closer to hydroponics and consistent horticultural development and growth in the nursery industry, in the tree industry or the arboriculture industry. We are starting to talk about a hydroponic cultivation. It gives us the environment that facilitates, that just creates the opportunity for root growth to occur, okay? Because we say, listen, what comes first? The chicken or the egg? What comes first? The root or the needle? We know that the root comes first every single time out of that seed. And from that, root, the supply of hydration, the supply of water and oxygen that creates sugars and starches is how we start to build a tree and how we start to fuel the system. So as we expand, we say, which season comes first? Spring or fall? If the root comes first, even though we know, and listen, this is where we've got to be a little bit more cerebral about the bonsai practice. We understand seeds germinate in the spring because we need elongated roots. We understand seeds germinate in the spring because we need elongated roots. We understand seeds germinate in the spring because we need daylight length and increasing temperature to drive the metabolic activity that sustains the use of the energy stored in that seed to generate the foliar mass in the root system and start the process, okay? But if we look at once we establish a tree, what comes first? Does the foliage generate the root or does the root generate the foliage? We know with the root coming first, fall is actually season number one. Spring is actually in response to, and the product of spring is a result of the vascular productivity that we accumulated on the needle mass that was created over the spring season. Vascular productivity over the fall determines the needle mass the following year. Tree has to be producing resources in excess of what it has to sustain itself. It has to create resources to sustain plus add. Over that fall season, that's the adding part. the previous fall the root system was created to sustain what occurred in the spring in the fall the resources the highways of vascular conductivity trunk swelling branch girth and root formation are created to sustain what the tree plans on producing the following spring stored energy sugars and starches over that fall into the winter season creates the energy that generates that foliar mass that's produced in the spring so when we start to think about it to create the environment that facilitates the preparatory model of vascular productivity in order to be able to dictate determine and drive that growth is the most important thing that we do in bonsai it's the most important thing that we do in bonsai okay it will always be the number one solution to every problem yes we're studying nutrient related issues if I don't have a route to take in the nutrition I'm going to have to take in the nutrients and I'm going to have to take in the nutrients and I'm going to have to take in the nutrients and I'm going to have to take in the Malaysian it doesn't matter what kind of nutrition I put into that container I cannot get the nutrition to germinate roots the tree has got to germinate roots right I have to create the environment where roots can be generated roots can be generated in a poor pH roots can be generated in a poor soil quality roots can be generated in an abnormal circumstance and condition if the balance of water and oxygen is correct mr. camera used to always say pay there is no bad soil in bone side there's just bad horticulture that can't accommodate the characteristics of that soil and if you start to really digest that if you can learn how to establish a balance of water and oxygen in the containerized environment you are already on your way towards creating the backbone in the system to establish that ultimate health now that's not to say that we don't have certain things we want out of a soil quality and in this in unnatural environment the shallow soil column we recognize we need more oxygen we need control of the water that's held there we need something binding nutrition that can also sustain its shape and structure over a prolonged period of time right this is the what gave rise to the pumice lava akadama model but if you don't first understand you are not entitled to root growth you have got to create the environment that facilitates root growth the timing when that root growth occurs is in the fall and what happens in the fall determines what that tree does the following spring then we are starting to build an understanding of aftercare and how we conduct ourselves to help a tree through processes that we perform in bonsai for no other reason than to execute and explore the aesthetic and contextual implications of that visual representation ok building block of bonsai building block of bonsai of gary water get a tree to grow more balanced water and oxygen? How do I get a tree to backbud balanced water and oxygen? Balanced water and oxygen, balanced water and oxygen, balanced water and oxygen, nothing else happens in after care of a tree, in the care of a tree, in the cultivation of the tree, in the design of the tree, in the repotting of a tree without a balanced water and oxygen. In the nutrition of the tree without a balanced water and oxygen, it does not matter. That is your first fundamental solution response and answer to every single question in bonsai, balanced water and oxygen, you will never be wrong. Hey, how should I style this tree? Balance of water and oxygen. Okay, cool. Got that. Now let's have the conversation. Hey, should I repot this tree? Balance of water and oxygen. Yes, it has it. Maybe you don't need to repot. No, it doesn't have it. Maybe you do need to repot. I repotted. Get the balance of water and oxygen to help it recover. It's always the right answer to the question. Okay. All right. We good? Belaboring the point here. Just murdering it, kicking it like a dead horse. Okay. But it's important. This is important. If you do not digest this piece of information, we can't have a further discussion. If you do not recognize that this is always what you go back to and you'll never be wrong to go back there, then we cannot have this discussion. This is your first technique. This is the silver bullet of bonsai. Unfortunately, it's not something you put in a canister or a spray bottle and apply to your tree and reconcile every other issue. It is the most complex aspect of what we do in the cultivation of these tiny trees in a confined environment. It is a number one, the most challenging because we think about species. We think about environment. We think about unpredictable actions. We think about uncontrollable aspects, water quality, air quality, temperatures that happen, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, right? But you always can focus on striking that balance of water and oxygen. That's your number one way to be cultivating the vascular tissue that supplies, supports, and creates immunity for all recovery, all response, and all progression of the bonsai model. All right. I felt like it was necessary to start there. Came out of the gate swinging. Sorry, but you know how I am. You know how it goes. Okay. All right. So the second thing that we need to establish is that we would never be actively pursuing an action in bonsai without a tree that is ultimately healthy and prepared. And when we say, okay, Ryan, we see, we see that that root growth you know, fall is number one in terms of root production. Root production is what gives rise to chicken and the egg. This is the one that comes first. Root production gives rise to foliar mass. But we also recognize it works in exchange. Foliar mass also creates root production. How do you prepare a tree for an operation in bonsai? Build the foliar mass. How do you recover a tree from any sort of activity Leave the foliar mass alone. Let it photosynthesize and physiologically understand when that foliar mass works to rebuild the energy system of your tree, the indications that the energy system is rebuilt and the timing of the year where we can pull that tree back into the bonsai model, advance it in the bonsai journey. We have to understand that physiology. So many questions about aftercare come down to my leaves burn. Should I cut them all off? Should I pluck them all off? Should I prune my tree? My tree is unhealthy. Should I repot and trim off all of the unhealthy roots? Should I do a major action when my tree is completely debilitated? Should I fix? Should I touch? Should I handle? And the answer is no. Aftercare is not about doing some action to your tree. Aftercare is about manipulating the environment with intention and a proactive thought of heading off the things that can detract from the acceleration of health in your tree. That is aftercare. Across the board, it is taking proactive measures to adjust the environment to accomplish the root growth or the foliar production to facilitate the root growth that gets a tree back into a stage where we do not have to be as concerned about the potential pitfalls of what is transpiring with our tree. Okay, so that that foliar mass here, the root production and vascular productivity is what gives rise to the foliar mass. But that foliar mass is what exists on the tree that captures the sun's energy that turns that into sugars and starches. And that sugar and starch is what causes the cellular division that gives rise to xylem, phloem, that gives rise to terminal buds, more needle mass that gives rise to new root growth in the containerized environment. And again, one more time, if we do not have a balance of water and oxygen in that root system, that last little bit of that sugar and starch that goes down into that root system, that gives rise to that root will never create a root without a balance of water and oxygen, it will sit in the end of that root and wait and stockpile and store up and cause abnormal thickening until there is an ability for that root to germinate inside of that system. That is facilitated by the balance of water and oxygen, the tree will wait, it's not going to spend its energy on something that's not going to survive, it's going to wait. That's why they don't grow leaves in the wintertime. Why would it? It's why in the in the late fall, we try to avoid getting a tree to back, but in the artificial circumstance of the containerized environment that experiences more rapid temperature fluctuation, hot spell in November on a Japanese maple catastrophic, right? But if you think about what a tree is doing for a tree, a tree is not going to put a root in it. A root into an environment where that root is going to die. That's like that would be like, you know, throwing your money into a wishing well constantly. It's like wishes are good. Hope is the last thing to die. But let's just be really honest. We've got to be wise with our investments when we have limited resources in a tree is a sedentary standalone organism that does not have a lot of help from anybody else. Self-sustaining microbial activity, all those highways that connect all of these things. Great. Tell a bristlecone pine that in the White Mountains. I'm sure that tree is not sitting there going, hey, buddies, you know, like, can you kick me down some of that energy? I'm like struggling here. Everybody else is like, I'm 5000 years old, bro. Like, I don't have much to give you. We're not even connected because you're that far away. That's why we're this old, because the fire couldn't get ramped up enough to burn both of us at the same time. You know, you got some fire lick. I got some fire lick, but neither one of us went up and smoke. You're on your own. I'm on my own. Let's continue to do our own thing. You stay there. I'll stay here. I'm going to take care of myself. You know what I'm saying? Like, when you start to think about that, that tree has got to make the best decisions for the energy that it has as an independent organism. I understand they help each other in the forested environment. Forests are the ones that burn. Forests are very young. You look at ancient trees. They are standalone organisms in terms of their ability to contain their resources, sustain themselves and work within the ecosystem. And that means when we start to look at a bonsai tree, it is not an unnatural circumstance when we put it into a containerized environment. And we expect for it to be able to manage itself. In an appropriate fashion to sustain itself over the course of time. But we are an active part of that act. Okay. All right. So foyer production generates the roots. If we create the environment for root production to occur. Last thing we want to do in any sort of aftercare condition is let's remove all of the foyer mass. All right, let's dive into the first and obvious one. And I've got a series of notes here because this was a fairly significant discussion. Like I said, number one, repotting. Okay, we are in the season of repotting. Daylight length is incredible. Temperature is increasing. Temperature is increasing. First and foremost, we've got to look at a multitude of mechanisms. And I've written them on the board here. We've got to look at watering. We've got to look at nutrition. We've got to look at temperature. We've got to look at sun and wind exposure. We've got to look at the season. We've got to look at the foyer mass. We've got to look at the species. We've got to consider the physiology. And then we can determine the facility. These are all of the factors that go into aftercare. Right. It's not put it here. Spray it with this. Do this. Now we're going to do this. Now we're good to go. That's how we take care of repotting. If it were that easy, everybody would be successful at bonsai. You guys think bonsai is easy? None of us think bonsai is easy. I've been in this for a very long time. I have a tree at Mirai that I started when I was 12 years old. Right. It's going to be 30 years with me this year. I can't believe it's still alive. I'm shocked. It's amazing. Right. And it has been a challenge from day one. Actually, both of the trees. Actually, all three of the trees that have been with me since I was 12 have all gone through major, major issues of health struggles over the course of time. Right. So when you think about that, understanding this plethora of opportunities to screw this up, it means we've got to be very knowledge about all of them to correct anything or care for something after the repotting operation. Okay. Now, when we start to think about this, if fall is when root growth is generated, technically you could start to. And this has been a growing theme in some regions of North America, in Europe and in the global sort of pursuit of bonsai. If fall is when roots grow, shouldn't we be. Shouldn't we be handling our roots in the fall? I mean, this would make sense, right? Like I repot what in the middle of summer and then I get this fall growth and everything should be okay. And what we recognize is like, hey, the daylight length is is too long. There's too long of days. The temperature is too high. The conditions are not appropriate to be as intimately involved with the roots system as we are in bonsai, which means messing up the biology, messing up the balance of water and oxygen at a point in time where the tree needs that water to cool itself and to hydrate the continued production of sugars and starches through photosynthesis. We engage with the root system far more intimately than any other endeavor in the horticultural model, far more intimately, far more obtrusive than any other condition in the horticultural model. Okay. Now, if we're talking about getting a solid root ball out of collection, maybe the fall is a great time. We get fall rains. We go back and collect. Now we get root production on top of that. Awesome. But in the bonsai model, we're taking off the surface. We're invading, invading the sheen. We're replacing the soil. We're breaking up the fine matted roots that are hydrating that tree. And in that instance, we've got to look at spring where we're saying, listen, spring equals short days, cooler temps, cooler temps, because we know some places there's warm temps in the spring, cooler temps than the summertime. Okay. Short days and cooler temps. But here's the problem. We might have a piggybacking production of new roots in the white tips that we see when we repot in the spring that are a product of the vascular productivity that's been taking place with the momentum of the fall season across the winter. We recognize that trees are consistently accumulating, right? And we're saying temperature tolerance. If my temperature tolerance is down to negative 10 degrees Fahrenheit, for a ponderosa pine, and that maxes out at January 15th. And from that point, as we see winter solstice daylight length increasing, tree starts to move those sugars and starches up into the actual vascular system of the trunk branches and terminal buds to begin that long migration of that lopsided sugar starch loading in the vacuole with no water or limited water, right? So that it doesn't freeze in those cooler temperatures. Water moves in, distributes the sugars and starches to the tip and low and behold, when we start spending that energy and we reduce our winter tolerance, and this is when we start full year production, we start to recognize, oh, wow, okay, that root growth that was taking place is not a product of spring. That root growth that was taking place is the tail end of fall and over the winter and the accumulation of these resources and their production of tissue in all of that abundant storage. But when we start saying, listen, on my energy system of the tree, if in say March or April, spring, wherever you are across the world, I have a maximum stored energy, which was the product of fall. That was the product of fall. I start to spend that energy to produce the solar panels and that expansion of the ability for the tree to get bigger. I spend that over the spring season. And we recognize spring is all about full year production. Full year production means they stored energy is generating more solar panels when the day is getting longer and the temperatures are increasing to ramp up metabolic activity. It is not a production of vascular tissue. And when we look at this model in terms of the physiological justification of this theory, the tree rings of a tree show a minor amount of vascular productivity in the spring and a major amount of vascular productivity in the fall. Small spring growth, large fall growth. Fall growth is what forms the primary thickening component and identification of the tree ring. And so we recognize it's very, very easy to observe this and see the physiology of it. So we repot in the spring, but we're spending all of the energy that we have already stored in the tree from the productivity of root production and vascular storage over the fall and the winter. What does that mean about your threshold for success in the repotting process? It means you have got to save enough roots on the tree to both deliver the sugars and starches to the full year mass and continue to hydrate the full year mass that is produced upon those roots. And when we perform a repot where we see a tree stop growing, when we perform a repot where full year production does not exist, when we perform a repot where we see foliage lost doesn't mean the tree is going to die, but we see foliage lost. These are all physiological indicators that inform your aftercare because we start to recognize if a tree is doing anything other than growing. The tree is communicating to you, I don't have enough to sustain and add. Now, if it's not losing anything, the tree is telling you, I only have enough to sustain. If a tree starts to lose something, I don't have enough to sustain. To what degree and how do we fix it? What's the only path out of recovery? What's the only path out of a step backwards? For your mass producing sugars and starches, providing the correct aftercare to maintain hydration of the canopy and the root system until we get to a time in the year where the sugars and starches create new root mass. And how do we create that? Again, balance of water and oxygen. Okay? So these are the ways that repotting starts to weave itself into our bonsai practice. And if you don't understand that vascular productivity is not occurring in the spring and that the that's your point of foyer growth. And if you don't understand that the energy that creates that came from last fall, then you can really misinterpret what is physiologically happening in the tree that's driving the presence of that productivity and the way that we handle that tree afterwards. Okay? So we start to say post repotting, most important aspect of aftercare, no matter what you're talking about, balance of water and oxygen, because you have impaired you have impaired the tree in terms of you've taken a system that had set up a vascular productivity to support an expanding leaf mass because this tree's mechanism is to continually get bigger. If it's not growing, it's dying. We know a tree has to get bigger. We have to accept that it's going to get bigger every year. We cannot stop it from getting bigger. And in fact, we want to welcome it to get bigger, and we want to apply the techniques of bonsai to manage, adjust, balance, and achieve an aesthetic result that it must get bigger okay but if we don't have that balance of water and oxygen what is the most important watering after we thoroughly saturate the soil and wash all the fines out of a tree post repotting the first watering after that and we say listen after you have put a tree in a pot anchored it successfully chopstick top dressed and saturated that soil mass the next step is to let that tree dry out so that oxygen gets back into that system oxygen getting back into that system allows compartmentalization of those cuts breaks tears scratches and wounds in the root system compartmentalization of the damage creates a callus from the sugars and starches that are beginning to be produced because we recognize by the time we're repotting sugars and starches are stimulating the presence of foliar potential as well as photosynthetic productivity of that water conductivity that allows us to heal those wounds and if we strike the balance of water and oxygen and we allow that tree to get oxygen in system to compartmentalize the wounds that first watering could be the stimuli for that minimal amount of spring vascular production in the form of new roots that help your tree recover from that repotting process okay so we're saying listen that initial watering watering in itself is the best aftercare of a repotting system so we're saying listen that initial watering in itself is the best aftercare of a repotting system keeping a repotted tree too wet is the exact same thing as keeping an air layer too wet the tree will not produce new roots the tree will not compartmentalize those cuts breaks tears and damage and in fact keeping it too wet will cause those cuts breaks tears and damage to atrophy more we have a root mass in recession what starts to happen with the root mass in recession post repotting we start to lose foliar mass I just want to make sure that you're listening to this I don't have enough to sustain I certainly don't have enough to add I don't have enough to sustain and in fact I'm in a downward spiral of losing what I need to sustain so I've got to shed some weight to be able to try and curb off this tendency which in the trees mind is a seasonal aspect somehow something happened to my root system and now I've got a tremendous amount of moisture I've got to hold off shed whatever I can to continue to lighten the load until I have a turning point where I get oxygen back into the system where I can compartmentalize that damage and where I can produce new roots because the balance of water and oxygen where those roots will will survive has been established inside of that containerized environment so you say okay after care post repot is all about the intentionality of that watering but we also start to say after care post repot is also about having the ability to alter a condition where either the tree is staying too wet or where we supplement that tree's capacity to compartmentalize and regenerate those roots so we say listen good watering maybe maybe changing the angle of even a freshly repotted tree should we see a decline to remove excess water remove excess water right and if we can speed up metabolism a heat bed if we can speed up metabolism to drive compartmentalization drive compartmentalization right and encourage root growth we can help a tree that might not have enough to sustain and add we can pull some of that full your potential which we have to understand bottom heat is going to pull resources from for your potential if a tree doesn't need bottom heat don't give it bottom heat but if a tree needs bottom heat it is one of the best things you could do to put the metabolic activity focalized in that root system right but when we speed that up and we encourage that to occur we start to reconcile the situation of not having enough roots to potentially sustain we're not even talking about adding at this point in time we're just talking about sustaining at this point okay now you have to keep in mind that all water is driven through a tree through the cohesion tension theory this is to say I have a water molecule sitting in the stomata at the leaf at the very tip of my branch at the very tip of my leaf and Mr. Wind and little Mr. Sunshine here always having a good day cause that to evaporate and turn into a gaseous state now that's connected to another water molecule the cohesive nature of water molecule to water molecule the cohesive nature of the water molecule to the wall of xylem which determines how tall a tree can get but we won't go there today when that leaves that water molecule comes together on buddy come on and it pulls that next molecule into its place before it turns into gaseous form and then that next guy goes no no not me but it pulls its buddy into place as it turns into gaseous form so if you have a tree that you've repotted and you've removed a significant amount of root mass if you have a tree that you repotted that you push the ultimate boundary how do you know where that boundary exists you got to push past that boundary to see where that boundary exists once you push past that boundary it will be a memorable experience oh my gosh I push past the sustainable boundary of root reduction and that tree died and I loved it so much now I know what it looks like to kill a tree through over root reduction I'm gonna start to find that sweet spot where I repot I provide the appropriate aftercare tree continues to grow and thrive but when we start to walk that line which when you're taking big trees putting them in small pots that's the goal of bonsai right that's what makes the aesthetic so beautiful you've got to be walking that line of pushing too far to achieve the aesthetic that drives this art form you also have to understand that if I'm creating excessive draws of water out of the foliar mass I'm automatically challenging that root system that I've just pushed to the degree of whether it can hydrate the tree or not I'm challenging that root mass to keep up with the actions of the external environment and this is where we say aftercare post repotting right balance water oxygen gets us new roots a heat bed can steam can speed up the metabolic activity the biggest thing that we need to recognize is the only way that we recover from that is keeping the foliar mass hydrated enough to produce sugars and starches that build the vascular tissue that compartmentalize and replace the root mass we removed so if I lose the water out of that foliar mass too rapidly without the ability for that tension on that chain to continue to grow and thrive and to pull water through a much more limited number of root tips because I've taken away that root system now all of a sudden I can get to a point where either the chain breaks or where this portion where that water and oxygen remember co2 goes in water comes up Sun stimulates the breaking of these bonds and the reformation c6h 1206 sugar through photosynthesis the water has got to be there for the resource that generates vascular productivity to have the capacity to regenerate that root mass that we have in p impaired through the repotting process you start to recognize oh my gosh I don't want that I don't want I don't want to put stress on that foliar mass so we say listen after repotting we avoid intense Sun after repotting we avoid heavy wind and when we start to talk about the severity of the repotting and the degree to which we've walked the boundary sometimes we might say listen severe when severe Sun I don't want any wind I want a very minimal amount of Sun I need to give this thing the best opportunity to be able to regenerate what I've taken away from it and I am gonna offer total protection now a tree has to have light to photosynthesize but a tree does not have to have wind to photosynthesize right so we put it into a very favorable environment maybe we even missed the foliar mass what is misting the foliar mass do does it rehydrate the foliar mass absolutely not for your misting stops the evaporation of that so that the immense amount of tension that's been put on that water chain can be eased right tension tension tension I don't have the roots I don't have the moisture but I'm a babbo transpiring and then we put that full your mist on that foliar mass and suddenly evaporation ceases for a moment and through those minimal amount of root tips we get some of the water back in the system and we're able to ease that tension and then that water evaporates that's covering the stomata that's stopping gaseous exchange and suddenly that tension starts to amass again and we missed it again and that tension is relieved again and then that water evaporates and that tension begins again for a tree that's walking the boundary of life and death just slowing down that loss of water and relieving the tension on the chain could be the thing that hydrates the foliar mass enough to create the sugars and starches that compartmentalized the wound and allow for that balance of water and oxygen to produce the new roots that allow the tree over normal conditions in time in the future to hydrate itself and so we start to say oh the tree is not good enough for the okay misting on a far extreme of walking the boundary of aftercare if understood correctly if applied correctly can have a major impact on the success and the nurturing of a tree that has had its roots tampered with in the environment that are challenging its hydration in order to keep the system capable of repairing itself and getting to a point where we don't have to mist anymore okay and typically I would say listen misting is not something that we do on a continuum misting is something that we can do in the very beginning of aftercare post repotting to ease the tension on that chain for a heavily root-reduced tree we don't want to do it on a tree that doesn't need it how do I know if it doesn't need it do you have a healthy root mass do you do you have some portion untouched did we be sure that we didn't bear root is the tree stable in the environment did you not over a chopstick did everything go accordingly according to plan yeah cool don't mist maybe we don't need a heat bed maybe we can even put it out into into morning sun afternoon shade maybe it doesn't need to be protected in the wind but if we start to do things where we say gosh that was a little aggressive man I'm removed a lot yeah that there was some rough rough patches in there of that repot we start to up our ante of after care post repot and we say listen I'm gonna mist for the first seven to ten days because it takes 10 days for new roots to emerge post repot and new roots start to emerge and I start to wean myself off of misting two or three times a day now can misting defeat the balance of water and oxygen in the container absolutely because it can keep the container completely saturated if you keep the container completely saturated do you get new root growth after 10 days no you won't get new root growth until you strike the balance of water and oxygen can misting be the thing that defeats and destroys a repot absolutely absolutely and so we have to apply the technique with the physiological knowledge and with the understanding of how the tree horticulturally recovers to be able to sustainably apply a technique like misting in a way that benefits the tree and does not actually create a counterproductive environment for that tree's recovery from the operation we performed okay post repotting aftercare is all about limiting the stress and the rapid loss of water in the foyer mass so that you maintain hydration strike a balance of water and oxygen generates new root growth and you keep the tree moving forward any advanced Bonsai practitioner unless you exist in a tropical environment and maybe even in a tropical environment any Bonsai practitioner benefits in the repotting season from the use of a greenhouse to cut the wind to control the sun and to reduce the loss of water after an impediment to the roots until the tree gets its feet back underneath it now what does it mean to recover from repotting well does that mean we don't have to care about the balance of water and oxygen absolutely not that's just the beginning that's just the potential we see the buds start to elongate is it time to move it out into the external environment at that point in time maybe how severe was the repot very severe repot I still wouldn't trust it moderate repot yeah maybe we put it in a morning sun afternoon shade with some protection from the wind light repot buds are elongating get it out of here severe repot buds are elongating I'm going to wait till they start to happen I'm going to wait till I start to see dependable needle mass right I'm going to wait till I start to see leaves just beginning before I move that out moderate repot yeah I don't need to see those leaves I don't need to see those needles light repot yeah I don't even need to see the buds elongating maybe you know Japanese black pine back in Japan fundamental repot top side bottom sheen's in good place it's completely uh established tree we'd repot it we'd set it back outside and Mr commercial let those trees freeze repot it we'd set it back outside he'd start fertilizing it because it wasn't an initial repot where we completely deconstructed and we pushed that tree to the boundary of death it wasn't a sheen replacement in that second repot where we're going to challenge the microbial environment in the biological system it was a tree that had a minimal impact with a tremendous amount of fine roots developed through the scalability of the bonsai soil we put it back outside and it was like we never did anything to it the only thing that changed was that water went through it much more that but this is the degree to which we have to look at aftercare if you're going to provide aftercare in an appropriate fashion you want me to talk about aftercare we've got to really be looking at every point of the energy system every point of the species nuance every point of the severity of the repot which repotting is it what was done how have we handled it and that allows us to gauge things but just circling back to formalize this after care post repotting is all about most important water application is the first one after that tree has been thoroughly hydrated in the pot because we need it to dry out we wouldn't let a spruce dry out as much as a pine we wouldn't let a maple dry out as much as a juniper but we do need to get oxygen back into the system we need to see that top dressing show that it has thoroughly lost water content throughout the containerized environment okay once we've thoroughly saturated that we may we may need to change the angle of a tree that stayed too wet that isn't drying out to get excess water out of it we can use a heat bed to enhance metabolic activity compartmentalization and root regeneration for a tree we've pushed very far okay heat bed let me just say 75 to 80 degrees Fahrenheit is optimal temperature okay we want to avoid intense sun we want to reduce or completely eliminate wind and for your misting is one of these things that we apply if done responsibly to ease the loss of water in the canopy to reduce the tension on the chain to allow the tree to continue hydration that allows sugars and starches to be produced that creates the compartmentalization and vascular tissue that allows that tree to effectively recover from repot and how do we know when it's recovered from a repot we see the tree sustained plus add we see the addition of growth when we see the addition of growth does it go out into full sun no it goes into an area with morning sun and afternoon shade it goes into an area with a light or limited amount of wind that's protected for 7 10 14 days growth continues unimpacted okay let's move it into a more exposed environment a little more wind still morning sun 7 to 10 days we're still good great let's move it into sun and wind things are still good awesome things get funky I can mist I can ease the tension on the chain I can change that environment right but understanding the physiology there is where all of this starts to become something that you can deduce the technique and the action that is appropriate for your tree all right repotting repotting after tear if you have questions if there's anything I didn't thoroughly cover enough be sure that you write those down because we will have a Q a at the end understanding the cohesion tension of water mobility uh in advanced species of woody perennials very very important very very important this is still the water transport Theory that hydrates the Redwoods that hydrates the Sequoias that hydrates the sand that hydrates that ten dollar Juniper that we find at Home Depot that has the capacity to be a great bonsai right you know it's this it's the same mechanism across the board okay ah repotting was the biggest one okay oh you know what I didn't talk about um let me let me just come back to this okay because we need to be thorough in this discussion okay repotting so we talked about water nutrition in post repot as far as an aftercare discussion so we talked about we did water check uh we haven't talked temperature we definitely talked season Sun and wind uh let's talk about foyer mass a little bit species I think I feel like we're okay okay all right facility everybody always says post repot when can I fertilize when can I fertilize when can I fertilize can I fertilize now can I fertilize to help the repot can I fertilize to to improve the tree can I fertilize the tree the tree to get it to grow how do I make my tree do what I want I repotted grow I want it to grow can I do that no no nope listen trees feed themselves through photosynthesis photosynthesis is facilitated by carbon dioxide and water you only get water and carbon dioxide through appropriate uh care plus balance water and oxygen to repair the root system nowhere in the discussion fertilizer application fertilizer does not solve things fertilizer does not fix things and in fact if you really want to destroy a tree that's been repotted fertilize it that is the best way to completely eradicate recovery of a tree post repot because let's say we strike that balance of water and oxygen let's say we achieve that compartmentalization let's say we get that new root growth to occur how do you destroy fresh fine root tips you fertilize you add salt to the system you change the balance of water and oxygen by introducing another dynamic the tree doesn't need it the tree's feeding itself through photosynthesis we're repotting because it had stored energy we're using that energy to create the the the repercussive growth of the repotting activity and the best way to defeat that tree's natural progression forward is to fertilize now i just told you mr kimura would repot a black pine that was fully established put it outside it would freeze and he would fertilize it i'm not saying that you should be doing that i'm not saying that you should be doing that i'm not saying that you should be doing that that's not me promoting that i'm saying that is the degree to which an established root system could potentially be handled under the guidance of a master a bonsai master in an environment where he's been cultivating trees for 40 plus years at the highest possible level across the world okay that's not you that's not me let's all be really clear about that that's not us we don't understand the depth and nuances of our environment and the species behaviors enough for any one of us including myself to be doing that fertilization does not need to begin post repot until we see the growth of our trees not just begin not just continue but until we see the growth of our trees start to harden off that would be a moment where you say okay if the canopy is a representation above ground of the current conditions that are ahead of us that we're growing trees that we would have more that are occurring below ground I'm only going to be nutritioning a tree supplementally through fertilization if it has enough to sustain and add and if it adds it I only need to apply supplemental nutrition once that growth has hardened off as an indicator of what is happening to the new roots occurring in the containerized environment so when we start to talk about this post repot application of nutrition is a light application not a heavy not a moderate a light application at full your hardening for a tree that produced vegetative growth post repot okay for what about those trees that produced a weak flush of growth you got to wait a longer before you fertilize what about a tree that didn't grow you got away longer on that tree because we're saying listen you know the next time that that tree is going to produce roots post repot is in the fall you don't want to mess with the water oxygen balance and dynamic in the containerized environment with the root system that existed that did not have enough to sustain and add and you're going into the summer season with no more root mass than you had thinking that adding a salt in a complete and total change of environment to a root system that has not expanded to the degree that it can add we think that's a good idea we think that's gonna fix things that's gonna completely destroyed the potential we've got a wait until we start to see behavior change right so for a tree that doesn't grow in the spring the next time that I'm looking at fertilizing is probably a huge risk when is your tree able to survive with excess roots found on past adulthood going to be something more around the tune of late summer early fall when I'm entering the vascularly productive phase if it survives summer then it has enough to sustain and if it has enough to sustain and I strike that balance of water and oxygen which has been my focus the entire time instead of trying to lean on nutrition as a silver bullet to fix the problem I'm working on my balance of water and oxygen I'm thinking about that tree that's not growing and every time I water it I've got to be absolutely on point to get that tree to survive that is a part of aftercare balance water and oxygen balance water oxygen balance water action we get to that early fall now we can introduce something at a point where the tree is moving into the creation of its vascular tissue now we can introduce it survived those things somehow we got it to this point now we can start to supplement that tree's health and that tree's capacity to grow okay but until that point if you don't have vegetative growth if that growth hasn't hardened off yet there is no fertilization if you get vegetative growth and it's hardened off a light application to begin the process maybe only one maybe one or two light applications across the late spring early summer we hold off in the peak of heat and we begin again in the fall with a moderate but if your tree hasn't produced any vegetative mass it's still focusing on that one significant issue we know that doesn't get fixed until the fall balance of water and oxygen until we get to that moment and then we can start to look at that now that tree that's not producing vegetative growth what kind of environmental situation do we put it in not full Sun and full wind it didn't have enough to sustain and add what makes us think we can put it under the most severe dehydrating conditions and have it be able to to to support itself or sustain itself that's the tree that we are very careful of through the summer that's the tree that we put under shade cloth that's the tree that we keep out of intense wind regardless I learned this lesson the hardest of ways 117 degree heat ponderosa pines should be fine California junipers should be fine and I wasn't wrong I also wasn't right the thing that I did not take into consideration is if a tree has been repotted it has not had the season of vascular productivity to create a root system that allows it to sustain itself under the most compromising what is Ultimate Health resistance if I don't have a root system built up I'm not I'm not fully equipped for resistance that was really where we suffered that was really where I learned the lesson the hardest of lessons but the lesson I get to share with you which is hey that root system doesn't come back after repotting until you get through the fall could we go into a discussion of post repotting aftercare meaning shade cloth and continued consideration in the increasingly hot summers across the world absolutely absolutely but let's stay focused okay nutrition in the repotting process water in the repotting process we understand the season what temperature generates six new roots 42 degrees Fahrenheit and above ambient air temperature for 12 plus hours of the day heat bed can speed that up what temperature really ramps up metabolic activity 80 degrees Fahrenheit and above is when the tree starts to enter its real sort of sweet spot right it's in the zone flow state okay once we cross 90 we start to get into a level of metabolic activity that we need to have a root system to be able to facilitate the continued perpetuation of that motor all right I'm done with repotting okay let's go into styling this is a good one styling's a good one okay now styling definitely definitely comes down to seasonality and let's just be very very clear let's set some expectations for ourselves we understand spring as far as structural and there's different types of styling like there's different types of repotting structural work which means we are going to be doing big bends we are going to risk big breaks we may possibly be reducing vascular tissue whether you're wedge cutting a pine whether you're thinning a juniper right when we are doing structural styling activities this is when we need to be very very concrete in our understanding of appropriate timing and season peak energy positive just prior to period of growth so we say early spring is number one early fall is number two okay now historically at Mirai our major structural styling occurs in early fall why because we repot 300 plus trees a year early spring is tough with the way that we offer education at Mirai we have students that are talented enough and enough firepower and I can categorically tell you that trees that are heavily structurally styled in the early spring far outpace recovery of trees that are structurally styled in the early Fall does it mean early fall is bad No for the past 12 of 13 years we have been doing a majority of our structural work in early fall it's worked out pretty well for us but the recovery process of Structural work in early fall vascular productivity after that and now we enter winter that winter aftercare is Really what we need to be concerned with and so we get into this notion. Okay early spring. I have tissue damage What is the danger? heat of summer Heat of summer with reduced vascular conductivity Early fall. What is the aftercare? cold of winter Dormancy of winter lack of metabolic activity and the atrophying of embolisms the expansion of those breaks throughout the tissue without metabolic activity to compartmentalize and repair and so we start to say, okay, What would lead me to perform a structural styling a tree? That's growing with tremendous vigor because I'm gonna pull on the energy system of the tree I'm gonna reduce 40 50 60 percent of the branches to make the structural decisions that create the space that Allow me to set those primary pieces coming off the trunk or maybe even the trunk shape itself It's certainly not a tree that I've repotted. It's a tree that's either been prepared through the recovery process post collection It's a nursery stock piece that's been repotted and regenerated its roots over the course of that year Including through the fall I repot in the spring. Am I doing a structural styling in the fall? Absolutely not Why not fall is when I get that root growth that leads to recovery. I repot in the spring next time I could do a structural Major initial styling following spring at the very earliest if it's still not vigorous then wait till the fall of that next year, right? Tree has to be ready for this one This is the biggest preparatory styling that we're gonna perform on a tree. Make sure the energy system is stocked Timing's got to be right Trees got to be healthy and ready for it technique obviously is the one that we're constantly working on to refine and hone to be able to push the boundaries of these time frames and the success of the Operation but if you give yourself a healthy tree that's prepared for the operation you can fudge on technique and capacity. This is where a beginner Pursuing bonsai at the appropriate timing with a healthy tree Horticulturally can get away with a lesser degree of technique and have bonsai success Okay, but after I perform a styling what is my priority? Well, let's just be really clear structural styling We take 60% of the branches off. What's the first thing that you need to establish? balanced water and oxygen balanced water and oxygen 60% of the Transpiration almas remember that gaseous water molecule pulling its buddy into place creating tension on the chain take away 60% of that draw of water what's going to happen to the containerized environment? It's gonna stay wetter So if you're not changing your watering practices post styling after care post styling has already failed has already failed This is the biggest issue Why decandling multi flush pines in the middle? Of Summer causes damage to It back to the client watered its trees on a watering system Continued watering is multi flush pine that'd be deferred on the watering system that was dead two months later. And he sued the bonsai professional. He said, the bonsai professional killed my tree, he decandled it. Bonsai professional didn't kill the tree, we all know that. I ain't killed the tree. He put it in an all watering system that continued to hydrate a tree that had lost 80% of its foliar mass. Is what it is. And listen, we think about, hey, Ryan, tell me the aftercare that helps me repair a break, that helps me repair a bend. Talk to me about big bending. Every aspect of success post styling is all about proactively heading off the issues that come with the season you're approaching and adjusting your water and oxygen balance in the containerized environment to compensate for that loss of foliar mass and draw of water through the system. So we're saying, listen, number one, post styling, adjust water. Adjust your watering to compensate for the proportional loss of that draw of water through the containerized environment. Is this the biggest reason why we say repot nursery stock first before you style? Absolutely. Absolutely, this drives that strategy. Because I have this little tree in a big nursery can with almost entirely organic water conductive water holding material, and I reduce the foliar mass by 60%, and I think that big vat, that big bucket of water, is going to dry out and create a balance of water and oxygen that allows this tiny tree, with 40% of its foliar mass left to thrive in that environment? Not a prayer, not a chance. How many nursery stock trees have you styled and designed and watched them die afterwards? And people say, why? Why does that happen? Well, if balance of water and oxygen is what allows a tree to stay healthy, and foliar mass is what's moving that water out of that containerized environment, you've gotta set a tree up for success with the reduced foliar mass that you understand is coming with that initial styling, or else that tree cannot do it on its own, okay? Second, if we have tissue reduction, if we have breaks, if we have tears, now we recognize that the chain of water that is facilitating and hydrating the foliar mass at the end of that branch that has that break, that has that tear, that has that damage, the chain of water is smaller, that is hydrating and delivering moisture to that foliar mass. Now, there's a boundary. There's a boundary here. We start to teeter-totter on this, and we say, yeah, but I removed 50% of the foliar mass that that was sustaining. That actually might be the saving grace of not needing to necessarily alter your behavior that much, but do you know that? No. Should you proactively remove foliar mass on a branch that breaks? Absolutely not, because what repairs that break? The foliar mass, the sugars and starches, and the vascular productivity. When does it repair that break? Vascular productive time of year in the fall. What do we need to do until then? Reduce the amount of moisture lost in that foliar mass in the same way we did when we reduced the amount of moisture lost in the foliar mass post repot. A tree that suffers a heavy break, a major tear, a very massive vascular conductive reduction, what do we do? First thing, keep it out of wind. Second thing, keep it out of intense sun. Morning sun, afternoon shade, protected from the wind. If we still are concerned, we see a loss of hydration, or we recognize it's broken down, broken to the point where it may not be able to stay hydrated, we miss that foliar mass to ease the tension on the chain and provide the capacity for compartmentalization and potential foliar vascular production to occur. How do we know when we're out of it when that branch continues to grow? When it produces a little bit of growth? No, same discussion as repotting. A little bit of growth on a severely repotted tree, I'm not gonna move that out into the external environment. I'm gonna continue to let it establish. A moderate amount of growth on a severely broken tree, I'm still not certain that that tree can sustain itself in full environmental conditions. I'm gonna continue to err on the side of caution. Vigorous production of growth on that piece of tissue, now I know that there is enough water moving through the system, the tree's root systems, the vascular connection between roots and foliage, is substantial enough that the tree is saying, I can sustain and add this degree of vascular draw even though there's a break here. I've either repaired it or the damage wasn't as bad as we thought. Now we can start to challenge its ability to stay hydrated through more sun, more wind. But again, do we go from morning sun and no wind to full sun and full wind? Absolutely not. It's an acclimation process. I go from a little bit of morning sun and no wind to a little more wind with morning sun. 10 days, 14 days, growth continues, stays strong. I go to a little bit more sun, more wind. I go to full sun, more wind when I see that through that, incremental increase in conditions, the tree continues to maintain hydration and move forward. Okay, and one of the biggies with that is saying, listen, if I do this in the spring, I know that I have the heat of summer to compete with. A juniper should be able to take full sun if its root system was established. We wouldn't have done a structural styling if it didn't have an established root system. But now that we've gone ahead and we've compromised that system, daylight length is getting longer. Heat is getting more severe. It has continued to grow with health. Do you want to roll the dice of putting it in the most severe circumstances? Absolutely not. We start to say, listen, shade cloth, as a proactive approach to a negative response to the styling process, major, major reduction, major break, major tear, heavy reduction of vascular conductivity. But Ryan, you said if it's growing, it should be good. Hey, listen, we said in the beginning aftercare is not just about heat. We said in the beginning aftercare is not just about heat. We said in the beginning aftercare is not just about heat. We said in the beginning aftercare is not just about heat. We said in the beginning aftercare is not just about reacting. We said in the beginning aftercare is not just about reacting. We said in the beginning aftercare is not just about reacting. It's about proactive actions you take to head off the problems that could exist. We don't want to ask ourselves, can that survive in the full sun? This tree has, you know, if it's a piece of Yamadori hundreds of years of history behind it, you want to roll the dice on one year because you want to put it in full sun. That's crazy. That's insanity, right? You want to roll the dice, see if it can tolerate winter, hundreds of years of existence. You want to see if it can tolerate winter. That's craziness, right? In one fell swoop, you can stop that process from occurring. This is where we start to say shade cloth, doesn't have to be much, 30%, 30%, minimal. Minimal cutting of the intensity, and we watch that growth consistently. We did major restyling of a juniper on the stream last fall. Put it in the greenhouse. I mean, we've full on ripped the major structural branch off of the deadwood, bent it down, washed it in the greenhouse, started to produce growth, left it in the greenhouse. Typically I don't let trees grow in the greenhouse, but when we have severe repots, the aftercare of such an operation. I see it growing, continues to grow, continues to grow, continues to grow. Put it outside. A little bit of a sheltered environment, a little bit of shade cover, not full sun, a little bit of wind obstruction so that it's not being dehydrated. Watch it. Watch it. Watch it. I'm going to be watching that tree all year. We did this last fall. Should have repaired itself. Correct. Came out of the greenhouse. You said fall. Man, the problem is winter. Hey, listen. A tear that severe, the aftercare doesn't stop. The aftercare doesn't stop until I see the raffia decaying. I'm going to be watching that tree all year. We did this last fall. Should have repaired itself. It's not going to decay from the branch that I raffi it and tore off of the deadwood. That's when the aftercare stops. We have to understand that this is a continuum with our trees. We style in the fall, again, great time, past the heat of summer, prior to the onset of major vascular productivity. We understand when we see wire biting in severely over the fall season, this means we're in peak productivity, vascular production, wire starts to obstruct that swelling. We start to say, we can do a structural styling. six weeks prior to first anticipated freeze. First anticipated freeze. The degree of winter tolerance is not about bending. The degree of winter tolerance is all about foliar reduction. The more foliar mass we reduce in the early fall, the more winter aftercare we need to provide. That six weeks allows sugar starches to adjust. That six weeks in vascular productive period of time allows compartmentalization of damage. That six weeks allows the tree to readjust its navigation system in the form of hormones. But if we start to talk about post-style handling in the fall season, and we have a 50% or more reduction of the foliar mass, or we look at that tree and we say, gosh, that doesn't have a tremendous amount of needles on it, you've got to protect that in the cold. Okay, now in both of these circumstances, when I say cold, don't allow it to freeze. In both of these circumstances, when you start to look at aftercare of styling, you get a major break. How do we handle a major break? Okay, when we talk about a tear, we're talking about a liquid cut paste. This is where callus mate. I paste every single tear on the outside of every bend of every tree that I style. You see the bark separated on a ponderosa pine, you know that doesn't hurt. And you see the bark tear a little bit on a black pine. No big deal. I still paste it. Why run the risk? But we get a major break. This is where we really say, hey, I bend this branch and this branch broke. What do I do? First thing most of us are going to do is we're going to move the bend back. Don't do that. Don't ever do that. Why would we do that? You just bent it and broke it. You think bending it back is going to hurt it? No, it's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. It's not. to help it now you now you just effectively did it for no reason because you don't even get the benefit of the shape that you establish with the break and you still have the same vascular conductivity in fact you might do more damage bending it back because now you're flexing the tissue again leave the break liquid cut paste covering that entire area followed by parafilm seal that up so that there is no loss and it's not lost through the break here because we understand oxygen already came flooding into that the tree is trying to compartmentalize that we want to stop the loss of water through that bark that exists on the tissue that still exist that still is intact yes water is lost through the trunk yes water is lost through the branching yes water is lost most most importantly and most abundantly through the foliar mass the leaves and the needles but that tissue in that constricted space needs support covering the cut is one way to stop oxygen from continuing to infiltrate it's one way to put hormone on fresh tissue to get it to start to callus this is never going to reemerge you're never gonna see a break refuse it's not gonna happen it will be a break for the rest of the tree's life you now have to stop the dehydration of the tissue that still exists so that water can move through that freely to continue hydrating that foliar mass most important thing that you do on a severe break seal the break so that you stimulate new cellular division and protect that vascular tissue that's still intact from excessively transpiring so that you give the tip of that branch the best possible opportunity for success big break protection from the summer heat big break in the fall protection from the winter cold these are no brainers okay do i need to mist in the fall if you have the loss of water loss of chagity wind sun all of those things still a factor but in the fall those factors that are acting on dehydration are declining that's where fall is such a good time and where we've had so much success at mirai we're not dealing with the long day like length and increasing temperature pulling more moisture out of the foliar mass like we are in the spring but water is moving more rapidly in the spring it's being forced through that vascular tissue water is receding in the fall and that's where there is this odd trade off to these two seasons but both of them are prior to the onset of growth foliar vascular and both of those seasons in the structural application of styling and design need a consideration of protection post operation protection and maintenance so that's where we're at in the fall and then we're going to continue that big major styling manifestation and operation does that make sense aftercare on another level right here y'all because it's not just oh my god i broke a branch what do i do well you know patch it up straighten it out put wire to some um that's not what we're doing here that's that's for the bonsai basics book and we recognize that you get past that the moment that you style your first tree that's not what it looks like we all know that's not what it looks like if that technique and methodology has helped save as much time as you have to fill your two feet with water and also prevent thedeer to deform the stem root of the tree by how you're going to move your. any branches on your trees over the course of time I would be shocked okay it's more advanced than that it has a bigger story than that now are there are there species that lend themselves to repair better than others obviously junipers Lou move resources linearly right we know that a break on a juniper is a very big deal okay pines move resources laterally as well as vertically okay elongating species store their energy in the vascular system okay broadleaf deciduous trees have very little backbone to the vascular connectivity and system have very little adaptability to those breaks okay okay all right I see this I see what's happening here right now when we talk about broadleaf deciduous early spring most brittle time of year early fall never a good time and let's talk about that a little bit more unless you're trying to maximize vascular productivity leaf drop best time to structurally wire a broadleaf deciduous it's the one exception to the other fundamental aspects of technical application okay I just wanted to make note of that water nutrition temperature Sun for your mass species okay nutrition post post styling obviously when we start to talk about you this action of styling compromising vascular conductivity we're not talking about the same thing as impacting the root system in trying to use nutrition as this as a sad to a poor repot or repot that walk the line so when we're styling in when we have a major breakage in its just prior to the onset of a major flush of growth foyer or vascular supplemental nutrition because we wouldn't be structurally styling a tree that is not established in its root system and is not strong that means that we're working with a tree that's very strong and has a very established root system we can fertilize and in fact in this operation some of aftercare is supplemental nutrition to provide the resources that allow the tree to continue physiologically functioning at a higher level with the resources needed to maximize metabolic activity and this is where thinking about supplemental nutrition that feeds cellular productivity could be the next level of aftercare post styling for major failures operations breaks tears or reduction of vascular tissue to merge and mend and repair that damage and when we look at that calcium as the major backbone of new cellular production is also one of the things in a lot of our bonsai cultivation inside of the tree that is deficient you think about how do I repair damage calcium in the system is a big one now some of you know if you're east of the Cascades through the majority of North America if you're existing in almost an entirety of the Mediterranean regions of Europe you're probably dealing with a fairly basic alkaline pH and you say I've got an alkaline pH which means I've got plenty of calcium I see it on my pots in the form of calcium carbonate that is not plant available calcium right so when we start to think about calcium calcium becomes available at a slightly more acidic pH the form of calcium that plants used to create new cells is not calcium carbonate it's got to be more water soluble than that so when we think about this this is really one of the benefits of bio gold if you just want to break it down from start to finish bio gold as a as a fertilization mechanism a fertilization recipe a physiological anchor to the bonsai process in the western world. as derived from this unknown manifestation of bonsai design from Japan what makes something better than another the unspoken or unknown qualities and traits of that thing and for bio gold thirteen percent soluble calcium available to your plant does it come with some issues yeah it does over the course of time certainly is bio gold a good solution as an aftercare mechanism if you need calcium in the system and that's where new cellular division comes from. listen I didn't know this was taking place as I was styling all of these trees in the first ten years of my right but I know that bio gold gave me a better response in a better result than anything else that I utilized and it comes down to the calcium content in the form of the calcium empowering cellular division in the production of tissue right so I throw that out there I'm not sponsored by bio gold I don't even know who makes it I've got a ton of bags of bio gold down in my basement because I'm working with other forms of nutrition. that are a lot more pointed less broad spectrum more accurate and customized but it is still a tool that I keep in my tool belt understanding now with the dissection of its of its chemistry where it can function in the bonsai process styling after care I feel like we did it I feel like we did it in a way that I've never heard anybody do it before okay all right now I've got one more I've got one more and this one more is a little bit of a catch all because we've talked about repositioning. we've talked about styling those are the two big operations that demand ultimate health in order to successfully accomplish let me just look at this how we doing on time hour and a half in figures okay damage damage is a catch all for everything that happens that we did not intend to happen and I'm gonna break this down in a multiple of ways okay temperature damage we're gonna come back and talk about that high versus low nutrition toxicity versus deficiency sort of genetic thing or Foundation for which is to say hey listen balance of water and oxygen in the root system is the only way that we can telletry. fortify itself. and to to so. say hey. cross the groats, do they. recover but the way that we build that root system is through the foliar mass so many of our responses when we see our tree take on a visual sign of damage is to say should we remove the damage should we remove the damage and the answer is absolutely not absolutely not now there are a few exceptions to that we're gonna cover those 99% of the time do not touch your tree after its experienced damage okay let me tell you the two exceptions now blows off the bench and your pot shatters we're gonna need to do something about that what do we do we're gonna put it back into a slightly larger contain slightly larger container so that we don't have to break apart the root system and put it back into a smaller container we can't just slip it back into a light container because all of the walls and all of the walls are going to be damaged so we're not going to be able to get rid of it all of that root system is going to shed water around the path of least resistance into the larger soil mass around it slightly larger container chopped stick in the soil and we go ahead and we move into the same aftercare post repot out of Sun out of wind and we strike that balance water and oxygen okay there's that one second one borer damage you've got to go in and find the borer you've got to find it if you leave borer damage they will continue to feed right you've got to go find the borer other than those two damaged scenarios I can't think of another scenario where you should not remove or touch your tree excuse me where you should remove or touch your tree remove some damaged pieces and touch your tree now there may be there may be I can't think of them okay let's talk about temperature first and foremost all right susceptibility to temperature comes directly with sort of your species tolerance and the other thing that we're going to be talking about is the tolerance you're full your mass your container size and the condition of your roots okay ultimate health balance of water and oxygen gives rise to a massive root system you have a greater resistance to heat and cold in that scenario you have more sugars and starches you have a lot more antibodies that can respond to stress you've got a lot more tolerance for the farther degrees and outlying circumstances of that tree's capacity to endure any way you go about it a healthy tree has a lot more capacity to respond in an unhealthy tree does not so you say listen what's the proactive approach to avoiding a temperature high again I learned this the hard way do not subject a weak tree to intense heat do not subject a weak tree to intense cold pull those pieces into the most sheltered and protected environment and guess what you need to do while they're there focus on the balance of water and oxygen focus on the balance of water and oxygen should you remove the nutritional things that are applied to the containerized environments yes I think that would probably help you shouldn't have nutrition on a super weak tree let's just let's just reset that system you should not have a ton of nutrition on a weak tree entering the hot period you should not have a ton of nutrition on a weak tree entering a cold period if you do take it off get it out of there get that system back to a fundamental building block of the roots reestablishing through a balance of water and oxygen fertilizer is not a fix it's a supplement to not a solution okay so when we start to see this we're proactively heading off that opportunity for damage to occur now here's the thing you can't always visually identify a tree that lacks Ultimate Health oftentimes we realize a tree was impaired because something happens and suddenly the tree does not respond appropriately I'm going to give you a little anecdote from this spring for me we were treating with a a biological insecticide not an insecticide a biological insect control right it's a it's a beneficial bacteria and the bacteria gets on the insect actually enters the ventricle it grows inside of the insect it chews the insect up from the inside out the delivery mechanism for that spore form of the biology had a slight degree of a viscosity of oil clogs up our our pump that delivers the the spray it's kind of a nightmare ultimately to clean it all up we've been looking at this and seeing this okay now we applied it to 200 junipers of those 200 junipers right and and most of them with robust foliar masses five junipers suffered significantly they suffered in the way a juniper would suffer if you treated it with a Volk oil or a horticultural oil and this is why we say hey listen 195 junipers were fine five junipers were not fine were those five junipers predisposed to susceptibility to to an oil-based biological insect control no those five junipers although robust and full of foliar mass had an inherent lack of Ultimate Health and with each one of those junipers when we went back in and we looked at what else was happening with this juniper that made it susceptible to this when 195 were okay there was inevitably a root related issue happening below the surface that we were not aware of now had I been aware of would I withheld that no did I know that that could even cause phytotoxicity no but when we applied it and it did cause phytotoxicity now I understand that we have a problem what's the solution balance water and oxygen what created the susceptibility was a shortcoming in the root system of the tree where the epicenter of immunity is sourced how do I fix that then do I worry about taking off all the damaged foliage no because new foliage can occur on the branches of damaged foliage it's foliage right new foliage can occur in the crotches of that I don't want to remove all that I don't want to do something to the tree I can't change it the only thing that I can fix about that tree is the issue that caused the susceptibility balance of water and oxygen it's always going to be the most fundamental answer to every question you're never wrong balance water and oxygen balance water and oxygen balance water and oxygen 117 degree heat dome most heat tolerant plant we have at Mariah's ponderosa pine did I know that they would not be able to keep up with the water transport to cool that tree and that the vascular system itself would burn had no clue did most of the ponderosa survive yes did I lose more ponderosas than any other species I did did I lose ponderosa I thought were healthy yes did ponderosa pine that I thought were healthy survived yes what was the commonality of all ponderosa pine that suffered root system was weak root system was weak okay all right so we're saying listen if we see if we know we have a weak tree proactive answer to the problem protect it don't subject it to those situations if we don't know we have a weak tree and we take on damage immediately okay change environment to tilt tree on angle three apply silica as a foliar spray okay now this is the one that I've never said before this is becoming a big part of Mariah when you talk to cannabis growers when you talk to vegetable growers when you talk to regenerative agriculture in general silica is a magic solution in the way that pixie dust is a magic solution nobody really knows necessarily how much it helps you don't really see it change things but physiologically when we start to look at silica silica is a fortifying agent in the plant system silica cannot be overly applied in a toxic level there is no risk of phytotoxicity or if there is it's so minimal we probably would never see it it can soak up a tremendous amount of toxicity in the foyer mass it can reinforce the cellular wall structure that's broken down and degraded it can sustain hydration in needles that were damaged silica as a backbone of emergency response to bonsai related damage is one of the best tools you could have in your quiver I'm not supported by Eden Gold and any of their products but their silica product is hands down the best as purported by David nows of apical ag solutions and I have no reason to believe otherwise but in addition to that the more that I've talked about silica the more that I have a student in the studio right now who uses silica he's been using it from the very beginning of his vegetable cultivation as a tremendous tool to endure heat to endure cold I've talked with people who have been cultivating any number of plants over the course of time who were able to weather the storm of intense temperature related inclement activity through proactive application of silica as a fortifying agent and retroactive application of silica as a stress reliever to that operation I would encourage there's not many things that I'm going to talk about but if you want to support yourself some of this you need to have Silica on hand as an emergency response to be able to fortify you have pests and disease silica will help suppress they will suppress pest populations from booming in the stages of spider mite scale Etc it potentially can rectify some of it it will not eradicate the insect but it can stop it from expanding it will fortify the damaged tissue disease related it should stop the spread of the disease and fortify the needles that are infected very important tool if you want to have the ability to respond to at and this is not a this is not unique to bonsai this is across the horticultural world this has been a tool for as long as mankind has been cultivating plants something very very interesting okay change the environment stop the damage from occurring tilt the tree on angle establish your balance of water and oxygen fortify the damaged areas through silica treatment these are your emergency strategies that you can apply should we be misting the foliage pins do we still have life in the foliage the only way a plant fixes itself is through photosynthesis misting starts to shut down the stomata and gaseous exchange misting is probably not a good way to respond to the damage could it have prevented the damage as long as we didn't keep things too wet and destroy our balance of water and oxygen you decreasing the temperature of the leaf surface could I have curved the damage of the hundred and seventeen degree heat dome I'll never know but chances are probably I could have reduced the damage probably we'll never know right temperature after care how long how long do we apply that until you see new growth until you see new growth okay nutrition toxicity and deficiency hey listen if we're using a general broad-spectrum fertilizer this could be miracle grow this could be Osmocote this could be Bio Gold this could be Dr. Earth this could be Fox none of the I'm not slandering any of those listen nutrition over the course of time when you have nitrogen phosphorus potassium and trace elements one of those is going to become accumulated and in a toxic level right over the course of time because the plant is not using them as you prescribe it the plan is using it as you need it and what we recognize about our nutrient discoveries is that over the course of time when you apply everything all at once all the time one of those is going to accumulate in the system and become an impediment to the others now that is responsive to water pH that is responsive to time of year and physiology of the plant that is responsive to action that we perform in bonsai combined with that application of supplemental nutrition it is a three-dimensional model that is difficult to tack down how we handle each scenario perfectly but we are learning that when we start to get these toxicities and deficiencies what is the response to a plant deficiency what is the response to a plant toxicity and here's what I would say your immediate response to damage has got to be test you have to know what is happening inside of the plant and if you want to be proactive about nutrient related issues in your garden you will proactively test water you will proactively test soil and you will keep record of nutrition of what you applied and when you applied it because ultimately at some point those three factors are going to weigh in significantly and heavily on your ability to respond to a nutrient related issue you have insects on your bonsai you have a nutrient related issue you have fungus on your bonsai you have a nutrient related issue is it the water causing the susceptibility through the pH is it the fertilizer causing the susceptibility through the constant input of deficiencies and toxicities is it the weather and the season combined is it the work plus the weather plus the season plus the soil plus the water plus the inputs yes yes and if you don't have a backbone to begin with when this happens you have no way to recover until you go through establishing your protocol and again I'm not I'm not hired by apical I'm not paid by apical I pay apical a lot it is the best thing that we have done because Mirai was at a point through all of our trying to figure out what in the heck is going on with these random things that nobody can tell us about multiple multiple consultants coming and offering different solutions sending tests off to lap you have this pathogen you've got this insect you've got this problem you've got it all came down to nutrition for us and it took us 18 months to test enough to understand it to build these backbones to explore to discover had we just had this paneling done in the very beginning and this is not any lab can give you the same results I push you towards a process after having explored every process that works this is why Mariah's an incubator is sitting here lecturing about how to do bonsai on a higher level because I have seen this radically transform Mirai in a way that I've never seen another technique another fertilizer and another silver bullet alter the state and the health of our bonsai period right I'm going to push you there you want to proactively set yourself up for success every student that walks through the doors at Mirai I'm not telling them you have to do this but I'm telling you if you want to do this I think it gives you the opportunity to do bonsai better and to save and preserve the health and the integrity of your trees you have a nutrient related issue you apply something and things go wrong you have a an insect related issue you have a fungal related issue you have a nutrient related issue and you need to test it's the only way to figure it out it's a combination of water soil and whatever your inputs are okay nutrition chemical mechanical chemical mechanical okay so we had this meltdown from phytotoxicity we had this meltdown from phytotoxicity okay I wish I had known about silica five years ago the first time that I excuse me eight years ago the first time I applied daconil to a spruce right I wish I had known about uh nutrient balancing to begin with back then but hey listen there's only only road forward uh only road uh only way to get better is to take the road forward right we can't go back and fix that I lost yeah eight to ten spruce from phytotoxicity to daconil little did I know that if you read the back label well actually the early forms of daconil didn't show spruce as a phytotoxic response the latter forms of daconil say don't treat Colorado blue spruce because it'll take the blue away in the ground it'll take the blue away right just eradicate the tree so I treated daconil Swiss needle cast or rhizosphere or both of those diseases uh to try and reconcile it as daconil was listed for on the news press spring growth and I watched these trees go one day at a time of a steady March towards death right did they have a root related issue yeah probably would it have stopped it if they had healthier roots wouldn't have been as bad uh was there any way to to fix that situation first and foremost if there's any mechanical or chemical damage you've got to flush the system flush the system heavily flush the soil mass heavily wash off the canopy and flush the soil mass right so number one we have to flush you get herbicide on your plant heavily flush okay number two we need to go ahead and establish balance of water and oxygen tilt on angle okay get me back to a position where my roots can thrive and number three fortify with silica now what we understand about phytotoxic response phytotoxic response more often than not mechanical damage herbicides fungicides insecticides your neighbors uh spraying oil on their house and painting it and this gets on your Boneside trees get the tree out of direct Sun that Sun is gonna play on the fact that most mechanical and chemical damage is caused by a desiccation or a degradation of the cuticle of the plant in the same scenario when we have a loss of cuticle the waxy covering on the needle we cannot stop transpiration we cannot stop the loss of water okay remove from Sun and this is a full sail removal from Sun not into a dark room but you need to put that into a heavily shaded environment removed from wind okay and we're talking about establishing your balance of water and oxygen and fortifying with silica only way to fix it once we had the mechanical damage from the recent biological had we known what was happening which I didn't know what was happening it just kept evolving and kept evolving and then finally I was like oh this is what's happening it was already too late the front of the tree the Sun side of the tree lost 60 65 more foliage than the back side of the tree this is an immediate response to the loss of cuticle the Sun even in the mild temperatures of the Pacific Northwest it fried of the foliage on the front side of the tree back side of the tree looks it's literally three times as dense okay we have the ability to let that chemical and that degradation of the cuticle run its course we improve the balance of water oxygen the cuticle will come back but we've got to curb the loss of that moisture level in the tissue mass that has no protection by removing it from the conditions that take that moisture out of that luscious photosynthetic mass okay and we've got to improve the system to regenerate the cuticle before we can start to integrate this back into the garden environment okay and this is if we're talking about this happening over winter bring it out of the intense temperature we're talking about happening in the summer you got to get it out of the heat and out of that Sun right and then how do we repair that once we start to see new growth we might acclimate it into a morning Sun afternoon shade with light wind the same same backbone applies a little bit more Sun still less wind a little bit more Sun a little bit more wind that tree two week increments starting to grow vigorously again here's the thing chemical mechanical damage that tree will push again some herbicides obviously have the ability to really curb that if anybody knows about the tumor Oaks at Auburn they couldn't stop that that that uh that growth um stimulant you know Roundup it's virtually impossible to stop Roundup in a tree once it gets into a tree so there are exceptions to the rule you can stop transpiration you can regenerate cuticle take the correct steps in that mechanical chemical damage insects and disease last one for aftercare then we'll open it up to questions and I'm assuming there's quite a few questions ah my tree was hammered with spider mite it's lost all its color should I remove the in the the damaged foliage absolutely not my pine has a bunch of needle cast should I remove the damaged foliage absolutely not my juniper has uh phomopsis juniper tip light should I remove the damage folds absolutely not now this is completely counter to everything that the horticultural books websites everything tells you I don't care I don't care bonsai sits apart from the motherland of horticulture it is an island connected by a rickety bridge right and that rickety bridge you can fall straight through it if you're not careful we exist in our own world cultivating trees in a shallow confined environment on a hydroponic level virtually hydroponic level we do have seven to ten percent organic matter in whatever proportion of that's not a lot okay but that does create a nuance in and of itself right so when we start to talk insect and disease do not remove infected tissue take your hands off the tree in fact you don't want to be handling a tree you don't want to be touching the tree now you do have to you do have to treat the issue okay you've got to eradicate the population of insect that is causing problems are there biological ways yes do some of those biological ways have pitfalls clearly right we've experienced that so now we know you know that's we need to find another solution but the biggest thing okay so we're saying number one treat and eradicate pressure the pressure number two alter the environment spider mites exist primarily in the canopy of the plant upper apical region if you're really talking about that and they typically occur in the heat of the summer because things get dry they get dusty and it's a breeding ground for their offspring right if you change a tree that's heavily infested with spider mite let's move it to a different part of our garden tree that's heavily infested with spider mite let's treat the foliar mass in order to decrease the conditions that allow spider mite to proliferate I've got a tree that's got scale shift its environment change its circumstances slightly okay when we alter the environment altering the environment alone everybody says well I don't want this to spread to my other trees well I can tell you if one tree has spider mite another tree has spider mite if one tree has scale another tree has scale if one tree has scale the tree next to it might not have scale why wouldn't it have scale because that tree doesn't have the same thing that causes the susceptibility I'm going to tell you something very very tough for you to digest right now if a tree has insects that's nature's way of helping the tree if a tree has disease it's nature's way of helping the tree how is that helping the tree it's taking away my beloved foliar mass it's taking away my beloved branches it's taking away my beloved health of my tree no the tree is calling to that insect to come and relieve it of some type of stress insects typically gravitate towards high salts the tree is saying I got too much salt I got high blood pressure I'm gonna stroke out come help me and the insect comes and it sucks the salt out of the system to try and re-achieve balance that's the tree saying listen I'm at a threshold where I cannot tolerate this kind of salt content in my tissue any longer so in addition to altering the environment and taking away that pressure you have to adjust nutrition this is fundamentally and I'm going to say or water fundamentally the ultimate solution to insect and disease damage you've got to have that balance of water and oxygen you've got to eradicate the problem so that it doesn't continue to act on your tree but you've got to change the actual cause of the problem insects are a symptom disease are a symptom of a greater issue inside of the vascular system of your tree you've got to change the core problem or it will continue to exist there's a reason that I was treating Mr kimura's trees every seven to ten days for three months in the spring every two to three weeks over the course of the summer and every month over the course of fall because the amount of salt and the amount of metal toxicity from constant factory fertilization broad spectrum non-targeted nonspecific fertilization creates toxicities and Inefficiencies and the insects and disease are being called to the plant by the tree They're being called to the plant by the tree And you say okay insects are attracted to salts What are pathogens attracted to metals? metals Pathogens are attracted to metals. How do metals become available? This is the entire diagnostic discussion of akadama Akadama is a unicorn of a particle a product of organic matter with volcanic activity at a region in Proximity to the right volcanic activity under the right mineral content in the right aggregate Construction and all of a sudden you get a high manganese high aluminum content tubular structured clay that creates a self scaling Stunting capacity for a tree being cultivated in a containerized environment And it holds its shape as a cation exchange site over the pressure and course of time in that shallow soil column of the bonsai pot And you subject akadama to Different pH's you subject akadama to different environmental factors and akadama becomes One of the biggest causes of fungal issue in bonsai cultivation, right? And it just is it's a part of it Can you change that? Absolutely? We will not stop using akadama at Mirai Akadama is the biggest problem that we have at Mirai we will not stop using it but it's our biggest problem why won't you stop using it because in this specific zone of a shallow environment shallow soil column water retention and necessity with these old trees to exist inside of that for a decade at a time between repottings Akadama is the only organic component that we can find that will do what it does to create that level of aesthetic this is about aesthetics Akadama is the one and we have to curb or head off its fundamental failure which every soil particle has a weakness and that's Akadama's high metal content that causes pathogens under the appropriate environmental or water pressure conditions right okay okay how do we solve the problem of heavy salts add calcium add phosphorus use carbon how do we solve the problem of metals use silica use calcium use phosphorus use carbon different solutions different components different application strategies absolutely absolutely we've built we're building a database for this right these are the these are the things that allow us to persevere okay adjust nutrition fortify with silica okay bad enough damage protect from heat bad enough damage protect from cold these are now weak trees now we look at these other after care components of temperature right but if we just look at the basic fundamental layout of after care as it broadly applies to these different aspects of bonsai there are continuums through all of these balance of water and oxygen fortifies the tree we've got to be continually proactively treating to avoid having to go into the emergency state and once we get into that emergency state now we are really battling to get that water oxygen balance back and adjust that tree's experience in the immediate to try and get it back to an experience where it's healthy once again okay we did it we did it I don't know I felt like we did it I think you did it we've got a lot of questions uh so let's get uh let's get into it Matt W in Denver I performed an initial repot of Utah juniper of my Utah juniper in January Mariah recover well over the winter in Todd's greenhouse this spring it produced a ton of berries I think you had said in the past it takes a lot of energy for this plant to have the berries would you recommend removing the bear in the post repot situation get them out get berries off the tree Vincent uh can you discuss aftercare for when you receive a tree bought online that was shipped by mail how do you inspect the tree after opening the box what do you watch out for in the weeks after for contacts I'm looking at buying a yamadori ponderosa from Andy Smith ah yeah uh after you receive a tree in the mail biggest thing you have to understand is not subjecting it to direct Sun intense wind and the the factors that compromise a tree when a tree goes into a a confined State temperature controlled State moisture controlled State which inside of a box that's a very small ecosystem and you bring it out into the external environment it's like putting somebody into full Sun out of a dark room it's like oh no the tree will do the same thing it will sunburn uh it is not not tolerant to the external conditions immediately it will get there very quickly because it probably hasn't spent a lot of time in that box but the longer that a tree is in a box the slower we have to be in acclimating that tree into our external environment when it first comes out of the box I would put it in a shady environment I would start to shift it into morning Sun afternoon shade and a limited amount of wind I would then continue to move it into a little bit more Sun seven ten days later assuming everything continues until we eventually move back into full Sun full wind as a that tree has acclimated I'm looking at the is the growth occurring has there been growth inside of the box which would slow down that acclimation process and you're watching the behavior of the trees water utilization because again balance of water and oxygen is what you've got to strike to get health into your tree Gary asks and moving out Tropicals like ficus Jade Sarissa bougainvillea from indoor grow light winter quarters to outdoors in the high 70s to low mid 50s type of environment how should we manage garden location timing for species that normally thrive in full Sun how much has the cuticle thinned over the winter how do we tell when it's rebuilt for full Sun again cuticle has thinned to a massive massive degree there's a completely different foliar mass that that exists on trees that are put in that environment when you move them out you want to have them minimal amount of even morning Sun right and for the most part shade because they need to acclimate first to the wind right uh minimal wind minimal Sun morning morning sun but primarily a shady environment we slowly move them into morning Sun afternoon shade a little bit more wind but that tree has to produce a new flush of leaves in order for those leaves to be tolerant of full Sun in the summertime based on the fact that those leaves are old they've been lowly photosynthetic and probably our nutrients are energy suck not an energy generator we want to acclimate tree starts to activate and that new leaf mass once it starts to come out is the one that's going to be tolerant of full Sun if we're acclimating it into that full Sun appropriately again 7 10 14 days between any shift in light and any shift in wind and it's small shifts I'm going to move it into a little bit more and I'm going to leave it for 10 14 days watch observe see how the tree behaves still good I'm going to give it a little bit more watch observe we're watching water we're striking the balance of water and oxygen and we're observing how that Foyer mass is responding to those conditions Gary I have some Eastern white pines that had some of last year's needles Brown most likely because I moved them out from winter storage to full Sun too soon in March about 10 to 20 percent of the total needle count candles are healthily extending on all branches including the ones that got Browning needles trees are three years from the repot in secondary development anything I should be doing differently this year as a result in anything specific uh same thing yeah the the acclimation process is nice and slow 10 to 14 days between start out with a much lower level of light and then build them into uh that more full Sun exposure over the course of literally it's going to take you a month to acclimate those into full Sun it is what it is look Japanese black pine totally tolerant any Japanese black pine we greenhouse we put it in full Sun the entire South side is going to sunburn every year every year we have to be careful with this you've got to be slow and methodical in your acclimation process now I will tell you I'm going to give you a little hint here the more exposed your protected environment is for example our greenhouse I used to just turn the fans on at night we run the fans 24 hours a day now because that airflow hardens the trees off even post repotting I might find a less windy location in the greenhouse for a tree that was severely repotted to reduce that transpiration I might missed it a little bit more but do not turn the fans off because I've found that's a big part of acclimation issues and lack of cuticle and moving them outdoors okay before we ever move anything out of the greenhouse we take down the upper triangles and increase airflow right we try to put trees at the threshold of a greenhouse where they will get a little bit of morning direct Sun before the greenhouse covering creates the light distribution and shade that uh you know makes the greenhouse more hospitable than the external direct Sun high UV environment so there are ways inside of your structure to be acclimating trees already instead of going from nothing to everything you've got to make that transition more smooth Kim in the instance of not having a greenhouse can you provide some aftercare options I have set trees under shower doors to reduce rainfall after repotting also protects them from some wind what other things can I do I have a bunch of trees on my porch until the rain starts to slack off they've been there for over a month how long do they need that type of protection yeah they need they need look they need rain protection until the crops we built if you've seen our Instagram at any time in the recent future the amount of plastic that we have on the new structure in the middle of the garden is all about rain suppression if you keep trees that are freshly repotted saturated with rain it will completely destroy their root system so you got to do what you got to do now I think dappled shade under natural uh native forest cover is one of the best light control mechanisms it's also a relative humidity control mechanism is incredibly important building uh building a uh a windscreen to start to cut down on some of the wind that you might experience in different regions or in different environments in your backyards across uh bonsai you know practitioners yards is a big part of protecting from that excessive transpiration caused by and dehydration caused by wind so there are things we can do but your biggest thing Kim is rain and you really do have to protect them from that so they can stay under the sun to move them out Bentley I collected a bald Cyprus late winter after it flushed because it had submerged it was submerged most of the winter I then kept the toil the soil too wet I recognized it was too wet when it started to drop what little foliage that it had before my hope dies I'm checking it by doing a scratch test if the tree has pulled in all resources how indicative of life is the scratch test um the scratch test tells you that there is a lot of water in the ground so it's a lot of water in the ground so it's a lot of water in the ground so it's still viability in the tissue that's it and I gotta tell you hope is the last thing to die the scratch test is is the last is is the last sign of hope right um the only way that you can fix a tree like that is to tilt it up on angle get as much of the excess water out of the system as possible and prevent it from getting excessively wet if there's still hope maybe you can compartmentalize maybe it can produce new roots with any stored energy and maybe it can start the process again keep in mind too that the bark trees can photosynthesize through their bark so even though they don't have foyer mass if there's still viability in the tissue if we can get roots to generate through the sugars and starches created in the bark there is still a chance and a hope and that's where the scratch test can give you that last waning potential to rectify that situation treebeard Steve if a newly repotted tree is enclosed in a clear plastic bag out of the direct sun and wind can the plastic bag have the same effect as misting it when it comes to retarding transfer separation the tree in question underwent a severe repot uh so I would just tell you right off the bat um I would not put a tree in a clear plastic bag because the smaller the the the smaller the ecosystem I and I I know this from experience right the smaller the ecosystem the more challenging it is to acclimate acclimate a tree out of that air mass so even if the tree survives the repot the uphill battle that you have to remove it from that bag is going to be so incredibly challenging that I would try to start out with a bigger air mass in a larger environment that you're able to achieve that same reduction of wind control of Sun intensity and control of temperature maybe you don't have that option that was what you got now you're there I think it can hold the humidity and reduce transpiration you have a lack and a loss of carbon dioxide which is a pivotal part of the sugar starch product activity of photosynthesis when you keep that bag closed and it amasses that humidity you're also amassing a tremendous amount of wet stuffy stagnant air that causes anaerobic bacterial growth and you're not getting carbon dioxide in there which the plant needs to create the sugars that allow it to regenerate its root system so there is a trade-off that you have there that is very very challenging and again I would avoid doing that in the future if it's all you got you need to open it up periodically get some air in there and then close it back up until you see that tree start to produce healthy vegetation and then it is a slow process of just barely tearing it open opening it periodically closing it opening that opening a little bit more to generate the kind of uh Fortitude that allows it to exist in the external environment but carbon dioxide do not underestimate the necessity for carbon dioxide in the production of sugars and starches there has to be air exchange in order for that tree to recover tribute Steve can the first fertilizer after repotting when appropriately time be a liquid such as a fish hydrolysate uh it could but it still needs to be light and diluted yep Keith uh is asking Ryan at what point after care would you recommend reintroduction of biologicals into the soil mass for a total repot or to reinvigorate the biologicals after spring cleanup of the topsoil but without any major root work is this an aftercare issue uh spring cleanup of the topsoil without root work is that an aftercare issue no removal vacuum removal of the sheen would require aftercare yes uh how soon can you re-stimulate biologicals the tree stimulates the biologicals you're not going to re-stimulate the biologicals you might be able to and if you're thinking about the pro-bio carbon and whatnot it's my understanding that that stuff does not have a detrimental impact to a tree that has been repotted I don't know you know it's something that we're working with this year for the first time and I don't have any the jury's out right now but I understand from the people that have used it that they put it on repotted and and trees that are established uh equally um as far as like mycorrhizal inoculants and whatnot you know i don't know if you've listened to the podcast uh that we did with um what was her name karen ohanlan karen ohanlan but like she basically said look mycorrhizal isn't gonna happen uh it's either there or it's not and so uh i don't put witches brew on my trees balance water and oxygen root growth occurs roots produce produce exudates exudates become the basis for flora flora expand on the exudates work on the aggregate system aggregate system is prepared for moss and we see moss occupation as the greatest indicator of biological activity in our containerized environment but that takes several several months maybe even a year or more to get to that point where moss will occupy that environment even when we top dress. Vincent, I applied some slow-release organic fertilizer to a repotted tree that was just starting to leaf out. How does one unfertilize? Could I dig it out with a spoon and then do an extended flush with water? Yeah, I guess if it's sitting on the surface, you could try and remove it. Maybe use a vacuum cleaner to suck it off instead of digging it out with a spoon, which would probably cause a lot of damage to your soil system and potentially the roots underneath it. A vacuum would be a lot friendlier. And then I think you could flush it out, yes. As long as temperatures are cool outside, a lot of those time-release or weather-release chemical fertilizer resources won't dump a tremendous amount of really hot nutrition, and hot nutrition meaning high nitrogen nutrition, into the soil system. But if you're in a warm environment, that could really be dangerous and you may want to take it out, yeah. Eric P. I have a cherry tree in a pond basket that has to be moved inside due to temps dropping to minus 15. While it was inside waiting out the cold, it began to push buds, so I kept it inside. It flowered, pushed leaves, and then went into a full-scale collapse a couple weeks later. Based on the lecture, I'm thinking it was likely caused by something in the fall. Is that correct? If you've seen something like this before, any thoughts on what could have caused it? It didn't work at all last year, and it seemed to be fine all year long. Sugar starts deprivation. It pushed out all the nutrients. All that energy, it's in a low-light situation. Metabolism is being driven by temperatures that are warm. It exhausted its sugar starch supply. It couldn't feed itself through photosynthesis in a low-light foot candle scenario, and it starved to death. Either that or it stayed too wet in an area where it didn't have the wind and the common transpiration that occurs through the sun and through the metabolic activity driven by the sun and photosynthesis, which uses a lot of water and consumes a lot of that excess water and moisture in the container, or maybe it dried out. In the low relative humidity of the indoor environment that's heated and makes the environment comfortable for us as human beings, but very inhospitable for plants. Any way you go about it, plants, temperate climate plants do not belong indoors, and that's a tough thing to handle because you're like, negative 15, what do I do? Cold shelter, unheated garage would be much better than bringing it into a warm, heated environment. Danny, in Wyoming this winter, we had temperatures that dipped to minus 41 and hit the minus 24 at least three other times. What temperatures, what temperature and care do I need to maintain in the greenhouse to give my trees the protection they need during those temps? Yeah, those are tough ones, right? I mean, you know, this is where people have healing in cold shelters or dark storehouses that are in ground and the ground buffers the temperature exchange. You go to Minnesota, you go to North Dakota, you go to some of these outlying regions, and now you're in an outlying region where you're at in Wyoming. You do have the capacity to lean on an in-ground cold shelter that can buffer that, and you don't have to heat that as long as you're dealing with, you know, temperate climate plants that are adapted to those temperatures. The spruces, the ponderosas, the junipers, etc. will survive and exist in there. But if you're cultivating more coastal varieties, you're cultivating like black pines and red pines and Japanese varieties, I would say your greenhouse needs to stay 25, or above to weather the storm of those kinds of temperatures. If you're working with redwoods and those, you've got to stay above 32, you know? And so it's like, can you stay in that range or not? That's really, really tough. Those are tough environmental conditions to work with. A lot of people that exist in those regions with greenhouses will not only have a heat-efficient buffering layer of a double-wall poly or a triple-wall poly or an air-inflated polyplastic, that has that air gap in between the two plastic layers, but I've also seen people coat the entire interior of their greenhouse with bubble wrap as just one more added layer of insulation that can make a huge difference on energy consumption in that kind of extreme weather. Terry is asking, the garage door was accidentally left open to very cold wind and two junipers got burned. Is hands-off the correct action? Absolutely. Ricky D., could silica interrupt contact of biological fungicides and insecticides, such as certain bacterial strains? Not to the best of my knowledge, and we did talk about this when silica, because, you know, silica, we apply silica literally with every four-year treatment. We apply silica not in a pure silica form to the roots, we apply silica in a calcium silica form to the roots, because it soaks up a lot of the metals that are made available through our slightly acidic, mint, and pH here at Mirai in the Pacific Northwest. So it takes some of the aluminum and manganese pressure off of the plant, but I see better biology in every aspect of our bonsai cultivation, even though we're using silica, so my inclination would be no, or at least not measurable enough to count. Danny, you mentioned Miracle-Gro fertilizer. How should we be using that in aftercare of our bonsai, if at all? I personally don't, I'm not interested in Miracle-Gro. I don't use Miracle-Gro or any other chemical feeds. I think it is a fast track towards, yes, you can get rapid growth. Yes, you can get a plant to produce a tremendous amount of vegetative for your, you know, production. But ultimately, sustainability over the long run is not really there, and so I kind of avoid it. Now, whether or not you want to roll that dice, create, it's a little bit like a steroid for a human, like a bodybuilder. Like, you can build a tree with that, but you've got to wean it off of it, and you're going to lose something if a tree is built on that. I know that there are a lot of, you know, international bonsai personalities that are like, the differences that make nitrogen, nitrogen, and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. That's not true. It's categorically not true. Scientifically proven is not true. There are different forms of nitrogen. The plant does know, and it does determine the durability and the health of the plant. So, you know, I think that's a really good point. And I think that's a really good point. And I think that's a really good point. And I think that's a really good point. Even still, people are going to say, I love to see the rapid response to chemical inputs. And it's like, yeah, okay, all right. And you can deal with the repercussions of that. That's fine. You just need to know that there will be repercussions. Chuck, should silica be part of repotting aftercare? If so, how soon after repotting? It certainly could be part of repotting aftercare as a foliar spray, and you could literally do it before you repot, after repot. You could foliar apply it five times a day, to a repotted tree, and it would certainly fortify the foliar mass. Do you need to, is the question, right? Do you need to? If you don't need to, it's an awful lot of labor. But the way that it's explained to me and what we've seen is that it certainly cannot hurt. Rafi, a student of mine made severe bend with probable damage on a jack pine in early fall. I decided to keep it from freezing during winter. I had an outage, and the tree went under freezing, minus three Celsius for about three hours. In late February, now it seems that the branch is going. Could the cold have caused that? Absolutely. Yeah, absolutely. That's a really weird one, but you better believe it. Those are those moments where it's tough to say, you know, because you can't go back and see the sliding door. Had that not happened, did it make it? And it did happen and it died. But you better believe that cold can be the fatality, the, you know, finishing move to a branch that was on the brink. Treebeard Steve, I repotted American larch at bud break in a 2-1-1 mix. Acadamopumus scoria replaced half of the professional bonsai growers mix. The tree's flushed out very well with lots of new needles that appear to have reached full size. Can I assume that it's ready for a light fertilization? I'm not very familiar with larch. As long as the new growth has hardened off, I think you can feel safe that you can apply a light fertilization to begin to acclimate those soft root tips and harden them. As long as they're ready, you can turn them off towards a potentially more aggressive fertilization a little bit later on. Yeah. Bentley, I collected some elm last year. Didn't get as many roots as I would like. This year they're pushing with medium vigor in my opinion. Some of the leaves also appear to show some deficiency with yellowish leaves and green veining. They're planted in a 4-1 pumice to bark mix. Anything I can do to boost the health of these trees? If you don't have a water panel and a soil analysis, it's tough to say what you could do to boost those trees in terms of nutrition. It's a stab in the dark. Absolutely, there's something you can do to boost those trees for sure. When you start to talk about the green coloration, the green coloration, we just had this conversation yesterday. Magnesium is what makes chlorophyll green. Then you've got calcium. What was the other one, Ira? Calcium, this tipping point here. Calcium and nitrogen, maybe? I'm trying to think. No. Potassium. Potassium. Calcium and potassium. You've got this tipping point. Calcium and potassium are constantly needing to be in balance. What typically happens in our broad spectrum fertilizer that we apply is that potassium becomes in such excess that calcium becomes the element that is deficient. Now, calcium is what leads to deficiency. Calcium is what leads to deficiency. Calcium is the element that is deficient. Calcium is what leads to deficiency. Calcium is what leads to cellular growth. If you don't have new cells growing, you don't have new places to put chlorophyll or the green pigment. Magnesium spikes, calcium becomes deficient, potassium spikes, insect issues become an issue. All of those are subject to a multitude of potential causes of deficiencies and toxicities, including water pH, including medium of choice, including species of tree and how they utilize those resources. How do you get a tree that's yellowing to turn green without testing? It's anybody's best guess. Roberto. Hi, Ryan. How do you quickly increase the nebari of a Japanese black pine? How do you quickly increase the nebari of a black pine? Prune back thick, coarse roots to laterally growing roots. Never bare root. Always leave it untouched. Really improve the quality of the sheen and cultivating it. ,. Short-term recovery period in a wider, more shallow container would be sort of immediate, off the cuff, nonspecific, haven't seen the tree, have no clue how it's handled. Gary, in a recent forum Q&A you said that broadleaf evergreens like boxwood when we repot from nursery stock to bonsai pot, it in the heavily reduced the roots that unlike with a conifer we also want to prune to reduce some of the foliage. Can you please explain why and what leads us to treat broadleaf evergreens differently from conifers in that respect? Scott. Yeah. will broadleaf evergreen maintain their leaves but they have a massive surface area for a lot of transpiration so when you take back their root system you know on a conifer we can't cut them back as severely on a conifer we've got to be a lot more measured and we apply a lot more after care on a broadleaf deciduous they don't have the transpirational mass pulling on those root systems so the roots and the foliage grow at the same time on a broadleaf evergreen you reduce the roots but you've got this high surface area transpirational mass if you're not reducing that in a severe circumstance typically i don't do it but typically when you repot a broadleaf evergreen if you heavily work the root system it's going to naturally shed some of its leaves but when you go severe and you leave a full canopy and a massive reduction particularly in a nursery stock circumstance you need to reduce the foyer mass with the root mass in order to have that tree be successful or the very limited amount of moisture that those you're going to have to do is you're going to have to reduce the foyer mass with the root mass and you're going to have to reduce the foyer mass with the root mass in order to have that tree be successful or the very limited amount of moisture that those you're going to have to do is minimal amount of roots can conduct gets distributed across too wide of a foyer mass and none of it survives none of it is able to sustain and that's where i think that major cutback at the same time is a big part of success when transitioning broadleaf evergreen into a bonsai container from nursery stock the first time and you probably want to structurally cut it back at that same time as well is my guess i don't know i'm not looking at the tree but that would be the theory and the strategy behind why we would reduce those things at the same time ricky d have you found any interesting findings in relation to fall nutritioning with root slash vascular growth since the recent experiments uh yeah yeah we have now to what to what degree does this apply to the rest of north america i do not know potassium for us in the fall is a no-no potassium is a no-no that's not to say that potassium is a no-no for you guys uh but potassium in the fall really caused a pretty catastrophic meltdown in in the nutrition of our trees um this past fall and uh and and we're starting to learn you know that ultimately under the conditions that we have at mirai uh which again we are dealing with a a neutral to even you know 6.5 6.4 water ph we have a rainy environment um if we in the fall are adding potassium to our trees we're going to have a negative impact on our trees um i think potassium will have a negative impact on our trees potassium potassium is very acidic if we're adding iron to the root system in a liquid form it's very acidic that has a negative impact on our trees um and i would imagine that generally across the board in north america we probably have too much potassium in our bonsai cultivation uh in general i would i would assume so i would also say that we probably have too much magnesium in general uh i would assume so especially if you're using akadama magnesium while often we're mainly along potassium if the plant eating beneficial for psilocybin slipping plataforms al And let's say that can enable us to promoteLEPboards in the late 80 year period I. is a part of it. There is a pH change if you're using an alkaline pH where magnesium is not as available, and that's where you can see magnesium deficiencies in alkaline growing regions. But just universally, there's an awful lot of potassium and an awful lot of magnesium in bonsai. All right, Chuck's up next. This is like a two-part question, so hang with me for a second. Is the reason that summer is best for repotting tropicals because without full dormancy in the winter, trees draw down energy reserves and then have to regain them again before repotting? If so, do we treat temperate trees that stay green in the winter in Florida, like Chinese elms and tridents, the same way? Delay repotting to maybe very late spring? And then he added, unless I refrigerate my tridents, they will leaf out more slowly in the spring. They eventually get strong, but much more slowly. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. I think that you repot your tropicals initially. the middle of summer because tropicals are able to metabolize at a much more rampant pace with that heat whereas temperate trees tend to go dormant or shut down in that super intense heat and trident is on the cusp you know it's like a broadleaf deciduous so is a pomegranate you know that can kind of exist as a semi-evergreen chinese elm is another one which is kind of a semi evergreen state in a really warm tropical region and they can make those adaptations but it does take them a minute because their inherent uh behavior is is is is broadleaf deciduous right and so you put them in that evergreen state and it does mess with their normal cadence as a as a broadleaf deciduous but they can tolerate it they can function at that level they can more than anything move enough water to create enough sugar starch load that they can keep up with that consistent metabolism and that's what allows them to thrive i would not be repotting them in the same way that you're handling your tropicals and i probably wouldn't even move them to later in the spring after they've fully leafed out i would want to be repotting those trees still when they have older leaves on them but haven't really started to produce that really lush aggressive uh amount of new foyer mass now maybe you're saying hey listen this is what i'm saying is it takes them a while before they even get ramped up enough to start to produce that i'm using that bud swell and new aggressive flush of growth that the the preemptive permits on that sort of thing what what the alternative is with a lot of these other existing plants it's not just welcome greenery and data and other patches and so some of those plants are for best results and some of them are excellent with the greenery of the spring so i'd consider repotting those trees at least eight weeks before they're ready to get into a potting season again with the right time and the right timing of that as my repotting mechanism and maybe that is late spring where you're at chuck based on how they're behaving coming through that warm winter and that semi-evergreen state but certainly i would be repotting before they add a lot a large amount of strength from above it i slowly have been removing the grafted branch but wondering if you would have gone about it in a different way besides just not doing that uh you know ricky these are but these are how you discover these are how you discover tricks and how you discover techniques and how you how you learn about physiology i i have to be if mariah was not as willing to mess up as badly as we've messed up over the past 13 years on multiple occasions i've almost killed this entire garden uh we would not have near the capacity to field the kind of discussions that we talk about in on this platform and in this community uh you probably have a little bit of a discovery there and for your own awareness as a technique as well as a pitfall of of grafting and what that can do and how that interacts with the rest of the system, and how maples conduct water, and what that water distribution changed about that behavior. Is there a different way to go about it? Yeah, now that you know that, a more sustainable methodology, maybe the graft doesn't need to be as strong, maybe you need to be aware of what's above the graft when you place a graft, maybe the position of the graft could have been different if you altered the aesthetics to accommodate depth in the location that that graft was, right? There's so many ways that we could come back, in hindsight being 2020, said we could do that differently, but you have that for next time now, and that's the most important thing, you know? That is the most important thing. Roberto, my trident maple is growing very strong in Naples, Italy. Can I start shortening the new branches with very long internodes, or do I need to wait for the leaves to all harden off? Thanks. I would say that you need to wait for that first big flush to harden off, but trident maples don't stop growing, and you're in Italy, which is warmer, and really we start to look at May in the northern hemisphere as the beginning of our consideration of, is it time to post-flush, harden, prune, and partially defoliate? Are you there yet? Early May feel, first week of May feels a little early. I would wait till the second or third week of May, and I think your trident maple will respond better to that pruning and partial defoliation, but I think you're really close, and if you're in a warmer part of Italy, you're in a more southern part of Italy, you may be there right now in the early part of May. So if it's produced that massive first flush, and your tree is hulked out, and you wanna prune it, and a majority of those leaves have hardened off, the tips are gonna continue to grow regardless. You might be there. If it's come out and you say, you know what, it still feels, they still feel a little fleshy, it still feels a little early, give it another week or two before you go about that operation, but you are close to being in the window right now. Ricky D, do you ever parafilm your wedge cuts on pines, or do you just patch them with the putty? I patch them with the putty, and I do parafilm anything that tears on the top. I'll liquid cut paste the top, I'll putty the smile, and then I'll parafilm if I get that tear over that cut paste on the smile, and the liquid cut paste on top. I'm pretty liberal with parafilm these days. You know, I took a large trunk, and I split it in half and bent one side of it. I wrapped the whole thing in parafilm. I didn't liquid cut paste it, I just wrapped the whole thing in parafilm. As a way to keep a thinned out tissue hydrated after a major operation, and that tree pushed with success. And I honestly, I'm quite shocked that it pushed with the severity of what we did to it. I think there is an undiscussed amount of water conductivity and loss through transpirational load when passing through the trunk and branches, especially if a tree does not have heavy bark. That heavy bark is a real moisture retention. And when you don't have that thin bark trees, young trees, et cetera, parafilm can be a really good technique and tool to utilize in that capacity. All right, David, I have a three-year-old apple seedling, and from the necrotic and crumpled edges of the leaves, I think it could be Pseudomonas. What would you recommend other than silica and a water and oxygen balance? It suffered for some reason last year too, maybe from too much watering during the summer. Yeah, probably. That's typically when you see Pseudomonas, specifically late spring, early spring, early summer is generally when you see the damage occur. What could you do for Pseudomonas? When you get a lot of water, I don't know if you know what your water pH is, but when you get a lot of water into a system, oftentimes the pH can really start to drop, and that's when metals become available. And metals typically create pathogens, and I'm guessing the Pseudomonas is probably a response to a heavy metal load from excess water, and I'm guessing the Pseudomonas is probably a response to a heavy metal load from excess water. That is one way that we might wanna go into that cycle. That's what we've been trying for and what we're trying to do. being present that caused a slight acidification and I I'm not quite sure how the chemistry works out but I do believe that that would be more more aptly what probably happened and the way that you would potentially rectify that as a Cal silica calcium silica treatment now I say that without any knowledge of your water pH without any knowledge of your growing medium without any knowledge of what you've been inputting into that plant as far as as a fertilizer so you know I'm stabbing honestly I'm stabbing in the dark and that's what I'm saying listen proactive paneling of the things that you're putting into your plant allows you to test the foliar mass and immediately have a so and I'm talking immediate solution you send that test to apical they test that foliar mass they'll send you a recommendation you apply it at the rates that they suggest of the recommendation that they suggest and you will almost immediately see that tree change you know and it took us a while to figure out what's the dilution ratio what's tolerable how do these trees respond to these different rates it's a one-to-one he says apply max cal silica and and we have those rates that that we provide to people that test through apical and work with us on this nutrition give you a dose of cal silica there's probably some other things that need to go into the equation and there's probably two or three treatments that are involved to get your tree to a point where it needs to be you can radically alter a tree in a matter of three weeks and I mean radically alter a tree tree bird Steve for a major bend on a thin trunk to ponderosa do you think wrapping with raffia would do less damage than a wedge cut the plan bins are rather drastic well raffia and a bend will create a more circular bend a wedge cut creates a more angular bend but certainly a wedge cut creates limitations and a delicacy of handling afterwards whereas raffia and and a really aggressive bend does not so you have to be the judge of do you want an angular bend or a more curvaceous bend and how many of those bends and how will the handling adapt to that wedge cut the biggest challenge with wedge cuts is the structural loss of integrity afterwards and whether or not you have the technique to be able to support what that tree can facilitate post wedge cut that's all we have for today oh my gosh I did not plan on that twelve thirty two and a half hours went deep I'm certain I'm certain my class is in there saying, dude, we want to make trees. I'm going to go make trees. You asked for aftercare discussions. Whoever did, you guys can all thank that person. I don't know. I forget who put the request out there, but you should own it. If you did, you're probably going to get some hate, probably going to get a lot of appreciation. I don't know. I don't know how you guys feel about these lectures, but I don't think I could have done it any differently because I really did start to think about it, and we've learned so much because we have constant, Mariah has constant aftercare. We have 300 trees in repotting aftercare. We're going to have another 80 to 100 trees in styling aftercare. We've got five $30,000, $40,000, $50,000 junipers in mechanical damage aftercare. We've got consistent rainfall. We're going to have 95 degree weather in one week, and we haven't even broke 90 yet this year. The amount of obstacles that we face at Mariah is shocking. It's shocking. It's exhausting. It's totally demoralizing. We had a snowfall that collapsed three bonsai last year at the end of April. The Pacific Northwest sucks. It just flat sucks. As a result, the atmosphere... Aftercare discussion, when it came up, was just like, oh, my God, let me tell you about aftercare because I know about aftercare. I got this. I got this. No, I think understanding the physiology and then understanding the severity of the operations allows you to calibrate, and that really was an important area to focus on. And with ultimate health, hey, listen, aftercare becomes a lot easier. All right? You got it. Love you guys. Have a good rest of your weekend. Have a good rest of your weekend. 
