what's going on everybody super tuesday whoo it's been a big day big day big day uh have a full studio tonight which is uh uh it's a new experience post interim in the middle of pandemic anyways you know new experience it's exciting good times trying to move on trying to keep moving forward you know how it goes uh it's been a monster day lots of things happening spring has sprung great time to be working broadleaf evergreens and it's time to tackle boxwood we're excited for this one uh welcome got eve on the mic this evening hi everyone uh josh producing the stream from i don't know where and i don't know how but it's happening he's live he's live in the computer screen behind the camera uh lonnie and jesus are on the detail cams in the studio and i used to say you know pines or junipers or elongating species is here now it's just the worst day we've lived together for a hundred years and i hope you get that down too yeah ryan thanks for having me today we're doing a great time you know we're we're giving a lot of time to us but we're really glad you've joined us today and uh this is a great time to have some fun and we hope we'll have a great time so if you want to have fun and have a great time take some time off feel free to come and have a nice weekend and let us know about it thank you for joining us tonight we'll be here next week uh next week's the week 10 class we do everything class wouldn't you say spring we do everything class this is week 10 class or week 11 uh now we've had a great time we have another day tomorrow but it's good to have you guys in the studio with us uh buxus okay so i i just want to be transparent and up front uh so i just want to be transparent and up front right Rodney Clemons in Atlanta Georgia is the Kingsville Boxwood Mac Daddy master right like Rodney and his and his partner Charlie have dedicated a lot of their time and attention to this we have been trying so very hard to get Rodney here obviously we're in the middle of a pandemic it has not been possible based on all of the things associated with that and so if Rodney's watching from afar Rodney I hope this isn't too cringy for you I'm gonna go over basics but I'm still gonna leave it to you set you up so you can knock them down when you come to Mirai we've got the best of the Boxwoods left for Rodney when he comes to visit to fill in the holes all right but when we talk about this we say listen spring fantastic time of year that we're dealing with Kingsville Boxwood buxus micro phyla compacta Kingsville a dwarf mutation found in Maryland propagated but buxus micro phyla compacta Kingsville a dwarf mutation found in Maryland propagated but buxus micro phyla compacta Kingsville a dwarf mutation found in Maryland propagated but buxus micro phyla is the Japanese version of boxwood boxwood definitely native to multiple continents across the world we have them in Europe we have them in North America we have them in Asia and I do believe they may occur in Africa as well so we have kind of this diversity and in that diversity a lot of different nuances right when we talk about the European boxwood buxus sempervirens a little bit of a larger leaf a little bit of a different behavior and growth habit in their native habitat when we start to talk about the species more specifically or how we would evaluate large leaf to luscious species more specifically or how we would evaluate large leaf to luscious ingredients species more specifically or how we would evaluate large leaf to Прbai with their name exactly psychological meaning sure сką on with their name exactly psychological meaning sure ска and what that means when we look at it as a propia li on with their name exactly psychological meaning sure сüssing picture English and then we say japanese and then we say Japanese and then we see professor german in ko room in ko room again feas Иänduin af 보고 my book recipes here i'm not i'm not on board im которым focus on. We talk about our evergreen oaks. We talk about our eleagnuses. We talk about some of our pieris. We talk about boxwood. We talk about olive. We talk about camellia, right? There's all of these broadleaf species. And, you know, if we want to get into the mahogany, we want to get into the sages. We want to get into, right? It just continues to go on and on and on of these species that we very rarely, I mean, we all see boxwood. We all know it to be a great bonsai subject matter. How do we maximize it? We're here to kind of break down the fundamentals of broadleaf evergreen cultivation and design in the spring season, okay? So I'm going to give you, again, I've been kind of giving you the circular tour. This is a shanty bithy grown tree from Connecticut. Shanty bithy used to be a staple of North American bonsai. They always occupied the back cover of bonsai today. I used to lay in my bed. I used to look at the back cover of bonsai today, and I used to dream someday about having a bonsai facility that remotely mirrored or had any kind of similarity to shanty bithy. Really, really nice to have this material grown in the ground for, I want to say, 30 plus years. Really, I think a lot of love, care, and attention went into the pieces that shanty bithy curated, and now we have it at Mirai. So I'm really excited for this, but here's the question with boxwood, and we'll come back to the horticulture and the physiology. How do we handle them, right? Because when we talk about Kingsville boxwood, we're talking about Kingsville boxwood really more or less mimicking this kind of large, expansive, southern oak, or just Quercus in general, interior oak variety, big expansive, sprawling branches, big domed-out canopy. Is this the aesthetic that we want to pursue, and does each boxwood, although it naturally lends itself as a dwarf cultivar in the Kingsville variety to this mounding habit? And Buxus in general does tend to have that mounding habit. Do we continue to move it in that mounding direction and take advantage of that, or do we try to challenge that a little bit? Do we play with proportion? These are all the questions you're going to help me answer with this piece tonight, okay? So when we just start kind of orienting ourselves in terms of styling and design with boxwood, great time of year right now, super high energy positive. We understand that every tree is getting ready to put on its spring flush, and when we talk about broad-leafed evergreen, we're talking about trees that have a broad leaf but maintain that leaf through the winter over the entirety of the season. And we know as soon as this starts to push its first flush of growth, it's going to start to shed a lot of its older leaves. That first flush starts to harden off, energy positive after that first flush, and we get that drop of leaf mass as a really, I think, unique, right, and very early timing mechanism of that broad-leaf evergreen and the shedding of the old to welcome in the new. So we should be expecting that, and we recognize inside of that, wow, okay. We've got a spring push. We've got a ton of stored energy, and because we've got all of that stored energy, we can really come back into boxwood, and we can start to do some of this, not only branch elimination in terms of dead, but inside of each of these ramifiable pieces of growth, inside of each of these branches, we can start to come back in, and we can do these lower branch kind of removals. We can take away these weak interiors and crotches. We can cut these stubs back. But we get to these sections right here, where we start to see these tribes, triads, if you will, right? We see these tridents of growth, and we start to make decisions right here and now about how big or how small or how far back do we want to cut boxwood. Now, just like any other variety, when we start to look at the quality of ramification in our broad-leafed evergreen, we want to be very careful to not make the assumption that I'm going to take out that big central stem, because we're going to have a very broad, very obtuse angle here if we save these two lateral pieces and we take out that central stem. Okay, now, what we're going to see here, and I'm going to go ahead and execute it, is I'm going to take off the strong piece there. And what we see behind that strong piece is I have a fine piece of growth up above it. And because I have that fine piece of growth up above it, and to preserve the quality and integrity of the crotch as an acute function, I'm going to take off one of the two laterals. Now, I have this other branch here, so I chose to take off that piece growing into it. This is fundamental. Fundamental manners and methodologies called drop crotch pruning, reduction of size, back to a transition of a finer branch to increase that, taper from base to tip, get smoother and smoother, more seamless, and control growth, right? And to control the energy in the tree and to control the growth, all right? So if we were just trying to maintain boxwood at this time of year, we got through the the fall very, when we talk about the fall, work we can do definitely in the latter portion of the fall, but we recognize that if we do foliar reduction towards the latter portion of the fall, we want to be a little bit careful with winter hardiness. We wait till the next spring, we have a lot of energy, we do this kind of pruning, and they tend to explode, okay? And so when we talk broad-leafed evergreen, to do big reduction in the spring when we're in an energy positive is to say, I'm doing an initial styling, I'm working on developmental or secondary goals. This is not the time of the year to be heavily pruning back a boxwood where you want in that pruning process to elicit a very fine, very small, short, compact, twiggy piece of growth. Now Kingsville, right, micro phyla compacted Kingsville, is going to lend itself towards those smaller proportions. That's why it's so cherished. Very slow to get there, takes a lot of time and effort to get any sort of size or maturity, which is why this piece is so special, but we do have that inherent characteristic even then. To maintain proportion of all of the other growth, if we prune when these broad-leafed evergreens are at the peak of their energy positive and we reduce the number of growing tips that we distribute the energy confined by the cleaner, we are going to get more robust, vigorous, but coarser growth, okay? So we're talking right now spring prior to the flush, developmental, great time for first stylings, great time to challenge and compromise. If you're going to run the risk of breaking boxwood and setting structure, do it now because we have the opportunity for that big flush to patch that damage. We've got a lot of flexibility or at least as far as boxwood is concerned, a moderate amount of flexibility right now. Great time to be doing the initial styling. And that's where we're at with this piece, okay? I'm going to rotate again. I'm going to talk to you, talk to you about some of my thoughts and thought processes, because what we see here is we have a very big trunk. We've got a beautiful detail here in terms of the base. We have great movement, but then we get these big kind of long leggy pieces, right? You see how long that is. Now we've got a great lower branch here, wonderful lower branch, but then we've got this synonymous continuation of this massive, singular, thickness and girth of branch all the way out to a piece of foliar mass that contributes to the overall canopy of the tree. This is where I think boxwood needs to be handled in a very intelligent way, because to say, hey, listen, because this is all the way out here, I'm going to create this big massive canopy. I'm going to treat it like a coastal oak, or I'm going to treat it like something else. Okay, great, but you don't have the proportions necessarily. You don't have the transitions of taper. You don't have the secondary handoff of the bifurcation along that piece of growth. You have one big long kind of log of a trunk slash branch slash apex, right, that's happening there. Is that the quality that we're looking for in bonsai design? Sometimes we may say yes, sometimes we may say no. Sometimes that branch might have a lot of quality, and sometimes it might not. So when we start talking about the design and the execution of really creating high level, high level boxwood design, we have to be looking at branch by branch, the quality, the bifurcation, the transition of taper, and we've got to be building that in, whether we choose the Quercus or the oak sort of form and the big broad expansive canopy or whether we go more into sort of an upright tree, maybe more of the Mediterranean kind of vibe. When we get into Sempervirens in the drier regions of coastal France and we see these contorted forms that have a lot more of a singular trunk tree-like manifestation, this is when it starts to get interesting and we can play on that scale with macrophile. Okay, so I'm going to continue to rotate, right. We've got this trunk again beautiful beautiful base wonderful spread some funky roots here and I'm not a huge fan when we start to get kind of these big long linear pieces we've got some negative space here maybe we take that off in the future it wasn't time the first time we potted it we've got a big kind of brewery here of lots of funky branches up in the top we've got this overlapping piece here how do we use it can we use it right and then we get to this other side here where all of a sudden now we have these pieces just shooting north right they're just headed upwards again another kind of monotone branch lots of great movement contributing to the canopy but the same taper excuse me same taper from base to tip and it's it's kind of a distraction right now we know boxwood doesn't heal super-duper fast right we've got a wound here that's rolling very very hard wood boxwood is right and they will heal but it is very very slow and then when we get to the compact varieties like a Kingsville like a green gym right we start to talk about an even slower rate of healing low surface area very slow growth habit as it as it exists now we're talking about a very long time so when we start thinking big branch removal am I ever gonna think something massive like this taking off one of these two trunks that divide just a small portion of the Navarre for boxwood we're not okay all right so I'm just gonna kind of sort of make make my decisions in terms of how I want to handle the selection of the front and and I'm gonna start by removing some of the pieces that just don't give me the quality that I'm looking for in the execution of design I'm gonna open it up to questions we'll watch as kind of the canopy changes with these decisions and once we've got some more open space and some more visibility we'll start to make design decisions right up first we've got Kevin he wants to know if you concerned at all about the boxwood blight spread that is currently going on is there any way to fix the issue yeah this is a really interesting one I a have to be honest these pieces, they were so dense and they came in the wintertime and they were in bald and burlapped and we left them out in the rain. And because of the density, and you can still see, Jesus, can you kind of zoom in here and just show kind of some of this modeling and some of this kind of odd discoloration, right? The tree is absolutely healthy, right? It's been repotted. It's grown well over the past year, but some of the older leaves that existed in the areas that were heavily infested have not been shed yet. These will be shed, again, evergreen. I left them on. More leaf mass means more strength, okay? But we actually sent this in to be tested because it is something that very much on the eastern seaboard of the United States, boxwood blight, big problem, huge effort to kind of cure it because it's such a massive piece of landscape in North America. I tend to not fear that stuff. If it happens, it's really unfortunate. But when you talk about, okay, borers, impoverished, emerald ash borers, you talk about white pine blister rust, you talk about any sort of syrococcus, rhizosphera, pythium, phytophthora, phomopsis, cabotina. When you talk about all that, at some point at Mirai, we've seen it all. We've seen it all. At some point from somewhere, some nursery, some collected tree, some crazy backyard, we have seen a lot of different things. And over the course of time, the thing that you recognize is, listen, balanced water and oxygen. And I hate to, continue to hammer on it, but balanced water and oxygen continues to be my response to, do you fear these infections? Now that might sound ignorant, boxwood blight, I don't want it, right? There's another blight coming out of Wales regarding larch. That's a real massive issue, or at least I've read some pieces about it. You know, these are things definitely to be respected, not taken lightly, and to consider in the acquisition of material, etc. Okay? But for the most part, I just try to keep my trees healthy. And that's it. And that's the best that we can do, as far as bonsai practitioners and cultivation. If something random happens, I give it to the bonsai gods, right? It is what it is. Okay? Just went ahead and took away. Now let me just show you this, now that it's out. Let me show you what we got here, okay? Because as a standalone tree, this is absolutely brilliant. I mean, it's fantastic. Stick that in a, you know, glass of water and root that as a cutting. I don't think it would take root, but you know, I know you could get smaller cuttings to take off of this. Brilliant, right? And maybe you say, oh, why didn't you air layer that? Definitely a piece that we can air layer, okay? To be utilized as a continuation of a tree. Now here's where, you know, you really do have to have a lot of desire over the course of time. Because if we air layer this, the time that it's going to take for that base to become something of some substantial existence to hold this tree, is not necessarily a time that I want to spend myself, when I could focus my efforts on the greater piece of material. This is why I cut it instead of air layered it. There is a piece here that we probably will air layer, some bigger pieces. But definitely a possibility when you're dealing with boxwood. A little tougher than most deciduous broadleaf varieties to air layer, but nevertheless possible, okay? I'm going to keep going. I've got some spindly pieces in here. I've got some big long pieces. The thing about boxwood is we know that we can cut boxwood back to bare wood and have it produce leaves. Now I'm not saying, okay, and be careful. I'm not saying I recommend we cut all of this back to bare leaves, right? And definitely when we deal with the more compact varieties, we have to respect. That dwarf varieties don't have the same vigor as pure strain varieties, right? So if we have shoots on the interior that are strong and vigorous, we can cut these branches back to them. However, if we're looking at junctions or we're looking at a lack of taper without ramification in the branch, I do look at that and I say, I'm going to go ahead and cut back to something that gives me a replacement. I find that to be the better course of action to be able to build the best tree over the course of time or in a time frame that I'm going to be able to appreciate it, all right? So as I look at some of these more spindly pieces, I am thinking, man, I could cut that back. I have some buds on the interior. I'm going to roll the dice. I could either cut it off or I could kind of give those buds an opportunity to play ball. Maybe we see what happens. But I'm going to go through and first fix structural flaws in areas where I have too many pieces. Goodness gracious. Too many pieces growing from one singular location. Ready for some more questions. I'm ready. I'm ready, yeah. We better go to questions because I'm having a hard time doing both sides. Oh, we got it. We got so many. Good. Here they come. All right. Bentley wants to know, how long does it take Kingsville to get this big? How long does it take Kingsville? Well, I mean, this was 30 years in the ground from what I understand. And whether that's slow or that's fast, I don't have a reference. But I'm going to assume, you know, that that's a pretty standard rate of growth. And, again, these are some of the nuances that I'm really looking forward to having Rodney out so that he can give us concise, because he's been growing Kingsville specifically for so long, concise information on actual talk. But they are very, very slow. I understand this piece to be 80 years old. Rough ballpark. 80, 75, 80 years old. All right. Up next, we got Corey. Corey wants to know, what is your consideration of deadwood on boxwood? Yeah, yeah. Good question. Okay. So a lot of boxwood that we have access to in North America, we start to look at boxwood coming out of hedges, right, shaded. You have a lot of cross-pollination of branching. You start to look at that. You start to say, gosh, that doesn't really look good. You start to look at that. You start to look at that. You start to look at that. You start to look at that. You start to look at that. You start to look at that. You start to look at boxwood coming out of hedges, right, shaded. You have a lot of cross-pollination of branching. You start to look at that. You start to say, gosh, that doesn't really look that good. It's not really that functional. It's not really that usable. How do we go about handling that? Do we utilize that? Do we carve instead of trying to take some other course of action? I think that deadwood is nice. I think that the carving aspect of an application on boxwood tends to be handled in a manner and methodology. That looks a little bit artificial to me. So I think whenever we start to explore carving, right, for a species that has hard deadwood, gives us the opportunity to potentially reflect and utilize that deadwood to a really positive degree, I think we have to key into what are the characteristics of that deadwood that give rise to value and any sort of indication of character that inherently carries with it the concept of the tree, right? So if you're going to do boxwood, what does boxwood deadwood look like? What does it look like in the native environment? What does it look like as a characteristic of the vascular tissue? And I don't know that I've ever seen boxwood handled in a way where I thought the deadwood work was really profound, right? Not to say you can't, but I just haven't seen it. So I think you want to be careful to lean on that as some generic way to transition and attempt to create some sort of artificial vibe. If it's done well, absolutely. It's a hardwood. It will last. That's one of the big aspects of do we create deadwood or not, okay? Again, I'm taking off some of these coarser pieces. I have these two smaller branches. I'm looking at transition of taper over the course of time. By that bifurcation occurring at the end of this, taking off the bigger piece, I like this now. This gives me the opportunity. It brings light to the interior. You notice all of these shoots, we're going to come back and I'm going to show you about shoot thinning and really selecting where the tree puts its energy in terms of direction of growth. But right now I want to continue working on the structural. Now I have a conundrum here, okay? Because at this junction on this sub trunk, I have yet to select my front. I've got two areas that I'm looking at, okay? Area number one, direct to the main camera right here. Okay, I'm going to turn to the three-quarter camera for Lonnie, okay? Area number one, I love the movement through here. Go ahead and bring me in, Josh. I love the movement through here. This is just a fantastic trunk line. Now it moves up into the upper canopy. How do we handle this up here? I don't know yet. We see this fork. We see the acute angle of that fork. They do start to form a little bit of a circular shape right there and we want to be aware. But we get to this piece over here. Four branches, big branch going to the back, two intermediate in the front and then another one that kind of comes to the interior, crosses over and take a look at this. This crosses over and ends up right here. So it's actually the furthest left branch here, ends up on the farthest right here. Tough but interesting. You'll never get that shape into a boxwood branch. It's giving it to you. Do we use it? Okay, front number two, coming over to the other side. Oftentimes one good front means 180 degrees we have another good front. And look at the movement, okay? I think the Nibari is compromised from here. To see these kind of similar thicknesses, kind of even almost artificial distribution of the Nibari, a little bit challenging for me to appreciate from an aesthetic perspective. And so I am, as I kind of look at this, thinking about do I shift to get away from that Nibari? Do I start to look into here? This is where we took the big piece off. Naturally, this kind of bows towards us. Or do I come back to this area where we have a much more powerful piece? It's kind of giving us that strong interpretation of a really nice base. We see this root in the background. I'm curious what you think. Front number one, or when we're over in here, front number two. Let Eve know. I'm going to open it up to questions as I continue to kind of mull over this myself. All right. Up next, we've got Tribute Steve. Are you familiar with Buxus harlandii, Harland boxwood, native to Taiwan and neighboring areas, tropical slash subtropical and blight resistant? Yeah, absolutely. I am very familiar with it. Mr. Kimura had a couple really small shohin, right? Because when we were in Japan, as far as the kokufu exhibition driving the economy of bonsai, one of the big things that Mr. Kimura always dealt with is how do I find shohin, broad-leafed evergreen or deciduous material to complement the shohin-sized conifers for a three-point medium-sized display in the kokufu? What he did is he took the Taiwanese boxwood, big, thick bark, beautiful characteristics, and he cultivated a lot of those, air-layered several of them, and created a lot of these broad-leafed evergreen shohin accents to the coniferous chuhin model. So I have seen them. I have worked with them a lot. Very, very fantastic material. Every single person is saying front number one. Front number one. Okay, cool. It is a totally harmonious crowd. Very, very good. All right. I like that. That makes it easy. I appreciate that. Okay. Now, if we're going to do front number one, one of the challenges of front number one, the canopy goes away from us. So now we've got to start thinking about. Okay. How do we move this? How are we going to kind of reorient this whole thing? Because when we look at front number two, everything comes towards us. It's very, very beneficial to our endeavor to utilize front number two. I don't think it holds the same merit. I do agree with front number one, and that means that we've got to decide. Now, this big crossing, looping branch here, right? How do we handle that? Do we utilize that? Do we keep that? Do we take away these two foreground pieces? We already cut back on this one. These are the kind of challenges where I'm going to see these scars as they exist if I choose this, and I start to take these off from the front, and I want to be very conscientious of that. Here you see the forks. Go ahead and bring me in tight, Josh. You see these two forks right here, one vertical here, one vertical here. We've got this back piece again. Watch my hand. It crosses over, comes all the way over to that right side, and you see it there. I'm moving it right there. And then we have the biggest piece coming to the back here, moving to the rear. And if we're going to bring the front over to this side, we're going to have to really move some structural elements. Biggest thing that I'm considering, how do I avoid significant scarring in terms of the removal of these bigger pieces, all right? I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to commit, though, because I do believe this to be the best one. I'm going to go ahead, and if we're doing this now, right, how do you break down this big bush into something that has direction, that has asymmetry, that has flow? You've got to choose. First your front, look at the characteristics of the base, and then move in that direction of asymmetry to generate age. Even in the broadleaf evergreen or deciduous categories, there is asymmetry with age in the canopy of that tree. And I notice that I've got this wonderful, proportional, I would say excellent in terms of its bifurcation and transition of taper branch right here. This to me, counter to the base, boom, moving in this direction, big base here, and we've got this beautiful branch here. This feels like my defining branch. As a result, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to pull in on the root. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to pull in on the root. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to pull in on the root. I'm going to pull in on the root. right side I'm gonna take off that crossing branch I'm gonna expose that wonderful canopy and I'm gonna enter the design from that big move alright so here we go you helped me make the decision and it is done I'm gonna ask a question that seems a little bit more pertinent to timing serious curious about when it was last reported if we could get more information about repotting it could be useful as it might be easier to remove the roots than it is to change the direction of the apex possibly ah yeah sure right so I don't think that I can cut these big structural roots off repotted last spring grew healthy over the course of last year I really have you know this was grown in heavy clay I really have these external roots connected to everything so anything that I cut off is gonna carry a pretty significant amount of weight now we know boxwood incredibly incredibly durable right really really strong I could probably remove like this this root here that has the negative space remove that without fear they're very very aggressive they're very vigorous as I've been talking with Rodney more about boxwood he just keeps saying they're so strong man they're so strong so forgiving but there are definitely ways to elicit the best response to get the most refinable growth that's where we're going to pull in his expertise i'm going to take care of the crude big kind of broad brush strokes of of the species in this initial styling and that way we have some things that we can compare okay tough tough decisions here because every single branch on a tree that is this old is just so incredibly valuable and fantastic so to to to lose these pieces is quite challenging but look at the movement and the clarity of line that we're starting to get with the reduction of these okay next big decision i've got this piece moving to the back here i love this i've already pruned this back so that i have that piece for depth right here getting some interest i've got these two vertical pieces i can only save one of them right this back piece that we kind of decided this is going to be a major piece of the tree that we're going to be using for the back of the tree and i'm going to bring this towards the front and utilize it to pull into the foreground what do i do with these two pieces this is this is a conundrum for me okay because this piece comes right off the top here and you can see that it forms and it's part of that circular shape that we're building inside of here i don't like that as much and so more than any other option or decision that i'm making because of you know a preference the objective decision to remove as much as we possibly can the circular form should right just if we believe in the basis and foundation of bonsai aesthetics should improve the quality of the structure okay so i'm going to go ahead even though i'm very very reluctant to remove a piece that has this kind of quality i'm going to go ahead and remove it because i feel like structurally it's going to give me a better structure over the course of time and let me just make sure that i actually believe what i'm telling you i do okay good good okay here we go okay now i'm leaving a step I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to let the shoulders establish on these big cuts because I don't want, again, boxwood, box is really kind of time sensitive or say time investment to heal, right? I don't want any deadwood. I don't fear that there's going to be deadwood, but I also don't have a significant color where I'm removing these. And so to avoid the risk of having dieback occur, just like our deciduous, I'm going to go ahead, leave a stub. I already have some smaller pieces of growth here, which means I could reduce that stub. Reducing the stub might make it a little bit harder to heal in the future. I'm going to let these go ahead and recede on their own, all right? Okay, I'm feeling pretty good about that. I like where we're at there, okay? Let's see if we can't increase and improve the quality of the pieces that are moving towards the back, okay? Because we already said, listen, we have all of this coming here. This was most likely treated as some form, some source, or some notion of a potential front or opportunity, or maybe it was just hedged this way and that's how it existed. Okay, I'm going to try to transition the weight and push it back. So I'm going to start taking out some of these pieces that have a little bit of depth to them, okay? Just to start that move back in the opposite direction and start to push the physical weight of the canopy of the tree towards the opposite side where we can potentially start to rein in some of this ranginess and really develop and devote our attention on that front, okay? We see I'm going to work on some of these pieces. Go ahead, Eve, if you have questions. Of course, yes. Up next we've got Anne, Tom, or sorry, Atom. Atom? Atom. I'm not sure. If they have already started flushing out, is it too late to prune the boxwood or let them harden off the prune? I think you probably are going to want to wait, and here's why, right? Again, boxwood can take a severe amount of punishment, and I mean severe amount of punishment. They will give you a lot, even when you mistreat them. But if you want boxwood to truly thrive, you want to be functioning and working on them when they're in an energy positive state and that means not while they're flushing because that's when they're trying to expend their energy to expand their photosynthetic mass to get back to a higher degree of energy positive to get bigger their motivation is to get bigger just like any other tree this doesn't know right it's a it's a compacta for all it knows it's gonna be a really big tree just like its neighbor okay so we want to be respectful of that when we think about boxwood we don't want to pull on that energy system in ways that are disrespectful if we can avoid it because if we if we can sort of be patient what we get paid back with is a far more productive tree over the course of time with predictable behavior all right next week uh this is an endearing question and I assume that their six-year-old daughter is next to them so Lucas says that their six-year-old daughter picked out a box what is a tree that they could work on together but she demanded that they shape it in a heart-shaped topiary I tried to explain the difference but it flew over her head so , what is the natural form as you could explain it to a six-year-old natural form okay so it depends right it really does depend is this a natural form as we're talking about buxus sempervirens or buxus microphylla or any of the other varieties as they occur in the different regions of the world because when you talk about buxus sempervirens the European boxwood again you get into these dry coastal Mediterranean regions and that variety in that environment has a very interesting and unique shape definitely mounding definitely lower growth habit you do see some of them get vertically quite tall but but I would say free form starts to define that when you move into the buxus microphylla the Japanese boxwood much more water rich moisture rich environment okay definitely tends to lean more towards the shrubby sort of I would say you know not not not undervalued but I would say a little bit more mundane and less interesting form that we see in that natural growth habit now the the boxwood variety that is native to Africa what does it become that's something I don't know but we do have tree forms we do have low ground covers we do have starved stunted forms that occur in boxwood it is a very diverse shape of tree definitely tends to lean on the shrub sort of growth habit and that's really where there's a lot of interpretation or freedom to interpret the form of boxwood okay just take a look at where we're at here because we're starting to get some lines that are really becoming quite nice and quite visible okay we see a lot of these lines that are really becoming quite nice and quite visible okay we see this we've reduced some of the depth here let me show you from the side this is from the side okay although we still have this heaviness in the back notice that we're starting to see that almost make a transition towards the front this is all just structural pruning currently and again I want to be very careful about how far I go in terms of reduction I want to save the value of this mature kind of growth habit and I am leaning I will let you know I am leaning more towards a more slender canopy upright form of boxwood design here I'm not necessarily going for the broader canopy now how do I handle the beauty of these lines moving back in here I'm contemplating taking this piece out as well right even though I want I want the best of my ability to save two pieces at that Junction if I remove this I can drop this piece farther forward compress this right side elongate on the left side and there is some motivation to stop the further swelling at this Junction by just getting rid of all other pieces that are growing and healing these pieces so that we have a nice transition and really working on those lines that I think are far more impressive and beautiful moving through that portion of the tree okay so I'm wrestling with myself right here let me know if you feel like I should remove this foreground piece okay if we remove the foreground piece not much foliage mass on it but it doesn't mean it's not valuable we open the door to this piece right here and I'll let me show you the side view of that if I remove this front piece I have this piece that I can bring forward and really compress the design that's where my heart is kind of leading me right now but I'm curious what you think right as we wait for that to come in I got a question from Mark do you plan to use copper or aluminum wire given how easily it scars great I'm gonna use copper okay and I'm gonna use copper not because not because there's any less risk of scarring or there's a greater risk of scarring the scarring is gonna come from if I leave the wire on too long right whether it's aluminum or copper same thing is gonna happen I'm gonna use copper because I have a relatively durable bark on boxwood okay it's not it's nothing like it's not it's not like an invincible bark it's not a cork bark Chinese elm by any stretch of the imagination but but it is strong and it is durable and it's not a a light bark in terms of like a smooth bark like a Japanese maple it has texture to it it has roughness to it and because it's so hard right when we start to talk about boxwood as a variety in terms of being able to cultivate a lot of people tell me hey listen boxwood tough to wire very brittle no doubt about it we're gonna take one of these cut off branches and we're gonna experiment with it I'm gonna be using heavy gauge copper because I can get more done with heavy gauge copper then I'm gonna be able to get done with heavy gauge aluminum and I'm just gonna have to watch and be very judicious about taking that off before it starts to bite in but I would have to do the same whether it was aluminum or copper okay so I'm gonna start by just kind of starting to give rise to this defining branch on the left side of the tree I think this is gonna really kick off the design and anytime we start and we define the line base to tip of that initial apex right we recognize we're gonna make it this our front we recognize our line base to tip is here we haven't set that yet I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna see where is that asymmetry happening I'm trying to make decisions about the right side of the tree I always want to kind of back into some of the process so let me go ahead and just give myself a little capacity to manipulate right and before I bend these I'm gonna I'm gonna take one of those pieces that we've cut off and we're gonna test to the best of our ability the the flexibility of Kingsville right now at this season with those cut off pieces to see how much tolerance some of those pieces have and where we need to form our expectations of the capacity to move some of these really important structural pieces okay every time I come to a junction where I've got branching I want to be cleaning out all of the buds that are immediately around that Junction give yourself the opportunity to do really solid work no crushing of the leaf mass right because we have so many small little shoots everywhere and we have yet to clean it up I'm gonna set structure I don't want to waste my time cleaning something that I'm gonna cut off or that I'm gonna go ahead and get rid of right so when we start to do this structural wiring be sure that you're keeping that growth out from underneath the wire right because when we wire overgrowth and we talked about this in the class that's at mariah right now doing all kinds of work when we're dealing with spruce when we're dealing with the elongating species it doesn't matter deciduous broadleaf evergreen juniper pine always remove the needle as opposed to crush the needle okay and that sounds sacrilegious but listen if you crush a needle and you damage it that needle is sending out let me go ahead and test this before I get nasty I was about ready to just go for it but we shouldn't do that that's irresponsible okay all right let's see what we got here oh yeah okay smaller branches have some move uh-huh cool feels good all right a little bit of rotation a little bit of rotation gives us a lot more mobility oh look at that okay so we know that they're brittle this is continue let's see what we can see what we can do short short really nice short nice right when they're short they have a lot more brittleness to them okay because that that force is focused across such a shorter distance right when we get into some of these longer ones I would expect let's see now we can distribute the force across a greater amount of tissue and now we get a much bigger bend okay so this is common when we deal with slightly brittle trees longer the bend yep okay if we have a cut site that's gonna be a sensitive area that's what happened there okay but they have quite a bit of flexibility I feel really really good about where we're at in terms of our capacity to manipulate right and now when we see that kind of behavior when we take on that education and we see that behavior now we're looking for those indications where are the cut sites where are those weak points going to occur how do I avoid focusing the attention of a bend on a very small short segment of growth because that is a high risk area in terms of trying to change the direction of the bend and then trying to change the direction or making me major manipulations to the form of the tree okay I'm going to carry that wire out let's go ahead and pull these towards the front right and I'm trying to work with natural bends whenever we're styling boxwood you cannot work against you cannot work against a bend that already exists inside of the tissue so we're working with natural bends we're accentuating natural bends changing the plane of those pieces of growth but always following the natural contour of the bend otherwise we are going to be swimming upstream and that's a catastrophic thing to try and do with boxwood your response on that branch removal the it was an overwhelming remove it except for Bentley Bentley says don't remove it did I already do it oh oh oh remove it okay they're saying to remove it okay here we go let's remove it it's been a big long day here at my right folks it I can't even tell you how much work we've done today trees have been repotted trees have been wired trees have been pruned trees have been pruned trees have been セ sentido. we're going to have to do something kind of kind of naughty up in here too right this apex this apex is definitely needing to be oh gosh that's gonna be so filthy okay we're gonna get into four gauge let me just clean this up here I'm gonna do first before I roll the dice on this piece I want to do the the placement of the apical region because i think this is going to get to to potentially be a little bit of an aggressive move and in doing so if i'm going to break it and i'm going to tear it off the tree i want to do it now because i can always i can always about face all right we're going to go with four gauge when we're dealing with a brittle tree a lot of times people say brittle tree we want to be more delicate brittle tree you got to use heavier gauge of wire period because you have less distance that you have the capacity to move harden and really kind of bend and manipulate that piece in you better you better be focusing your attention on the heaviest gauge to allow you to move it and have it stay anywhere you move it all right so i'm going to go four gauge on this apical region i've got this junction back here bifurcates into two we already know we want to move this out of the way and start to kind of reduce the amount of depth here i'm going to carry this up this trunk i'm going to get rid of again all of the pieces that i could be smashing why do we get rid of of them because if we smash it the tree continues to feel stress try to support that damaged piece and allocate resources towards it when you remove it the tree can say ah at least i don't have to worry about that anymore okay here we go okay now when we're doing this kind of structural wiring and let me just see here i want to bring this forward i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to change my tune right here let's bring that forward that's going to be a better crotch entry it's going to be a better application it's going to be a lot easier and i get around a lot of those wounds i want to be hitting inside inside inside try to limit to the best of my ability the amount of scuffing that the wire engages with on that trunk so that i don't scar okay and hitting inside inside inside all right so that means i'm hitting the inside here inside here inside here inside here that helps me understand the structure of the structure of the structure but i still haven't figured that out how do i plan out that cleaning process to save myself time and not do more work than i need to and let until i've finalized the form shape and the pieces that i'm using just having that understanding of where your structural wire is going to go okay offhand always supporting big time support offhand is where the quality of wire occurs In this spring season, when we're dealing with broad-leafed evergreens, when we're dealing with our broad-leaf deciduous, right? That bark having that water rising can be a little sensitive, can be a little bit soft, can be a little bit susceptible to getting scraped and damaged. We wanna really hold that wire firm. So hit that inside, shortest distance of wire applied to your tree. There we go. All right. Nice and clean, very effective, minimal amount of scuffing. Okay? What else you got for me, Eve? All right. Up next, we got Christoph. When is the best time to air layer a boxwood? Best time to air layer a boxwood, when they're in energy positive, actively producing new photosynthetic resources. Okay? So when we say, listen, it's gonna dump all its energy. And when you think about the move of sugars and starches up into the canopy of the tree, that move is happening in the xylem. Okay? Because all of the stored sugars and starches are stored in the vacuole of the cell, cell to cell, across the entire vascular system of the tree. Right? So when that, so when that starts to move, and we start to have that resource transition, that resource is moving through the xylem, water to water. Xylem is the water mobilizing cell through the core of the tree. Okay? We need the phloem to be producing sugars. We need the phloem to be moving those sugars back, south, down to the roots. That only happens once all of those sugars have been put into new leaf mass. That leaf mass has accumulated the sun's energy, created glucose and sugars, and moves it south. Right? So that's as that growth is photosynthesizing, after it's been produced, it's out, cuticle forms. Now I'm maximizing and reaccumulating energy. First flush hardens off. This is when we air layer. Broadleaf to evergreen, broadleaf to deciduous. Same timing. Up next is Aiden with Japanese boxwood. If we have long growing season there in Perth, Australia, can we do a spring prune and fall prune if the tree is healthy? You can definitely, definitely, right? What's gonna happen when we start doing that? And let's just be clear, okay? If you're talking about refining a boxwood and you missed the first point that I made, this time of year to be refining a boxwood, not a good time to be pruning, okay? Because the product of pruning right now, energy positive massive sugar starch storage is gonna be very, very coarse growth. You're gonna get a lot of energy being put into a fewer number of growing tips and those growing tips are gonna go absolutely berserk. Right, if we're talking about refinement, you want the shortest inner node. You want the smallest leaf. You want the most refinable growth possible. Now is not the time to be pruning a deciduous. Now is not the time to be pruning a broadleaf to evergreen, right? Because we will get more energy being put into each bud, that bud is gonna have a longer inner node. It's gonna have a coarser growth, okay? So if you're first designing, can you design in the spring and prune again in the fall? Sure, yeah, if the tree is healthy, if the tree gives you the kind of growth, again, boxwood, so aggressive, so incredibly aggressive and strong when the root system is underneath it, you definitely can create the kind of energy movement through that tree where working it twice a year would be possible. All right, up next we got Bentley. Bentley's curious if these branches that you've cut, could they potentially be rooted? That's a good question. I'm gonna try it, but I tend to believe, not believe, tend to think. Do you think I could try it as a beginner? Yeah, you could try it, Eve. Episode one, guys, here we go. Episode one. The boxwood experiment. I'm not saying I like boxwood so far. Golly, it's so stiff to get wire up and through this canopy. There we go, there we go. Okay, let's see what we can do here. This piece is gonna go to the back. Give me just a second here and let me kind of play with. Watch for splitting. I like it, I like it. Let's see if we can move this up a little bit. Okay, all right, that came to the front really nicely. Okay, now this one. Now let's get that to the front. Got that to the lean here. Now we can start to spread these out, okay? All I'm looking to do is buy myself space. Buy myself space, buy myself orientation that engages this front that we're finding value in, okay? And I like that, right? Now we have the opportunity to kind of move this next thick piece. I'll do one more four-gauge, try to get some control of this piece here. And if we have those positioned and we're happy with their position, we're off and running in terms of the design of the tree. Okay, so this is that part. I gotta put a lot of work in on the foreground or on the front end of this. To make sure that we have the capacity to facilitate the design that we want. But if this goes well, we're off and running. All right, up next we got Shoheen Stig. Can you completely defoliate boxwood? Not saying that I want to, but in the past, if I partially defoliated a branch too much that branch will die off. Similar to what would happen if you removed all the foliage off a juniper or a pine. Yeah, could you fully defoliate a boxwood, okay? So I think when you're cutting a tree out of a hedge, ideally, you would cut a tree out of a hedge. Ideally, you would cut a tree out of a hedge. Ideally, you would cut a tree out of a hedge. Ideally, you would cut a tree out of a hedge. You would not cut past all of the leaf mass on a boxwood. Sometimes it happens, and sometimes they grow back. Oftentimes they do, right? Because they are so aggressive. That is a tree that has its root system in the ground, that has a tremendous amount of vigor, and can respond to a complete reduction of its vegetative mass. It's not something I would encourage, but with most of our broad-leafed evergreen trees, and Eliagnus can be defoliated, right? When we start to talk about the broad-leafed evergreen, they still have a high water mobility and oftentimes can respond. Is it something you want to do? I don't think so. And once we go into a bonsai container, we have a lesser degree of vigor in that tree already. If we're dealing with a dwarf form, we have a lesser degree of vigor in the dwarf form already. And when we start to compound those factors of in a bonsai container with a lesser degree of strength because it's a dwarf variety, I think you start to lose the capacity to do that severe of an operation and have less and less opportunity for it to respond positively. One branch being defoliated to dying, this makes total sense, right? All of the vegetative mass is gone. The rest of the tree is photosynthesizing. There's no longer a draw of resources. There's no longer a return of sugars and starches. Broad-leafed evergreen, boom, you're gone. Doesn't need it, right? But if the whole tree were suddenly void of sugar starch productivity, there may be an opportunity that it would produce foliar mass again. I probably would not tell you to employ that as a technique. Okay? All right, up next we got Joe. Let's see, Joe said, now this is from earlier, so I'm sure you'll know which side they're referring to, but the side, Ryan, is working on seems weak compared to the other side. Why not work the stronger side first? Am I not seeing this correctly? Weak in terms of visually, physically? I think, yeah, I think they just meant like visually that side of the tree seemed weaker. So maybe they thought, why? Is there any sort of like method or means to starting on the weaker or the stronger side of the tree? Oh, in terms of like number of leaves or health of the tree? Because weaker, I mean, it just didn't have as many branches. Like the tree probably grew next to other trees over the course of its life. Life in the field, consequently, this side had less and this side had more just as a condition of its growth. Doesn't mean that I should start on one side or the other because again, and I wanna be very clear, understand the stage that we're in here, okay? We are in a structural redesign. This is a developmental piece of work that we're performing tonight, okay? So I'm not sitting here looking at this saying, listen, this is how you refine your boxwood. This is how you go about pruning boxwood to get the smallest internode length. No, we're going about, let's design a boxwood. Let's design a Kingsville boxwood. Let's talk about the timing right now being a wonderful time for intense developmental work because of the stored energy positive. We know with the reduction as it's occurring right now, massive reduction, lots of big structural pieces getting cut that we're gonna expect a very coarse flush of growth. I want a coarse flush of growth after a big structural piece of work because that gives me secondaries. That gives me flushes from these branches that I'm pruning, pruning back that offer the opportunity for me to ease that transition of taper from that big piece to those smaller pieces because they have more vigor behind them as a result of choosing this timing at this time of year with this energy stored in the system to be doing this kind of work, right? So there's a method to the madness, but the scope of work is developmental, all right? And so from that perspective, developmental work, I don't need to, I don't need to worry about strong or weak or any of that stuff because I'm already resetting the system. Development is to reset, is to readdress, is to redefine how the strength system in the tree is working, right? So I'm taking advantage of the stored energy right now to be working my boxwood and getting the maximum opportunity for the growth that occurs to be able to assist me in the ease of transitions. How many boxwood do you see worked over the course of time that never really have a beautiful transition, that have a lot of scars, don't have big, beautiful, sort of secondary bifurcation, et cetera, right? You know, if we don't work on boxwood at the right time, the pushout is super weak, it's tough to get that weak growth to have the strength to become a secondary branch to heal a wound and to get to that degree of vigor where suddenly we have the capacity to really manage that transition of taper in the branch. This is the moment on a structural application of work that we're able to work on. This is the moment on a structural application of work that we're able to work on. This is the moment on a structural application of work that we're able to work on. This is the moment on a structural application of work that we're able to achieve the byproduct of this big structural reduction being a strong secondary vegetative growth that actually opens the door for the strength of that growth to be the transitional piece we're looking for. We do this at an inappropriate time, early fall or late fall. Those are clean up times, those are clean out times, those are energy management times when we start to talk about boxwood. Right now is an energy capturing time and the product of it is course growth, which for a developmental piece is exactly what I want. Up next, we've got Rafi. Rafi wants to know if tilting up from the side could help reduce the visual front of the ugly roots. Tilting up from the side would definitely bring the apex back over center. I wanna use this powerful root to move to the left, okay? So just bear with me, just bear with me. We're gonna get there. Everybody getting excited, don't worry. Don't worry, we're gonna get there. I got a question from Atom. I have a couple of field dug boxwoods from a nursery. They are B and B and have been out of the ground for over a year, overall healthy, but need significant styling and foliage reduction. My question is reduce and style or repot first? Reduce in style or repot first. I always take, especially with an evergreen tree, whether it's a conifer, it's a broadleaf evergreen, I'm always gonna take the route of repot first. I just think this tree, I could have cut it back heavily in the foyer mass. The amount of root that we reduce to get this into a bonsai container was insane. I mean, it was really, really gnarly repot to get this into a bonsai container. But the goal of this tree was never to have it be in a massive container. The goal was always to reduce the canopy of the tree so that we could actually create a more compressed, true to form, I think, shape in terms of the boxwood. And so, it depends on what you're trying to accomplish, but I would always give yourself the opportunity to have the capacity when we start to talk about, about that work, to really get the root work done on the front end. And having foyer mass is what allows that to happen. Now, we recognize, and again, we just spent time talking about the broadleaf evergreen, having the capacity for heavy foyer reduction still has a lot of strength, maybe in a really vigorous state, could potentially respond to that by producing another flush, okay? There is a possibility that you could heavily reduce the roots and do foyer work at the same time. The problem is we don't have the same water mobility as a true blue deciduous, broadleaf tree. And from that perspective, the evergreen nature of it means we work just a little bit slower, not as slow as a conifer, right? We're in the moderate range of how this piece is gonna behave over the course of time, but definitely working in terms of trying to be respectful of that moderate water mobility, okay? I'm gonna use these stubs down here as a redirection of my guy wire. And because it's just such gnarly, aggressive wood, okay, I've gotta use a guy wire to hold this. Now, the four gauge seems to be working just fine for the other piece, okay? But let's see if we can get... Nice, nice, okay. Now, when I'm looking at bending boxwood, hey, Zeus, can you focus in right there on that crack for me? I just wanna show you where I start to develop my threshold, right? When we start to talk about trees that are brittle, we're always looking for the tissue to separate. Notice how that's separating right there, okay? I've got my rubber, I've got my bumper here in terms of my guy wire, and I'm looking at that length of lever arm. Again, we said focusing that distance of pull across a very short area is what creates the kind of leverage that can be really dangerous. And you see that right there. There is a definite expression in the tree that, hey, I'm under stress. Brittleness is generally formed in the core of this vasculature. Brittleness is generally formed in the core of this vasculature. Brittleness is generally formed in the core of this vasculature. The cortex, which is the precursor to the xylem, starts to lose its water mobility, dries out oftentimes in conifers. A lot of tannic content is focused there to create heartwood. Boxwood solidarity also comes from that central core hardening over the course of time. So you have this central pivot point, tension on one side, compression on the other. And when you put that tension under pressure, that central core of immobility is what causes the brittleness to occur. So when you see that tension start to open up, that's your indication, ooh, you're in the danger zone now. Okay, now I'm gonna push it a little bit. I'm gonna push it a little bit because I wanna see if we can get this a little bit more forward. But already, already when we look at the side of it, we're definitely leaning in that direction, whereas we were not when we first started this piece of work, okay? So let me see what I can do. Got it. Close. Just caught it, I just caught it. I just caught it, I got a 50-50 break. Maybe a little bit more, but I kept it before it fully went. Now, here's the thing. If you're gonna do this work and you're gonna push it to this degree, which again, there's no reason. Listen, if you are going to style and design bone side, there is no reason to be conservative. Not saying, you know, just tear a tree apart, but there's no reason to not attempt to get that tree to where you want it to go. And if you think about, okay, I'm gonna get that piece to where I want it to go, right? It's the softest it's ever going to be in your life today. Tomorrow it will be harder. The next day it will be harder, right? It gets harder and harder. More photosynthetic mass, more tissue formation, all of that accumulation over the course of time. So when we do this, you do wanna try to push as far as you can. Did I push too far? I definitely pushed too far. Did I see the mites? The markings on the wall? I saw the markings on the wall, right? I showed them to you, talked about it, and then I said, can we get a little more? I was a gluttonous today, okay? That's all right, that's all right, okay? Do I move it back? That's the question, no, no, okay? Because we just moved this here because we want it here. So to return that to its original position, does that make it heal better? No, the xylem's never gonna rejoin. The cambial layer's never gonna rejoin. So what's gonna happen if we move it back? Now we have a broken branch that we're gonna be moving all of the resources through this foliar mass through a small portion of the tissue that's still intact, and that tissue's gonna swell and it's gonna get rigidly hard, and you're gonna try to bend that again, and it's gonna break the next time. Leave it where it's at, okay? I patched it with calismate. Jesus, go ahead and show that close up. Calismate, I give a very, very healthy dose of calismate. Okay, and then I'm gonna take parafilm, and I'm gonna apply as much compression as I possibly can. Now we know the parafilm not gonna be really giving us a tremendous amount of compression. It's wax tape, right? There's not a lot of force here, okay? But it's enough to be able to compress the area so that we don't get embolisms of oxygen moving into that wound. We don't have any water leaving. We also don't have water getting into that wound and causing any sort of decay, desiccation, fungal issue, et cetera. So a really nice compressive application of parafilm, enough layers of this, and it does form, you know, some degree of structural integrity in terms of that broken piece. But the big thing that forms the structural integrity, I've got four gauge on there, but I also have the guy wire, and you saw me tighten the guy wire. Why not tighten the guy wire? I've already broken it. What are the chances of survival? Mm, with boxwood, I'm gonna say 50-50, probably 50-50. At this time of year, what are the chances? Higher than they would be at any other time of the year. Low temperature, right? Moderate metabolism happening right now, relatively low temperatures, especially nighttime temperatures, okay? Relatively short daylight length, although they're getting longer, they're not super long. Transpiration is at a minimum, and guess what? Sugar starch movement through that cell-to-cell vascular transport is giving us a really opportune capacity to heal, okay? So now when we look from the front, when I show the three-quarter cam, let me show the hero here, let me show three-quarter to Lonnie, right? You see that's front and center. Now let me show you, obviously a more acute angle than we had anticipated having that move forward, but it does a massive amount of work for our silhouette of the tree to now have it in that position, okay? I'm good, I'm solid, it's patched. I'm gonna go ahead and continue with the work. If it dies, it dies. I'll come up with a different design. If it lives, awesome, then that's a bonus, and we get to work with it and have an acute angle of bend as well. Great, can't complain, okay? Now that those pieces are there, I'm gonna come back to here, okay? I'm gonna come back to here because I have a high degree of confidence that that is going to survive. Let's come back to the structural piece here. Let's see what we can get done. I'm gonna reengage with four again. All right, up next we got Sylvia. Sylvia's curious if you can cut back and repot at the same time with boxwood. If you can cut back and repot at the same time. Technically, yes, right? And again, boxwood's very forgiving, boxwood's very durable. So we wanna understand that technically, yes, we could execute a cutback and a repot at the same time. Is it the coolest thing to do? Is it the coolest thing to do? Well, if we're talking about a highly refined tree that has its roots already worked and we're doing a routine repot where we're just gonna be removing the compressed top, sides, and bottom. It's a domesticated root system. We're cutting back overly elongated shoots and we have a high degree of ramification. Sure, no problem at all, right? That is a refinement-based repot. That's a refinement-based pruning. Neither one of those are gonna pull on the energy system of the tree too much, okay? But let's just say, you know what? I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna do the clean out of all of the field soil and the first real repotting where I'm gonna reduce the roots by 60 to 70% to get them into a bonsai container. And I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna make all of the decisions we're making tonight with these big dramatic cuts and reduction of foliar mass. And then I'm gonna bend, oh, and one of them broke. And is that okay? No, right? So the severity of the operation is what's telling us whether or not we can go ahead and we can start to tag team and dog pile on different scopes of work. But definitely when we get into the more sophisticated sort of refined states of working, we have the capacity to do multiple pieces of work at the same time. When you're in these big raw forms of work, you want to avoid doubling up on those big scopes of work because typically you're gonna spread the energy system thin and the tree's gonna have much less of a capacity to respond positively. All right, next we got Kevin. Could you remove the larger branches in two cuts over a couple of seasons so that the callus starts before the complete branch is removed? Or is that not necessarily the correct way? So again, I've seen the Abihara stuff and I asked last time, I said, where is all this Abihara stuff coming from? And there's discussion of Abihara's techniques in a multitude of arenas right now. The notion of cutting a branch and then healing it and having that work over the course of time, look, be very clear, be very clear about this. Abihara was a genius. He was a mad scientist. Nobody could do what Abihara did, right? Is that a fundamental technique that we can apply? It could become fundamental if you work out all of the, really specific nuances to a branch in a position that has the water flow and you cut the size out of that branch without damaging it and you keep the foyer mass on that branch growing to the correct degree and balance with the rest of the tree. That is a big nuance to have that healing while it's still attached technique working for you, right? In the vigor, in the grope, right? All of the things that have to happen, okay? If you can pull it off, any tree would benefit from that. Any tree would benefit from that. Because you continue to draw resources to that region, right? While it is also healing the removal of that branch, okay? And boxwood would be the same. Can we, can we go ahead and form the collar by leaving a stump and allowing it to push out with vigorous growth, come back once the collar is formed, cut it to the collar, patch it, get vigorous addition of growth in the other areas and heal that over maybe a slightly longer period of time? Yeah, yeah, we can, you know? And that's good enough for me, not to say that I'm not pursuing that higher level of technique, but the nuances that go into that are far more complex than it seems. I just want to make sure everybody understands that. This isn't, the abhihara techniques that are being presented are not, are not simple. They're not fundamental. He was a mad scientist. Much like Mr. Kimura was a creative genius, and you don't see people being like, oh, this is the way to Kimura design, you know? Like, dude was a little touched, right? Abhihara did things that nobody else can do, okay? So I just, as long as that's understood, we recognize, okay, those techniques are there. There's a lot of knowledge that goes into those being successful. We can work towards acquiring that knowledge, but it is going to be complex for it to work. It will be complex for it to work. All right, next is Treebeard Steve. Follow up on the Harlan boxwood. What's the best time to repot one? Mine spent the winter under lights. Best time to repot boxwood, right as they start to, right? So there's a loss of winter color. Yours spent the winter under lights, probably showing a relatively deep green color in terms of the foliar mass. Definitely, definitely want that color return to be occurring. This one outside, color is returning. Great time to be doing styling. Great time to be repotting. As the buds swell prior to the push of growth, in the spring, once temperatures are warm enough to really start to bring a lot of water mobility to your tree, when we talk about broad-leafed evergreens, they have less indications than buds swell that we see on deciduous than the tips of new growth that we see on our elongating species or our pines with candles, right? We have far less insinuation or gesture of what's happening inside of the tree physiologically. So we really do look and wait for, hey, when are we starting to actually see the color shift occur? Right? Prior to the onset of foliar growth, that's when we wanna be doing the repotting, okay? I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna see, right? I don't wanna shy away from bending. Just because we bend a branch doesn't mean that it needs to be scary. I'm gonna continue moving forward. I'm gonna see if I can get this piece nice and compressed and down into this region here. I don't wanna cover up all the lines, but I definitely wanna start to pull in on the right so I can push out on the left. So let's see if we can get that done. All right, up next, we got Gary. If you're repotting a boxwood nursery stock into the first bonsai pot in the spring, would you do the first styling in early fall or the following spring? If it's a question of vigor, what are the signs? Yeah, so when we start to talk about, you know, Yeah, so when we start to talk about, you know, doing that big repot in the spring, when do you rebuild? The question you have to ask yourself is, when do you rebuild the resources? When do you rebuild the energy? When do you rebuild the root system when you do a big repot? And when we start to say, well, listen, it grew well. It grew well after the repot. It must have been healthy. Yes, no doubt about it. But when your strength is in the vascular system, like a deciduous, like a broadleafed evergreen, like an elongating species, you can have enough root to be able to continue to drive forward the push of growth and still not be necessarily strong in terms of that tree's overall vigor. Strength is created by the recuperation of the root system. And when we do that initial first potting, just because a tree lives, this tree survived after its initial reduction last year. I waited past the fall season to spring of the following year to do the work, okay? Because the fall season is when vascular tissues accumulated. The growth that occurred from spring until summer is what feeds that vascular accumulation. If we come back in the fall and we start cutting all of that off, we never actually rebuild that root system. I would say first big working on any tree coming out of the field, right? Any tree coming out of a nursery can. First big working stylistically after the repot is gonna be spring of the following year, because you wanna let that foliar mass rebuild that root system before you go about that reduction process. All right, up next is Andrew. What location in the garden do you suggest putting Kingsville? Kingsville always burn even under 40% shade in Pennsylvania. Interesting, are you sure that it's sun burning it, right? I would be really careful about that, okay? Because if you're seeing definitely boxwood, thick waxy leaf, right? And I'm not saying that just because they have a thick waxy leaf that they have the capacity to be in full sun. You probably are gonna need to some degree protect these dwarf cultivars in the peak of intense hot summer sun. But if we're under 40% shade cloth and we're still seeing boxwood burn, are we talking nutrient deficiency? Are we talking some sort of watering, lack of effectiveness in our watering based on our work schedule, et cetera? Is the container too small to maintain the foliar mass that that tree has? You shouldn't be seeing your boxwood burn being a broadleaf evergreen with that thicker leaf and that thicker cuticle under 40% shade cloth, right? I'm gonna be going full sun on boxwood until we get into the 90s in the Pacific Northwest. And I will see them be a beautiful emerald green thriving in that sun and see the root productivity of that also be phenomenal as a result, right? And again, I wanna continue to sort of echo this concept that I'm seeking to the best of my ability in the current iteration of this tree, I am seeking strong, vigorous push of growth after this work, which means it has to have sun to have the energy as a broadleaf tree, right? When we talk about broadleaf evergreen versus broadleaf deciduous, broadleaf deciduous, larger surface area, thinner cuticle, broadleaf deciduous, larger surface area, thinner cuticle, broadleaf deciduous, larger surface area, thinner cuticle, higher water transpiration, higher sugar starch productivity, higher water mobility. When we start to talk about boxwood or olive or camellia or any of these, right? Waxy, thick, hard, that waxy, that hardness, that's a cuticle preventing excessive transpiration. Slower transpiration, slower sugar starch productivity should mean also higher durability to sun. Now we know camellia, we've gotta be careful. We know that boxwood in the ground, full sun's totally acceptable. When we put a camellia into a bonsai container, when we put a boxwood into a bonsai container, the bonsai container, not the same reservoir, not the same temperature cooling capacity because the container and the water does get a little bit warmer. We know that we have to protect a little bit in the peak of summer. Up next is Treebeard Steve. Are most members of the genus part of the understory in native habitat? To the best of my knowledge, and I will admit, this is something that I've been doing research on. If you think about all of the native genus, and species, and studies that we have to do to inform ourselves about any variety or any species of tree. When you talk buxus, and you start to talk about, and how do you know? How do you know, right? And this is where I've talked a lot about. Listen, Google Images, when you're looking for native information, one of the toughest trees I ever styled was the Pacific Bonsai Museum Blue Atlas Cedar because Dave DeGroote, when he was the curator of the Pacific Rim collection, prior to becoming the Pacific Bonsai Museum, was basically like, hey, I want this to look like a Blue Atlas Cedar. I'm not happy with the way it looks now. Can you make this thing look older and better? And it's like, okay, I've never seen a Blue Atlas Cedar in the native environment in an ancient form before. Sure, let me get right on that, right? That's a big challenge, okay? So when we talk about boxwood as well, and we talk about the African variety, we talk about the European variety, et cetera, it's really, really tough to accumulate. Because if you Google boxwood, you're going to see a whole bunch of tacky bonsai, and you're going to see a lot of hedge plantings and landscapes. That's what Google is going to give you when you Google boxwood, okay? So how do we kind of find its native form of a more aged kind of product? That's a challenging thing to discover, and I haven't found really good references for many. I've found sempervirens, and there's also a lot of European examples and European bonsai articles of European collectors in the Mediterranean region. But I haven't seen it for a lot of the other buxus cultivars and varieties across the world, okay? Just kind of playing. Hang on just one second, right? Just playing with the reduction on this right side, and really trying as hard as I can to compress, to compress, to compress. Now, I'm in the same scenario, and I've got a little bit of a tough situation here, in terms of, let me get my boxwood. All right, I've got a little bit of a tough situation here, in terms of, let me get my boxwood. All right, I've got a little bit of a tough situation here, and I'm going to take a look at some more, and I'm going to take a look at some more, because this is my little twister thing. I don't have a pure hook point for my guy wire. I don't have a pure hook point for my guy wire. This comes back to a more technical application than anything. Okay, I'm going to hold that so that it doesn't slip off, and I just want to take a look. Now, this is a different bend. Notice that I'm rotating this bend. I'm pulling at the very long extension, hooking onto the fore, and I'm spinning. That rotation should technically give me a little bit more flexibility and capacity. Okay, and I'm gonna push. I'm gonna push. I'm gonna push. Watch what happens here, because this is going to slide right here. Before it slides, I'm going to take this and I'm going to compress this so that I get this guy wire twisted around this piece and it cannot hopefully slip off of that, okay? Boom. I locked it in right there before I let go. And that's how we can lock guy wire onto diagonal catch points, right? Have that piece ready to go. That's a really nice taut guy wire. Take a look at how that's changing the silhouette. Here, really pulling in on the right side. Go ahead and blast out, Josh. Pulling in on that right side, that's shortening and reducing it. We've got the left side here. That's elongating. We've got our defining branch over here. We're making headway. We're making headway. Up next is Moon. Moon says, boxwood takes scion grafts well. Do you encourage taking scions from the same plant or a donor plant? No, I definitely think you want to be taking them from the same plant because there's so much genetic diversity, right? Even when you talk about Kingsville, Kingsville, is an abused, it's an absolutely abused terminology for the variety of boxwood. Almost any small boxwood is called Kingsville at this point in time. Kingsville is a very, very specific variety. And to the best of my knowledge, this is a Kingsville, but there's a strong chance that this is a completely different. Maybe it's a little gem. Maybe it's a compact, a microfilo compactive variety that I have no clue about. And somebody just called it Kingsville because there's, there's a marketability to it. I really have no clue and have no way of completely verifying without somebody like a Rodney Clemons, who has seen thousands and thousands of boxwoods and has trained to see those nuanced differences. I don't have that capacity. I think it's a Kingsville might be some other variety, but because of that genetic diversity, you definitely want to be taking scions from the same tree. All right. Up next, you got Sarah. Sarah wants to know, are there any ancient boxwoods and how old do they get in nature? Haha. This is what I'm saying. Sarah, I, I, uh, there definitely are old boxwoods. Okay. Are there ancient boxwoods? I mean, this is like the, this is like the question that haunts my dreams. Are there ancient, you name it. Are there ancient bristle cones? Well, we know there's ancient bristle cones. Are there ancient red? We know there's ancient redwoods. Okay. Are there ancient rosemary? You know, you know, are there ancient time? Is there, is there, is there ancient, uh, you know, are there ancient Japanese maples? Has anybody seen an ancient Japanese maple? Like what's the lifespan of, of, uh, of, uh, of, uh, Japanese maple? What about an ancient cherry tree? Okay. The cherry trees that you see in Japan, right? The flowering cherries that are kind of given by the country of Japan around the world, they have a lifespan of roughly 80 years. And you see them, if you go to Japan being replanted and a new tree being regrown as they're cutting the old tree out because it's reached the end of its lifespan. Now these are hybridized, these are hybridized plants. So. And when you get into the pure varieties of the plant, I'm assuming that there are boxwood that are several hundred years old. And when we see that kind of longevity, right, we see typically longevity in the plant form occur when we have a slower rate of transpiration, right? And when we talk about the broadleaf evergreen, we've got that thicker cuticle, which is what causes the rigidity. Okay. It's broadleaf and it's evergreen always maintaining that foliage mass, which means it has to have the capacity to respond to, uh, some challenging conditions. Okay. These are the trees that we typically tend to, or the species that we typically tend to see carrying a little bit of age. I would assume boxwood being a broadleaf evergreen growing in some of the harsher environments in the world as a highly durable and vigorous species probably has some ancient forms out there to be explored. All right. Up next, we've got Aiden. Aiden's curious. What is the best soil composition for boxwood? You know, I'm going to, I'm going to, I'm going to lean on my go-to, which, which, um, I know people have mixed feelings about. But I'm going to say, Hey, I go, I go a hundred percent Akadama. I want that really nice skilled root system. And I'm going to pull back. I'm just going to pull back the, um, I'm going to pull back the moss here just for a second and let Jesus kind of focus in on the, on the root mass here. And you can just see, this is one year after repotting. Okay. We cut this back heavily, all of those white roots. Those are all new, fine root growth. Okay. And notice how small and fine it is now. Boxwood. When you start to talk about it as a broadleaf evergreen can produce a very, very coarse root over the course of time. If we put it into a coarser aggregate soil, if we put it into a very fine, heavy, organic soil, like a nursery mix, their roots can be incredibly coarse and incredibly cumbersome to work with. When you put them in Akadama, they scale, scaling reduces the inner node length and the leaf size. Now this is a Kingsville compactus. So I'm not really, or I think it is anyway. So I'm not really worried about leaf size. Being an astronomical challenge, but I still am going to try to get the most refined tree possible. And I find Akadama gives us that. All right. Uh, let's see up next is, uh, Eric does not crushing growth apply to ficus as well. Given that ficus is ability to merge growth together. Does what does not crushing growth apply to ficus as well, given the ficus is ability to merge growth together. Uh, so let's talk about the not crushing growth thing, because I haven't talked about bud selection yet. Which I want to do, uh, as soon as I get into some of the more refinable branches and we start to get into the secondary work. Um, but the crushing growth thing, this is something that we all need to have a fairly firm grasp of. Okay. When we talk about growth and we talk about don't crush growth, cut the growth before you crush it, right? And you think about, okay, this tree has this vegetative growth that it's supporting. All right. When damage occurs, just like in the human body, when damage occurs, the, the body has to respond, right? And it has to respond with resources. Allocated towards that region, it has to respond with, uh, you know, shock response or a stress response as a result, right? All of the immune system kicks in the, the tree says, oh my gosh, no more messing around. It's time. Or the body says no more messing around. It's go time, right? Well, the tree is exactly the same. No more messing around. It's go time. I'm going to allocate resources towards this crushed damaged piece to try and patch it and save it. Now, oftentimes the damage is significant enough that you'll watch. The leaf, uh, dry up and disappear over a prolonged period of time, still consumed a lot of resources and those resources. When you think about the stress of the damage to that leaf, the stress of the damage to the needle, the stress and the damage to that foyer mass, right? And the resources allocated towards patching that all you had to do was properly clean that portion of the foyer mass and you would never have had to have wasted those resources, especially in a tree that has the vigor to regenerate those resources. So as opposed to being sloppy or lazy, going through and making sure that we clean out as we're doing structural work before we ever do the very really detailed sort of secondary tertiary work and that we take the time to remove instead of crush that growth goes a long ways towards us allocating the resources that the tree has towards a positive productivity of something that can actually be utilized and allocated inside instead of it being exhausted and wasted, trying to patch something that really doesn't have a lot of value. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. or the capacity to contribute to the tree in a significant way. And that's why we don't wanna crush, especially on a grand scale. Broken leaf here, crushed piece there, not gonna hurt. But if that's the general consensus of the styling and we're very sloppy with it, it is very detrimental to a tree to pursue work in that manner. Mentally, the pursuit in that fashion is kind of unacceptable and disrespectful, but on a grander scheme, there is a physiological response to that kind of stress and it's not positive. It's a waste of energy. All right, let's see. Up next is Danny. I know you've touched on this briefly a little bit, but mentioned that you've been repotting still. Is this the time of year to repot broadleaf evergreens like this boxwood? Absolutely. So we wait, we really wait, and we tend to delay broadleaf evergreen repotting until they really start to see that winter color. And that's our indication, because most of them get left outside. But we do also wait to see the buds swell and to see those first signs of metabolic activity happening. For our olives, it's just starting. Olives need a lot of heat. When we talk about buxus, buxus also tends to respond to more warmth and more heat. And so I do see the capacity to repot them later than a lot of our broadleaf deciduous trees that tend to be stimulated to grow very quickly with small bouts of slightly warm weather. They're very excited, high water mobility, readily active, activated boxwood, not so easily fooled. And consequently, we tend to work them later. Now, there are obviously exceptions to that. Inside of the evergreen oak varieties, there are some coastal oaks that we talk about. Listen, Mediterranean region, we tend to see those being better repotted early in the repotting season, January as one of the very best times. But when we're talking about boxwood, I do find boxwood to be something that you can repot a little bit later with a lot of success. Okay, up next, we've got Matthew. They say, two years ago, I tried the boxwoods in the landscape and this action seemed to trigger an interest of leaf miner. When the larvae entered the leaves, they almost annihilated the bushes. Do you think a hormone release by the trimming action is what actually drew the infestation or just happenstance? I don't know. That's a really interesting question. Did, would that, would the pruning process, which there is a hormonal response to pruning, would that trigger? Is there some sort of insect signaling that it's time to go mow down some boxwood and as a leaf miner, just get your leaf mining groove on? I tend to believe that a healthy tree continues to produce, and when we talk about a tree and the pheromones that a tree produces to fend off foyer feeding insects, phytocides are the natural byproduct that a tree produces. When a tree is overly stressed, it stops phytocyte production. When a tree is overly vigorous, it stops phytocyte production. And so there's two situations in which you could justifiably look at that and say, that probably triggered some degree of what I experienced and saw happening. Would the pruning process trigger it? I would not think it would trigger it as much as stress from an unhealthy tree, right? And so, you know, looking at that, was the tree strong enough to be pruned in the first place? Maybe you say, look, this thing was an absolute hulk. If so, probably just circumstantial is my guess. Okay, now, I'm working this broke section. Again, if it's gonna survive, then great. Let's make it work, right? I think we tend to shy away from, and I'm not saying, hey, you break a branch, don't worry about it, but I'm saying, listen, I can't just leave this broken branch sitting over the rest of the growth on the tree. I'm gonna redistribute, I'm gonna try to put this into action, and you're starting to already see the redistribution of that forming a little bit of a new, an interesting canopy that's taking advantage of those lines, all right? So I went ahead and I did that. Now, am I gonna go into secondary tertiary and really detail it out? Maybe, but I'm probably gonna wait and see. How does it respond to the actual action of having broken, okay? But as I'm working through this, I just wanna point out that every time I put a new piece on the tree, I'm going through and I'm cleaning, and I wanna show you that process. So let me just kind of, here we go. Let's see here. Let's go right here, Jesus. Okay? Now, I've got this piece on here, four gauge carried up to there. I'm gonna transition to eight out onto these pieces, right? Notice where the growth of the boxwood is taking place. Advantageous and at random sites all throughout the branch itself, okay? Now, if I have a definitive, and always in boxwood or any phototropic tree, we have a definitive top and bottom of the branch. We never wanna take a boxwood and flip the foliage mass upside down. Totally catastrophic, sunburn, all kinds of detrimental things are gonna occur. What that means is, these pieces coming off of the bottom of the branch, I don't want those growing. I don't want those consuming resources. Weak interiors here, I don't want those weak pieces to consume resources. Those are not going to contribute, okay? And pieces near the crotch, where I already have good growth, where I have a branch on the opposite side and that bud would essentially form a bar branch. These are pieces that are going to take energy away from those portions that when this energy positive sugar starch load gets pushed into this canopy, are going to exhaust the growth that I may want put into. Pieces that I actually might desire or want to further develop, okay? So when we do this, beyond cleaning to avoid crush, I'm also taking out sort of unnecessary, unusable, and what I would consider to be more or less couch potato type freeloading roommates, right? That aren't paying rent, aren't paying utilities, using your shower, eating your food when you're not home. Get rid of those pieces before you ever even continue on. It gets it out of the way of wiring and it starts to reduce the foliar load and dilution of sugar starch energy. Again, developmental work. I want to leave only the pieces that I want and really inject the stored energy into those pieces. That's the reason we're doing this work right now. If I wanted a more refined, I wanted a more diluted amount of energy across a broader number of tips, I leave those pieces post-flush, harden, come back in and clean them off, right? Better way of working. Up next, we got Leonard. This question was from a little bit ago as well. The stumps you created in the front, can they be reduced to the point of disappearing? Can they be? They will be able to be reduced from the point of disappearing and honestly, they probably could be reduced relatively quickly because we have a slightly lower water mobility, right? I'm not worried about necessarily boxwood having a real effortless capacity to die back, but I always do when I'm cutting back big, heavy, heavy amounts of foliar mass. When I'm cutting back big, heavy branches, I do like to leave a stub. I like to let the shoulder form. I like to let the tree adjust its water lines. And so that's why I left them and I'll leave them there. Will they be able to be removed to the point of disappearing? They will be able to be removed flush to the trunk and healed over the course of time. If I don't want to wait that long, they could potentially become some sort of piece of deadwood feature. Although I'm not a huge fan of small stumps like that becoming deadwood feature. In Kingsville specifically, or any of the compact of varieties, it could be handled that way. I think the coarser leaf varieties, like your standard Simpervirens, Buxa Simpervirens, probably lend themselves to deadwood a little bit more than a dwarf variety. But that's again, subjective information when we start to talk about that. Okay, up next, we've got Paul. Since boxwood have relatively small leaves, do you fertilize year round or will they become too large if you fertilize before they push out and harden off first? Yeah, so for most, or if not all of my broadleaf evergreen trees, I'm pretty happy. I'm pretty happy and I'm pretty content to give them a consistent amount of fertilizer over the course of the year. Okay, obviously we take off the summer months. We don't like to add any sort of disruption to water mobility when a tree is experiencing really hot conditions and trying to cool itself. We recognize as we apply fertilizer or supplemental nutrition to the soil mass, that we do create a salt concentration in the soil that can compete for water uptake in the warmest months of the year. Okay, so I don't like to fertilize anything when it's really, really, really hot. Okay, when we talk mid 90s and above, I'm out, right? Or if I feel like a tree needs some nutrition, that's a perfect opportunity to go to liquid nutrition, like a fish emulsion or a fish hydrolysate kelp application. Okay, quick hit of energy and resources that the tree needs. You don't have the continual application of a dry pelletized, salt content to the soil mass, all right? But yeah, I think that consistent nutrition is important for broadleaf evergreens, and I do like to deliver as much as I can to the boxwood. Next, we've got Christoph. Christoph collected several large boxwood four feet tall, and the top has turned orange. I assume that it's sunburned. The tree's overall healthy with green inner growth. Will the leaves turn back to green? The leaves probably will not turn back to green. Sunburn is sunburn. The way that a tree rectifies sunburn is by growing through it and producing new growth. Okay, now one of the catches to sunburn, right, is when a tree's leaf mass is sunburning, it means it either doesn't have the water supply because the roots have been impacted, or it's leaves that were in the interior portion of the potential hedge that you collected the boxwoods from, you pulled them out, they were exposed to full sun, and they were not acclimated. They didn't have the cuticle to be exposed to full sun that quickly or at all. And so they sunburn. Now you wanna take it out of sunlight because you don't want that foyer mass to continue to sunburn, right? And then you take it out and you keep it in the shade, and consequently the next flush of growth that occurs is more prone to sunburn because you've been growing it in the shade because the first flush sunburned. So the transition is when you collect a boxwood and you have, if you do have it with foyer mass on it, and that foyer mass is interior foyer mass, you definitely wanna apply more of a morning sun, afternoon shade kind of a vibe, right? Because the interior growth will sunburn. It's not acclimated. It's not ready for that kind of a capacity to cool itself and take on that high light intensity, right? But once a boxwood starts to grow, when it starts to produce new foyer mass, make sure in the spring season production of foyer mass you have that in the sun because the more sun that that foyer mass gets early on with the cooler temperature, shorter daylight length, with that new growth, the stronger it is, the more sugar starches it produces, the shorter internodes, the smaller the leaf size that it will be, but also the more acclimated it is and the less likely to sunburn that growth will be. We leave it in the shade. Yes, boxwood will grow in the shade as a hedge, but it doesn't necessarily mean that it gives you the kind of vigor, the quality of growth, the type of strength that you need to build good branching, and it will always be susceptible to sunburn. All right. Next we got Danny. Danny wants to know what is the fertilization schedule for this type of material and development and what type of soil was the, oh, you said Akadama. Okay. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. I went solid Akadama, and my fertilizer schedule, if you will, I mean, I don't know about a schedule, but my fertilizer theory is moderate, consistent application of fertilizer consistently over the course of the season. So I'm fertilizing boxwood every five or six weeks with a moderate at best application. If the tree looks like it needs more or I want to boost its capacity to produce, I may go to a more aggressive feed or, again, add a liquid supplement that allows it to have sort of the pelletized dry form of nutrition plus that additive that gives it just a little bit more vigor and a little bit more capacity to grow. Right? All of us are trying, and I think it's necessary to discuss. All of us are trying to boost the rate that boxwood grows at. They grow. They produce a lot of foliar mass. They demand a lot of our time and attention in terms of foliar maintenance and work, and we'll come back to that later in the year with this piece. Right? That's a time consumptive aspect of the species, but they don't necessarily girth up. They don't necessarily grow in terms of branch structure, woody tissue, and elongation. And that's really where fertilization can assist us in the process of creating really beautiful boxwood over the course of time. Okay? Is that heavier application of fertilizer can increase the rapidity of woody structure formation. But we've got to be maximizing that time, right, when we have that new soft fleshy growth hardening off, big sugar starch energy return. That's when we would be hitting it heavy with fertilizer to try and increase that woody tissue production. All right. Next we've got Bentley. Bentley's curious if you know Ebihara's full name. No. None of us have been able to find it online so far. We've all been digging. Well, so I don't know if Ebihara is cultivating bonsai now or not, you know. Ebihara was like defying bonsai, let's just say this, defying physiological knowledge, right? Like Ebihara could get an apex and a base of a maple to live. He could cut out the midsection of the trunk and he could re-graft the apex to the base void of that midsection of trunk. Like he could truly Frankenstein trees back together and do pretty much whatever he wanted, which is where like, oh, look at this. There's an image, right, there's an image or there's a discussion of this notching technique that I know is on Bonsai Tonight and Jonas' blog, which, you know, Jonas is great and his blog is awesome and I'm sure he took that picture himself and saw that and it was phenomenal. There's no discussion of how that happened. There's no technique. There's no nuance. There's no, there's nothing about that. There's no illustration of the process by which that is executable, the stage of that tree's evolution that that's executable. That's where I say caution. I'm not saying it doesn't work. I'm just saying, yo, just because you see a picture doesn't mean that that's the way that that tree should be treated or that that's the way it's going to respond. Careful. Be very, very tempered in your accepting of Bonsai knowledge. All right. Up next is Eric. If the broken branch is going to die, is there a timeframe that you can expect it to happen within? I would say, so this is really where there's this, there's a series of give and take in the death of a branch. Okay? And when I say give and take, there's a series of give and take in terms of, there's a tension that's placed on the vascular system, the xylem cell, right? And that tension happens, right? We have transpiration, water being lost through the foyer mass. And that's pulling the water chain up through that trunk. Okay? I had 100% of that chain intact. Now I have 50%. So that tension on the chain that's left intact is going to be considerably greater. Right? So do I perform the correct things in the aftercare of this tree or am I going to perform the correct steps in the aftercare of this tree to periodically relieve the tension on that chain? Right? For a juniper, for a spruce, for some of our more, stomata open hybrids. Highly transpirational trees. Misting is how we stop the loss of water, allow the tension on the chain to be relieved by the roots conducting that resource, the cells in the foyer mass rehydrating. All of a sudden the water on the surface of the leaf evaporates, the stomata is open again, and the leaf starts losing through gaseous exchange water to transpiration. Right? Tension on the chain accumulates. We mist. Tension is relieved. Tree survives, expands its xylem and its vascular, mass and pretty soon we don't have to mist anymore. We wean the tree off of misting. Right? This boxwood is not going to respond to misting. It's already a thick cuticle, very thick leaf tree. Right? So misting doesn't do anything for boxwood. It doesn't do anything for a pine either. Big thick cuticle, high drought tolerance. Misting doesn't mean anything to those trees. Okay? So morning sun, afternoon shade. Keeping it out of intense wind because I have less of a water supply and I don't want this to lose that much water. Maybe a greenhouse. Our greenhouse is pretty hot right now. I think a shaded environment, morning sun, afternoon shade, low wind with a windbreak, best chance I can give this tree of surviving, balance water and oxygen, call it good in terms of that break. Right? Aftercare, relieving of that tension on that chain. If I can do it, conditions are right, it will survive. Looks like we are all caught up on questions. All caught up on questions. Very good. Okay. So let me walk you through where I'm at because I know there is like a lot of intense discussion in the very beginning. Okay. I'm just slowly starting to work these areas that I've left behind. Right? And I've bent these pieces and I'm starting to set the secondary tertiary. Instead of having all of this up at the very top and just accepting that that's the shape, I'm starting to move that and compress some areas. Because I think it goes a long ways when we're dealing with a canopy of this nature to have an informal billow. Right? Where we have a billow here and a billow here and a billow here. This is how we create scale and design. So if I just leave it as it existed and I don't create all of those sub-billows, then all of a sudden the scale of my tree as one homogenous canopy makes the trunk look super small and makes the tree look really, really ridiculous or very, very small in terms of what it's representing. The more informality in the design and shape of this canopy I can provide, the bigger the tree starts to get in terms of its visual representation. And that's really where Boxwood Design has the capacity, I think, to be able to execute a really high quality image over the course of time, play on the sense of scale. Okay? So as I'm wiring, I'm consistently thinking, how do I put these in positions where I'm going to get contour? How do I cut them back so that I create variations in length? How do I go ahead and continue to manipulate height and manipulate position to create photosynthetic efficiency that will give rise to the kind of design that gives me that informal billow, that gives that scale and proportion that I'm seeking in this miniaturized variety? Okay? So working through this. Now, tonight we'll get through the structure of the Boxwood. Then I will come back and I will secondary tertiary wire, prune, and clean this up. I'm going to do one of those branches for you before we finish so that you see how far I'm going to take the Kingsville in terms of the design application at this time of year. And I think one of the big things, one of the big draws to most Boxwood in terms of the bonsai application is the notion that they kind of can take care of themselves. They kind of gain a density and a form, much like a Procumbens juniper. A lot of time Boxwood very much taken for granted in terms of, you know, if you just let it do its thing, it's going to mound up. If you just let it do its thing, it's going to turn into a ball. If you just let it do its thing, it's kind of going to look like a miniature form of a much bigger tree. And I didn't even have to do anything. Like, it's kind of great, right? But when we start to think about that, is that really quality? Like, is that really the goodness that we're looking for? And just like any deciduous tree, any coniferous tree, when we talk about broadleaf evergreens, the quality of the final composition is going to be based on did you put the work in? Did you put the time in? For this tree, I could very much have kind of pruned, cleaned out the interior, rested on my laurels a little bit, accepted that it's a Boxwood, kind of said, hey, Boxwood is, is a super effortless, super effortless tree. No big deal, no issue, and I'll just go ahead and rock out and let it do its thing and prune it, and it's going to be great. It's going to be great, you know? And it'd be okay, but there's more. There's more quality to be had, right? And that's where I think you do have to put in the time. Now, this is where you say Boxwood's brittle. I'm nervous to wire it. Boxwood is hard. I have to use heavy gauge wire. What are all these nuances of styling? Here you go, right? You've got to get down to doing. Just got to get down to doing. With Boxwood. Right. I got some more questions. I know we talked a lot about full defoliation, but Sarah was curious about partial defoliation of Boxwoods. What does that look like? Yeah, I think more than partial defoliation, the pruning of the tips to get down to pairs of twos with the acute angle, the cleaning out of the interior week, the bottom growing pieces, the pieces that are growing at the junctions where we already have two branches. This is kind of the reduction of the photosynthetic surface area that in the Boxwood model, we perform to both focus the allocation of energy on the pieces that we want to be carrying that energy and moving that energy forward as well as kind of reducing the leaf mass and the photosynthetic capacity that will incite growth in the areas that we want the tree to actually be focusing its efforts. So more than and kind of in a different vein than the broadleaf deciduous model where we have a significant degree of hollowness, high water mobility, we're not necessarily looking for Boxwood to be defoliated to incite this next flush of growth. The beautiful thing about broadleaf evergreen trees is they function high in the heat for the most part. You know, it's very, very challenging to find a broadleaf evergreen variety that isn't going to isn't going to behave well in the heat. They tend to tend to thrive in the heat. They tend to be able to handle some drought. They tend to be able to take some sun. But beyond that, they tend to grow fairly consistently when temperatures get warmer and metabolic activity is ramped up because of that temperature increase. Right. And so from that perspective, we don't have to incite that that that next flush. They will continue to grow consistently if conditions are right. All right. Let's see. Are there any pinching strategies that can be used to increase your verification on boxwood? Yeah, good question. Right. Because pinching this this whole notion of pinching and all of the product of pinching. Is it is an interesting subject matter across the board. Could you pinch boxwood? Interesting. Like, why do you pinch pinching to transition energy from strong to medium, medium to weak? How do we sidestep that in boxwood, the necessity to do that by pruning, by making sure that our branches are cut back to the desirable inner nodes into the desirable, you know, sort of managed, managed pieces in terms of the threes down to twos, acute angles, etc. Weak interiors taken out. Focuses the energy into the stronger pieces that we really want the tree to allocate its resources towards. I don't believe that there is a pinching mechanism that benefits boxwood. Right. I think you could do it. I don't think that it's going to really enhance much of the development. They grow, they harden off. We post flush, harden, prune. That alone is enough to stimulate another flush of growth, stimulate ramification almost in the same lane or the same vein as Elm. When we talk about Elm. Very rarely do we defoliate Elm. Obviously, you can defoliate Elm. But if Elm has a small enough leaf, we just take those elongated pieces back to two and we get ramification almost inevitably, inevitably. Right. Boxwood behaves in a very, very similar fashion of being pretty predictable and pretty capable of generating a lot of planned pieces of vegetation, vegetation, vegetation just by the pruning process itself. All right. Moon wants to know if you could talk about pot choices. What are some pot choices for boxwoods in terms of color and shape? I love it. I love it. Yeah, that's a wonderful choice or question. OK. And here's here's basically where we're at. Right. When we talk about broadleaf evergreen, you have this you have this middle ground, not to say broadleaf evergreen don't show seasonality that obviously there are varieties that flower, there are varieties that fruit, et cetera. But when you talk about boxwood, right, boxwood, I mean, it has flowers. It has kind of some unceremonious flowers. I. I mean, I, I, I guess you could consider them attractive, but they're really kind of a no glory sort of show. Right. And so to think about generating interest in boxwood, to think about in boxwood creating compositional merit. Right. This is where I do find I do find the notion of the glaze container to have a lot of significance. Now, the glaze container, you know, has sort of been summarized. As a as a choice that we utilize with deciduous trees. Right. But I think the broadleaf evergreen category and the the the glaze container gives us the capacity to create some very, very interesting combinations of color and discussions of design. And that's where I tend to lean very heavily on glazes in a species like boxwood. For example, this Heinzel writer, I think, is a is a pretty impeccable container choice for a tree. That otherwise has a lot of cream, has a lot of green. And we've taken a really light baby blue. Right. I love I love the the contrast. This isn't a super powerful boxwood. It's a relatively elegant boxwood. The lighter tone of the container taps into the nature of the trunk, the curvaceous movement as opposed to angular movement. That's characteristic of bonsai. Tapping into those nuances in terms of container selection. Now, you may have a big, beefy bonsai. You may go for a darker color in your glaze. You may go for a lighter. for uh you know a complementary to make it a little bit more powerful and exciting as opposed to passive those are all the options that kind of pertain to standard application of container selection and the knowledge that goes into that and i don't think boxwood is any exception i like the oval i think the biggest and the worst thing that you could do with boxwoods is put a symmetrical or an upright boxwood into a round container that's like an absolute absolute catastrophe in terms of quality design to put a very apically centered very symmetrically formed boxwood into a round container we've now officially hit the doldrums of the most boring pot tree combination that's ever existed right and i would say let's avoid that other than that i think the world is your oyster i think you have a lot of creative opportunity but i would encourage you to play with color because it is something that adds a lot of pizzazz to the design dynamic all right up next is richard which transpiration puts more stress on your bonsai wind or heat well i think it depends on this it's a good question richard it's a tricky one wind or heat which puts more transpirational load i mean i guess i it depends on the the intensity of the wind and it depends on the severity of the heat um ultimately but i would tend to say that wind is the biggest enemy right i think trees when we think about heat and unless we're talking about like 125 degree like phoenix arizona heat or some sort of desert-like environment with low relative humidity trees generally can respond to heat in very positive ways and in fact they produce a lot of heat shock proteins that help the tree and create a chain chain event of reactions that can be really really beneficial both for the human body right sauna scandinavian lifestyle as well as the heat right and we talk about um sometimes there have been articles written about you know uh heat events and greenhouses and closing the greenhouse and in ramping up the humidity and plants can respond in in very intense ways to the release of those heat shock proteins when we when we perform those radical actions i'm not saying do it but i'm saying it's possible physiologically right wind there is no tree that deals with wind well you go to windy areas of the country i was just in wyoming the wind never stops blowing every single tree in the native landscape looks like a tired weathered old pissed off person just like yeah wind you know they're dry they're wrinkly wind it's so hard imagine how you feel after wind you're like i'm parched my skin feels like crap my hair feels like it's never had an ounce of moisture in it before like wind it's it's so hard and when you put a tree into a shallow container it gets even worse i'm gonna say wind all right uh up next is aiden when would you treat roots more like a deciduous or a conifer in terms of bare rooting the nice nice okay um i have no idea i have no idea if i could actually confidently bare root a boxwood uh or a broadleaf evergreen um and and get away with it i don't know if like there's a point where i would ever treat this boxwood like i treated the pomegranate when we did the pomegranate repotting stream and did the structural grading or anything and so i don't know because i just i don't know my understanding of bush but i will always try to work on it etc okay i have no clue i will always on an evergreen tree err on the side of caution and say listen don't bear root if you're unsure and don't bear a root if the tree has any sort of low water mobility capacity because that means that it leans on microbial that means that means that it's going to lean on the roots left inside of that undisturbed portion of soil to trees is something that i would be very cautious of as an approach bare rooting i don't think that i favor it now that's not to say and i want to be careful not to say it's not possible not to say there aren't times where you wouldn't do it not to say that there aren't advantages to doing it potentially i generally as a rule of thumb lean on being more cautious with evergreen trees because they have a lower water mobility that's that evergreen equals lower water mobility and that means don't bear root all right we're all caught up all caught up okay so this is kind of happening quickly now that we've gotten some of the structure dialed in and uh and and you can see the the right side of this tree i'm starting to work it back i'm starting to lay these out i'm starting to reorganize those go ahead and go to the three-quarter for me josh and i'm going to give that to lonnie okay and so i'm establishing this small little billow now it's a little tough with the depth of field but you can kind of see here that that first foreground piece i've got a lot of craziness back here in the back that first foreground piece being formed into that billow this is going to be it's one little piece right here this is going to be another this is going to be another boom boom boom okay right in there just three small little billows of differing sizes with differing spaces this begins to create the kind of scale that gives rise to a greater image in miniature and that's what i'm after but it is time consumptive it is very time consumptive and i want to walk you through just the handling of one of these areas and kind of detail out how i would handle this so that you see and have that uh that kind of information to assist you should you choose to go handle your boxwood at this time of year and do an initial styling okay so let's go ahead and take a look at this i'm going to have jesus come on in tight here and i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to do some of that standard cleaning now we've got some dead branches on the interior always going to be a common aspect when we're cultivating bone size shaded out pieces right we've got some areas where we've got multiple buds coming from a singular site i'm going to go ahead and go ahead and go ahead and go ahead and i'm going to select the strongest and in this instance i'm going to try to go lateral with the orientation as much as possible i've got these weak pieces here at the base of those i've got areas of three that i'm going to take down to two area again weaker pieces again bottom growing pieces i'm just cleaning out the growth here okay when i get out to my junction i have another trident of growth here i've got a secondary piece there i'm going to take the piece growing into that secondary save acute crotches this kind of detail work with boxwood super duper time intensive very therapeutic and i'm going to go ahead and go ahead and go ahead and go ahead and go ahead and gelmiş i'm gonna go ahead and go ahead and go ahead and keep doing this sort of pruning around the juniper you typically won't do it over the summer just like a lot of wood but you could be using such a pruning type of action right down the middle of a yam会 it's hard to get all that right there with the grafting with our yapate tool it'll be really even okay i'm gonna zoom on another pad here and go ahead and take this away I don't wanna cut off vertically growing pieces. The billowy nature is supported by upward growing pieces. But what I do is I try to temper the strength of those upward growing pieces so that I redirect the energy back down to laterally growing pieces and I hold these at bay. These will obviously, like any tree, and you look at the upper canopy of this, take off and grow vertically. So as a result, knowing that that's a potential, we always wanna be buffering that capacity to maintain strength distribution, energy distribution, and be guiding the growth into the areas that give us the best possible bang for our buck, okay? So I'm looking at each one of these junctions. I'm looking for threes, twos, weak interiors, bottom growing pieces, trying to just reconcile and make sure that I've got all of my structural pieces sound and intact so that I can move forward, all right? So this is the first part. Before I ever lay this out, I've gotta go through this process and just make sure that I've corrected everything that needs to be corrected, that I've reconciled everything that needs a decision made about it, all right? Now once I do this, that tends to set the tone because now I've done all of the pruning to get rid of the pieces that I may be tempted to keep if I didn't do that pruning first. This is objective pruning. You call this objective pruning because it sets you up to save the best pieces, to allow your tree to have the highest chance of success aesthetically based on the fact that you didn't fall in love with anything. I didn't even know. I didn't even know how this was going to be shaped. I just made sure to take care of all of the flaws and all of the unsightly tips, raise the level of craft that I'm pursuing the creation of this tree at, and now I can come back in with what's left and I can start to work out the design. Okay, and to say that is to say, listen, I don't have a lot after pruning that I need to work on here, so we just wanna have one strategic piece of wire. If possible, the less wire, the better, but we do have to get in and get dirty on the structure. Okay, one piece of wire. That I have the capacity to hopefully manipulate each branch in this system to create the best billowy shape, okay? So already, this is where my branches were at. Now watch closely as I'm wiring. Notice how I rotated those and I picked that piece up. Notice how it pulled my two pieces of ramification closer to that vertical piece. Okay, I'm gonna move over here. Now this one, I wanna actually rotate this piece counter to the roll of my wire, okay? So I'm gonna be moving that. I'm gonna set my wire up. I'm gonna leave it now. Nice and loose here. I'm gonna roll counter, and then I'm gonna come over the top of it, right? Because I can't change the roll of my wire to get buxus in this combination. To rotate the way I want, I have to proactively counter roll and then wire in the direction that the wire is naturally headed, okay? Now take a look at this piece because this piece has the opportunity to fill this hole right here. This is where we proactively, after we prune, have the capacity to really manipulate positioning and the styling process of buxus. You've got all of these pieces. You've got this billowy nature to it. Let's go ahead and let's use it in the areas that we need some of that density just to gain some of that character that gives rise to this natural sort of growth habit in this naturally billowy scale. Okay, I'll leave that piece dropped down. Notice that I filled that with that upper piece. One wire was able to control all of the branches on that portion of growth, and I'm gonna come back here and I'm gonna finish this off, okay? Now, we have to decide, okay, in terms of our tree's scale, and this isn't the defining branch. Typically, the defining branch is where we define this sort of proportion and size and scale, right? We'll come back to that. I just wanted to do a quick little sample so that you had it in your toolkit, okay? We have to decide what the scale of this is in terms of do we wanna widen this? Do I wanna flex this out and broaden that billow? Or do I wanna narrow it, pull it in, and try and make it much, much smaller in terms of the space that it eats up in the design of the tree? Okay, I'm quite happy with that, though. I don't necessarily need a flat bottom. It's not a conifer. I can come back in and I can sort of change the direction or prune anything that doesn't quite fit in. But just that nice little tufted, kind of billowy section, and if we put that kind of intention in to each piece on the tree, suddenly we start to really have a high level of craft, whereas there is, again, a tendency to sort of fudge on the craft of buxus and boxwood and really just sort of clip and grow in a moderately designed way. You know, to sort of satisfy that quick tree image. There's so much more to this if we handle it correctly. Okay? So that's the way that I'm gonna go about all of the, each of these tufts, each of these detailed branches. And as you can see, this is a complex, time-consumptive execution of design, right? But the fruits of your efforts are so incredibly rewarding that it's worth it. It's worth it every time. All right, you ready for our last questions? I'm ready, let's go. Joe says, will you address the roots at a future time or root grafting, perhaps? I will address the roots at a future time, but probably will not be root grafting. Because here's the deal, right? I don't need every single tree I have to have a perfect root base. I'm not discouraging anybody from trying to improve their trees or improve their root base, right? But I'm saying, listen, I selected the front of my tree, which I felt like the line was the best. I felt like the base was the best. I felt like the features were the best. That was what went into the selection of the front of this tree for me. So as we go into the next section, we're gonna talk a little bit more about that. But as a result, I'm not gonna worry about the backside of the root base because it's not the root base that I'm utilizing and it's not the root base that I'm gonna lean on for the quality of the tree. All right, and our question from JT. Almost all of my boxwoods flower and fruit, but I've never had a dwarf like Kingsville flower. Do you see flowers on your Kingsvilles? I have never seen flowers on my Kingsvilles. Whether or not they'll do it, I don't know. But there is a common aspect to mutations that generally exists where either the mutation stops flowering and fruiting or the flowering and fruiting characteristic is sterile. It actually doesn't bear seed or any sort of productive offspring as a result of the mutation that occurred. Now, is that nature's mechanism to prevent like all of these mutations from suddenly reproducing and sort of taking over the pure genetics that exist in those environments? I have no idea. I don't know if it's that intelligent of a mechanism in the system, but generally you don't see mutations readily capable of self-propagating and reproducing. Let's see if we're all caught up again. Okay, all right. So I wanna work this defining branch. What time is it, Eve? It is 8.03. Oh, 8.03, okay. Well, I'm gonna work this defining branch just to finish off the asymmetrical flow and really kind of set the tone for that definition of movement. Okay. Well, I'm gonna work this defining branch just to finish off the asymmetrical flow and really kind of set the tone for that definition of movement. to the to the in the leftward direction and then after we have this defining branch we should really start to see the asymmetry of the design come together to give us a little bit more of a clue and an insinuation of where this piece is going to go obviously this work is going to take quite a bit of time after this to perform this is something that Rodney and I talked about when he was coming just talking about the time consumptive nature of boxwood how do you show the techniques how do you discuss the information that's valuable to people and then how do you give yourself the time to actually go through the highly manicured process to get the best out of what they have to offer right so I'll be doing this behind the scenes we'll definitely circle back to this tree and watching its evolution over the course of this year should be pretty interesting but let's go ahead and see if we can generate some flow and some sense of asymmetrical push towards the left in this in this piece over here now one of the things we need to recognize right because a lot of these lower branches have been shaded out or been underneath the greater expanse of canopy above them is we're going to have to do a lot of work to get the best out of this piece and we're going to have to do a lot of work to get the best out of this piece and we're going to have to deal with some degree of weakness in these pieces that haven't had all of that availability to the Sun so when we get into these right we're going to be probably making exceptions in terms of the pruning process to have the similar leaf mass on the weaker sections that the stronger sections above them are going to have that means accepting that these pieces down below are not necessarily going to have the same quality of structure they're not going to have the same ideal layout as the stronger pieces or the first sample piece that we wired out these are going to have some failures to be able to directionally prune as much as we would like and they're going to have some scrappier looking branches in the beginning because we really do want to save as much of that leaf mass as possible doesn't mean that we can't shorten reduce doesn't mean that we can't make decisions doesn't mean that we can't prune it just means that the pieces that were pruning were very much considering maybe more trying to save and utilize as much as we can to balance out the leaf mass that's moving resources to those regions and this is how we get those lower occurring regions in the tree to catch up in terms of their distribution of strength and their hierarchy or level of priority in the trees physiological system as a whole right because if we don't have the same leaf mass we've got to let it grow the same leaf mass well guess what the stronger areas are producing a leaf mass at a much more rapid rate which means that they're going to stay stronger and bridging that gap super duper tough best way we can do that and help the tree get ahead is right now in this process being very aggressive in the stronger areas of the tree cutting back all of those superficial flaws and things that we don't like and in the weaker areas going ahead and trying to use a little bit more wire give the give those areas a little bit more leaf mass and benefit of the doubt and accept that they're not going to be as high of an aesthetic quality at the end of the work but that we're working on those with the reason to develop the tree for the future i'm so excited to take my boxwood cutting home are you going to take one of these home may i yeah you can take all of them home take them well i don't know that's giving me too much room to fail that's really scary how many boxwoods you can propagate that's really scary maybe maybe just one or maybe just two i don't know oh my gosh are they are will they likely survive the high survival rate or i don't know i have no idea i have no idea what um i have no idea what cuttings of that size now smaller cuttings are the ones that are going to survive the most if you took if you took those pieces and you brought and you cut them into smaller cuttings a lot of tiny cuttings the the take rate on boxwood cuttings is very very high very very high but if you start to talk about big cuttings really really thick wood cuttings i think you'd probably have to try pretty hard to get those to take i could be wrong um but most of the time the thicker the cutting the more difficult the success all right i'll take one big one and a couple of small okay some sort of stuff i like i like your adventurous spirit sure i like your adventurous spirit i'll have to watch some videos on mirai live to figure out how to how to propagate oh you know we're gonna be we're gonna be dialing in propagation here with the propagation master pretty soon and that propagation master is not me uh but i'm pretty excited we are gonna have some more propagation related content that should serve the community well from somebody who knows it better than anybody i've met before um that'll be coming up here pretty soon yeah yes indeed goodness goodness goodness gracious and a clock let me work this piece and then i got two pieces of wire here and we'll be off and running in terms of our defining branch when we used to work the taiwanese boxwood in japan for the kokfu oh it was just meticulous meticulous tiny work tiny work meticulous meticulous they had to be perfect you know because if you're dealing with a bunch of little tiny tiny work tiny tiny work little tiny tiny work with a species it's like a percumbent juniper very rarely you see a percumbent juniper in the kokufu exhibition because it has to with a tree that naturally lends itself towards a bonsai form you know if you're going to have a tree that naturally lends itself in that direction or boxwood which naturally mounds then you have to focus on some degree of quality in the craft and something unique in terms of the piece of material or else it's really hard to justify it as a piece that you would ever use in the kokufu exhibition so the the meticulousness to which we would work those was just so incredibly intense but rewarding because the final product was was absolutely stunning absolutely stunning in terms of seeing all that ramification seeing that really small reduced leaf mass the fantastic bark etc boxwood does have that potential and putting that in it reminds me a lot of the dwarf hinoki cypress you know you uh there's a a lot of video content on the internet of the of sort of that of that stone form the hinoki cypress you know that has the stone like this and the the trees are growing on the sides of the stone uh that tree took i pruned that tree five six times in my apprenticeship i mean each time i pruned it it would take uh two to three days of just straight pruning from like you know uh eight in the morning until like seven at night you know your eyes would go crossed pruning something so fine uh and having to prune it so diligently but um but but the product of it you know the the outcome of it was so rewarding because it was just incredible the illustration of scale that you got out of that composition i bring that up because again we're kind of tapping into scale as this thematic of boxwood especially the compact varieties opening the door to really be able to execute scale on a much much higher level uh tribute steve says our softwood box cuttings if softwood box cuttings take easily but hardwood box cuttings don't i i i would have to look up and and just being completely transparent and honest with you i don't know if boxwood takes better with softwood or hardwood or semi-hardwood cuttings that would be something we'd have to research i i'm relatively certain that it has the capacity to take at multiple points i think you can take uh semi-hardwood and i think you can take hardwood i don't believe boxwood are successful with softwood but i could be wrong i could be wrong and these are all of the things you know that in the pursuit of the higher level of knowledge with these species we have a lot of work to do at mirai right and i think a lot of us have those questions this is all information that although readily available and out there takes a lot of time you know some of the skill set when you talk about physiology and plant information is just knowing where to look knowing how to interpret the information knowing how to be discerning about the information that you consume and knowing how that translates or transitions into the bonsai realm of knowledge right bonsai is a horticultural anomaly bonsai defies all of the rules that are typically followed in the horticultural practice and the nursery industry so when we look at that to be able to understand right there may be books written on countless techniques about different trees and how they behave and how they should do x y and z and how disease only attacks at this time of year and insects look like this and their life cycle looks like this right and then all of a sudden you start experiencing something that is so counter to that and bonsai is an example of that and that's a different approach to it you know this is what we accept in our own practice and the bonsai approach this is normal in bonsai this is this is what we accept to be a part of the cultivation process as bonsai practitioners because we're doing something that's already a horticultural anomaly to begin with to think that the trees are going to behave the way they would standardly behave if you give them organic soil you give them an unlimited root mass and your goal is to get them make them big and healthy and strong that's not what we're trying We're trying to execute an aesthetic that shows scale and proportion and the creation of a much larger image in a miniaturized space Right and you find species that have small proportions like boxwood They're just brilliant to be able to execute that but then you have all of the physiological Nuances that limit and kind of contain your capacity to do so effortlessly. It takes a lot of investment You The last time that you styled a box, but I'm just curious You know, I had a I had a bunch of really really interesting box woods when I first Box would much like Japanese maple and and several other species Was a very significant draw to the deer and so when I first started Mariah I had a tremendous number of box woods and really good box woods at that. They were they were Character-filled they came out of some urban Yamadori Collections back in college when I went to school in San Luis Obispo on the Central Coast Mediterranean environment boxwood hedges Absolutely crush in that environment and these these particular pieces were really really unique but After the deer mowed those down and really really basically just destroyed so many years of work I was so discouraged that I have never gone back to it And suddenly here I am just like well, let's try that again, but we almost have a deer fence now So that's kind of the right now all of the deciduous trees come in every single night And then we put them back out every single morning It's it's it's pretty painful honestly as they as the leaf out when they're out of leaf the deer tend to leave them alone So the boxwood when they start growing And they have that soft fleshy growth that's like candy to a deer I got to be very very careful at that point in time with all of the Kingsville's because they will absolutely get Obliterated all the branches all the way down to structure will be pruned and you know this is where the question of defoliation Somebody asked you know Can you defoliate boxwood like a deer a deer will defoliate a boxwood and a boxwood will respond and then we'll defoliate a boxwood Mechanically ourselves and the boxwood won't respond anywhere near the way it would respond to a deer. It's kind of a crazy Kind of a really crazy Nuance of the natural environment these responses to animal You know grazing and browsing versus you know scissor etc In the control of as many of these branches as possible with a single piece of wire makes makes wiring boxwood just such a A more pleasant and effortless thing and that's a technique that you have to build over the course of time It's not it's not something that you Just quickly understand how to do that really that that ability to kind of see those shapes see those positions Understand the role of your wire etc Gives rise to a really rapid way of working a much friendlier way of working in terms of your tree to not have to wire the entirety of the tree and Something to focus on that took a long time to develop that skill set over the course of of Working on a multitude of trees at Mirai But it's something that we definitely focus on because if we can save a little bit of time That's that's a an exponential capacity to increase the quality of trees just by the way that we wire. Okay All right far out Like it I like it It's just a matter of time until we build your reward and then we will go for another one Until the reward happens Okay, so let me line up the front here because this is going to help us kind of understand You you You okay all right so we're looking right there I'm gonna line that up to you Lonnie and then if you come back okay so what you're seeing here is you're seeing those controlled billows seeing that kind of layered effect and what's happening inside of inside of these pieces you know and we can unify these we can divide these we can change the fields of these because we still have the ability to really kind of manipulate and control where we're at but just seeing and go ahead and come on in close Lonnie and just kind of focus on those pads just seeing kind of the nuances of those there we go yeah yeah right in here that's got all that behind it there we go oh man that's tough to see isn't it uh-huh yeah maybe a little bit over here let me show you there there we go okay just seeing some of that refined billowing nests right you see here you see over here right just some of that controlled some of that controlled tuftiness that's what I'm looking for in the initial setup of my boxwood all right so I'm gonna go through I'm gonna put in the time on this just so that we can carry this out to a form of completion imperative that I do this work prior to the push of growth because once the buds start to push now the stronger gonna get stronger the weaker gonna get weaker I've heavily prune these weaker areas open them up expose them laid them out if I don't take the strong back and I don't finish this work before it starts to grow catastrophic failure right we're gonna get weaker stronger gonna get stronger and we're gonna have such a lopsided distribution that our tree is not going to be in a good position to move forward aesthetically lots of work lots to think about lots of risk in handling boxwood but so much reward hopefully this gives you the bare bone fundamentals and we'll look forward to getting Rodney out here to really back us up with some nuances and some real specifics to the species anything else that's what I got for questions ah very good we're good we're good yeah awesome outstanding you got the information take it use it apply it enjoy boxwood bonsai the beginning have fun have a great rest of your night we'll see you tomorrow on the mini stream live Q A's on Thursday tune in be there be square love you guys have a good night 
