Hello, my name is Rodney Clemons, bonsai professional, enthusiast, and with a little bit of passion. One of my favorite trees is the Kingsville Boxwood. I'm kind of known for them because I enjoy them so much. I'm here at Mirai working on this fabulous one. It started with the live stream, we worked on it there, and I'm in the process of finishing it up. What I'd like to show today is a little bit of how to clean the trunk up. Boxwoods have the tendency to be in sort of a moist condition for a long time, and they form an algae coat, which builds up, and dirt and debris. Pollen get attracted to it, and that really shows up and sticks on. And really, you want to make it look as white as possible because that contrasts really nicely with both the container and the foliage. This particular cultivar has a lot of nice barking with lines in it, and the dirt really hides that. Right now, we're going to clean it up so that gets exposed. Okay, so we're pouring just a little alcohol in here at the moment. Just to get started. So I've got the brush good and wet, and I'm going to go with the flow of the line. So I'm just coming in here, getting it wet, and rubbing it. You can, if it was very dirty, I can use a little bit of soap and water, but I don't feel like it's that necessary. As I'm doing this, I can see it being cleaned. I'm leaving it in place. It could be washed off with a little bit of a jet of a hose. Or in this case, we're going to let it just dry up a little bit and rub the flakes off. But I'm going with the flow. I want to not mess up those lines, but I want to clean them out. But I'm just making sure I'm not going to overdo anything. And even though it evaporates, I still don't want to see it run in. What I'm trying to do here is also expose just some of the details, the nuances that this particular cultivar of the microphylla has. And as you can see here, it's got a little bit of almost barky feel to it with indentations and everything. That really gets concealed by being dirty. So the algae and dirt fills in those cracks. And you've got the algae and dirt on the outside. So it blends in, and you're not seeing that bark being shown. Where here, you can see the difference when it's cleaned up. You can see those lines and everything. So that's one of the reasons, rather than brushing across like you don't do with your teeth, you go up and down with the flow. And it really helps clean out those crevices. So you're showing some of the beauty of this tree. This one's very interesting that it has some of this, but not a lot of it. So this detail really sticks out, jumps at you. That's part of the character of this tree that we're trying to bring out and expose. Music What we've done is cleaned up this tree and made it look nice and clean. And this does not have to be the only species that you use this technique on. It's good for a lot of things. I want to warn that on a lot of plants with a more tender bark or a bark that you don't want to rub off, just applying the alcohol to it will really help. Music This is Rodney Clemons. I'm leaving with this one thought. The fact that this is all about nuances. It doesn't really make a lot of difference, but cleaning the trunk really does that little extra that we all want in bonsai. Thank you. Music Thank you. Music Music Music 
