What's going on, everybody? Super Tuesday. Aw, yeah, I've been waiting for this one. I've been keeping my grubby mitts off this Kingsville boxwood for this moment, tonight. And I'm excited about it. Welcome. Got Ira on the mic this evening. What's up? Jesus producing the live stream. Lonnie on the detail cams. Got any announcements? We've got a couple. Just a reminder, our Summer Solstice Reflections podcast is out, and we've got one coming out shortly about a Bonsai book review that we're looking forward to you guys having a chance to listen to. And then a reminder, in the web store, we've still got a few of those new Austin Heitzman stans. If you haven't seen those, give them a little look. Yeah, Austin Heitzman stans, the book review. It was like, you know, I have a really hard time containing my enthusiasm. It was supposed to be just, you know, a really light, short podcast. That's not really how Ryan does it. I went deep on my five favorite books based around Western Bonsai, right? And, you know, there's a story to every tree. There's a story to every book. There's a story to every relate. Anyways, I went super deep. I really like the podcast. I like talking about these pieces that commemorate things that happen in our community in time. And it's also been really interesting. Although we're so disconnected from Bonsai in Japan, there's so much overlap now between Japan with the number of Westerners that have studied for prolonged periods of time and the knowledge that's being exchanged and the level of Bonsai that's being pursued. It is really interesting. As I was looking at those books, it was like, is there less and less of a necessity for distinction or not? I don't know. You know, these are esoteric questions for the future. Anyways, have a listen to the podcast. I think it's a good one. All right. Tonight. The most complex, and I'm going to say this is the most complex from a design perspective. I don't know if it's actually the most complex in terms of Bonsai as a whole, but the most complex thing in terms of a design perspective is how do you teach branch selection, right? Like, how do you give a base of practitioners information about the functional aspects of branch selection that empower you all? Like, how do you give a base of practitioners information about the functional aspects of branch selection that empower you all? Because I've said this for the longest time. It wasn't Mr. Kimura's ability to bend radical things that made him the most revolutionary Bonsai artist on planet Earth for not just our generation, but previous generation and post-generations. It wasn't his ability to bend. That certainly helped. It wasn't his ability to repot and flip things upside down. That didn't hurt either. What made Mr. Kimura so great was his ability to object, objectively decision-make in the branch selection process when he's initially creating a tree, when he's building out structure to be able to anticipate and then not only anticipate, but if what he anticipates doesn't come to fruition, to be able to about-face. And because he's made the correct branch selections, he leaves himself a constant capacity to enhance design through the decisions of elimination or the ability to build on what he's left, right? And that, ultimately, dovetails into the discussion of stages of development where you say, listen, if you understand in your primary stage of development that you're trying to keep more foliar mass, that you have less ramification and less needle mass, and therefore you must save more branches to build a tree through that primary stage into the secondary stage, that changes the way that you think about branch elimination or branch selection in your primary styling. And if you understand secondary scaffolding, and that's, that's the stage of development where you recognize now some of these primaries are going to come out in the future, and I'm going to build secondaries into those spaces to occupy the space of the primary that I have left because I'm still developing my tree. But I've got to build these scaffolding because we always build and then remove. We don't remove and then try to build because that's the foliar mass that drives the battery that we just removed to build. If we leave it, we build this faster and then we can replace it. And it's a seamless transition. All of these things go into. The branch selection as a process. And so when you start to wrap your mind around the totality of this situation, you recognize, oh, OK, so if I don't pull the right branch out, it doesn't matter how much I bend something that doesn't have the same potential or how well I can flip something upside down in the repotting process to change our perspective. If I screw up what holds the paint, what holds the paint in the execution of bonsai, if I screw up, the branching that holds my ability to frame the positive, disguise the negative, create the asymmetry that represents age, build the apex that starts to coincide with that defining branch and all of the other trickle down design decisions. None of the other fancy techniques matter, right? And then you could always say, well, yeah, if you can't water and keep a tree healthy, then you don't even get to worry about branch selection. That's right. But we're going to divide the horticulture tonight. We're going to assume that we can and we're going to focus on the aesthetics of branch selection. OK, Kingsville Boxwood. We've seen some of these Kingsville Boxwoods that we've worked on in prior streams. Rodney Clemens worked on the big, beautiful, probably the largest Kingsville Boxwood that exists as a bonsai in North America. Did a tremendous job on that. We worked on the one that we formed into an oak and I broke the apex as I was bending it. That tree has come just so full circle over the past year. Looks stunning. You might see it in the very near future. But this was one of the pieces of material that was far more challenging because at its native planting angle, we had a perpendicular, horizontal, perpendicular series of right angles. So I recognize, gosh, I'm going to have to change its angle in order to get past that vertical, horizontal, vertical that starts to run against the lines of the ceramic and really detract your eyes. So we started looking at this angle play. And once we started looking at the angle play, we recognize, listen, this is an amazing opportunity to represent. Some form or perspective of coastal oak or live oak form. And as I was going to school in the central on the central coast of California, I was right across the coastal hills from the inland oaks, from the meshing of the live oak with the inland oak, from the hybridized oaks and this notion of these rocky sort of, you know, promontories and and protrusions out of the rolling coastal hills and the, you know, the golden, grasslands of California, you would see these almost fantastical, whimsical landscapes and cows and these isolated oaks. And that's what gave rise to this composition was this notion of this, you know, stone, which is a Jan Kulik piece existing in a Tiberio Graco pot. But more than anything, taking the tremendous opportunity of an eroded hillside with the exposed Nabari, which we played on with the hornbeam on the stone at one time, several years ago on the stream, that tree is still thriving and just one of my favorites in the garden. We played on that idea, but we also played on the idea of the merging of rock and the angle and all of those design components. Now, if I let you inside, give you a peek under the hood, you're going to start to recognize that this is just a catastrophic car crash of branches. And in at every single turn of this, we have so many structural decisions that we have to make in order to be able to maximize,kt to maximize the quality of this piece of material. And so it's from that perspective that seeing this as a dense ball starting to open up and make some branch selection processes, the original decisions start to create a cause and effect response. All of it needs to be objective. I've gotta separate myself from like to what is best in terms of the design of the tree. And it's from that perspective that I wanna approach this. We might put some structural wire on it tonight. We might just simply talk about the branch removal that sets us up for our structural wire. I would love to structurally wire this tree so we see the outcome of the structural branch selection. And so from that perspective, I wanna go ahead and get started. Now, the first thing I'm gonna do before I make any interior structural selections is just talk about the Kingsville boxwood and its ability to revert. And what you see here in this lower section is you see the really small, incredibly beautiful and highly cherished leaves of the Kingsville. And then you see this sport of these gigantic leaves that's shooting off of a branch. When you get these sports coming out of the Kingsville boxwood, and that's a fairly substantial branch that exists underneath there. When you see these sports, you wanna take this branch back to the base, take it all the way back to the base and cut that sport out because that sport is actually something that has reverted genetically from the mutation that is Kingsville based on the vigor that's present in the tree and the lack of management. You'll see this happen on a Dwarf Alberta Spruce sometimes where you're talking about Picea Glauca and all of a sudden the Picea Glauca reverts to, excuse me, Picea Glauca Columnar maybe? Picea Glauca Columnar or Picea Glauca something or other. And it reverts to the straight Picea Glauca and all of a sudden the Dwarf Alberta Spruce becomes a full-sized spruce. And you're like, well that's interesting. Happens when it's left unmaintained, unpruned, and gains an excessive amount of vigor. You gotta cut that sport out or the full thing will continue to revert. There's a similar behavior in Satsuki Azaleas where all of a sudden you get sort of this production of a flower that's not necessarily the character you want. Kinside or the Spider Flower would be quite essential but also the red flowers and the white flowers and the pink flowers giving rise eventually to simply white flowering branches as a recessive trait. If you don't prune out those heavy, abundant white flowering branches, they will come out. They will continue to overtake the mutations in the other parts of the tree. So we see this being something that we have to manage. So I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna cut these pieces out without mercy. And you see that that sport has extended all the way to the interior pieces. Bring me in tight, Jesus. Even the interior branches had those big, long leaves. But now check this out. As I get back into here, I have my Kingsville growth that's occurring from this location. You say, how can you tell? That's so small. That's just a bud. That could be a bud of a full-sized leaf. No, because the Kingsville leaf has a different curvature, has a different point to the tip, and has a different curl to it. This is definitely Kingsville. Here's my mutations. I just pruned back slightly behind the Kingsville. Could I have pruned up to the Kingsville and assumed that those would take over as Kingsville? Yeah, probably. But how far back does this mutation revert? I have no idea. So I always prune back a little bit beyond where I have that mutation still intact. And there were just three areas where we had some reversion. As I get up into the upper canopy here, this is a fairly seamless and easy one to prune out. And now all of a sudden, we're back to a position where we've got simply Kingsville across the entirety of the canopy. We have a scalable and proportional foliar model. The first place that I want to start any time that I'm looking at structural branching is always cleaning. I want to clean, clean, clean. And for this particular tree, I'm just going to take out some of the dead branches that are occupying and clogging some of the space that exists inside of the tree so that I can actually have the ability to show you exactly what I'm talking about when we start to dig into the actual canopy itself. So I'm going to take a moment. I'm going to open it up to questions. We don't typically do that this early. But I do need to get some of this structure out. And again, I did think, should I be cleaning this? Should I have this opened up? It kind of defeats the purpose, because when we talk about structural branch selection, structural branch selection is what allows you, if you become adept and you have a high level of structure, a level of acumen in structural branch selection, you save yourself a tremendous amount of effort in the cleaning process. Typically now when I clean, I start cleaning just because I haven't reconciled any decisions of design. But once I start to reconcile my decisions of design, the cleaning was how I got to know the tree. I don't clean the whole tree and then start making decisions. I start cleaning the tree so that I start to see some of these opportunities inside of the upper canopy. And once I start to see those opportunities, I recognize, oh, I can go ahead and start cutting off these pieces so that I don't waste my time cleaning them. But that is a trained and learned skill set that I've developed in terms of how I maximize the efficiency of my time. I don't spend time cleaning things that I don't need to. And with students, I'm very happy to tell students, clean, clean the whole tree, because there is no more important technique than the ability to clean, to accurately prune, to refine your ability to accurately prune so that you don't leave stubs, so that you don't create structural weaknesses or limitations by pruning too tight, so that you are able to prune rapidly, efficiently, and make your actions in bonsai incredibly effective towards getting to that final product, which is the initially styled tree. So I'm going to open it up. I'm going to continue to just kind of dissect some things in here, see what we got. And then once we're ready and you can see a little bit more, I'm going to go ahead and start the process of branch selection. And we're going to walk through how we design this tree, conceptualize the design, based on the decisions that we make. Gary O's asking if this is a good time to be pruning boxwood. So there are multiple times to be pruning boxwood. And in general, I would say that when we get into the July and early August period of time, and you can even extend into the middle or latter portion of August, depending on where you're at in terms of climates. If you're going to be radically hot, it's probably not the best time. If you don't have the ability to protect your trees, opening up an interior canopy to the sun of summer, probably not particularly productive. But I have found that keeping my boxwoods under the shade cloth in the heat allows me to maintain a much better color of green. They can tolerate full sun. It does tend to wash them out from time to time, depending on how big and deep the container is. The bigger the container, the less likely they are to wash out. The smaller the container, the more likely. We tend to push that boundary at Mirai. So naturally, every boxwood that we have, if we have it in full blazing sun, does tend to wash out and become a little bit more chartreuse and yellow in its color. But again, broadleaf evergreen trees in general do tend to respond. They start growing a little later in the spring once the heat has ramped up. They do tend to respond to a little bit later work. They harden off later than our broadleaf deciduous. And as a result, this joliet, which is going to be in July and now we're into the almost into the early portion of August, is a good time if you can offer the protection and you understand that you are exposing the interior of the tree at a point in the year where there is a little bit more susceptibility to burn and damage that we want to be careful of. The cutoff, I would say, is the second week of August. Right? We don't necessarily want to heavily reduce or radically prune in terms of cutting all the leaf off of a tree like Rodney did on the boxwood that he worked at that ideal time to perform that kind of foliar reduction in the fall. When we're at this time of year, we're talking about major structural branch reduction. We can go ahead and wire and redistribute. I can do some modification and some clean out just to clean up the ramification. But I'm not heavily cutting back to the interior. These exterior pieces will stay intact when I wire it out. I'll clean up the spaces between, et cetera. But I'm not cutting everything back from that perspective. I'm not hedging. I'm not massively pruning. I'm removing branches, creating space, organizing foliar mass. And that's the difference in the pruning style at this time of year because of the susceptibility of heat and sun to that interior, very delicate branching mass that's not quite ready to tolerate that kind of intense exposure. Treebird Steve's got a question and asks if you expect the principles that you talk about tonight to apply to other species and varieties of boxwood. Absolutely. Absolutely. Absolutely. And this is not just something that applies to boxwood. What I'm talking about tonight is a design application. But when we start to look at that design application, the way that we go about branch selection in a conifer is different than the way we go about branch selection when we start to talk about a broadleaf evergreen, broadleaf deciduous, et cetera. So coming back to the broadleaf evergreen model, which, again, is a little bit of a manipulation even and differentiation from the broadleaf deciduous, the thought process of how we enter this operation, the way that we conduct ourselves in the decision-making, can be cross-pollinated to every bonsai action. But the way that I prune the Kingsville boxwood as a broadleaf evergreen is going to be different than the way I would prune a maple, the timing, and the methodology. And it's certainly going to be different than, obviously, the way I would prune a pine. Moon's got a question. Are you still working the branches, like taking the threes and then cleaning the branches? No. I'm cleaning the up and down pieces and then the crotch. OK, so right now, and that's a good question. So when I say cleaning, cleaning is such a generic term, right? So it's like, OK, Ryan, you're cleaning. Are you taking all the threes down to twos? Are you pruning off bottom growing branches? I don't really have the capacity to know which of the threes are valuable to take down to twos. That has to come after I've made the structural decisions. So the only thing that I'm really doing right now is just getting rid of all of this interior garbage and these branches that are kind of clogging. And in doing so, let me just blast you in here. Hopefully, Lonnie can see that. Yeah, that's perfect. In doing so, I start to actually see what's happening. Now, obviously, these spindly pieces, right around the junctions where I'm going to be pruning, I'm not going to use those. I'm not going to need those. Now, I would encourage you to not cut off all of the little shoots along these branches of a Kingsville, because I think they're necessary to continue building with. But I'm just trying to get these dead branches out. With that, I get exposure to that. And now I start to see, oh, man, there's a three here, there's a three here, there's a three here. Do I need to focus on the three out at the tip? I don't know if I need to focus on the three out at the tip, because I've got to reconcile the three back here and the three here before I focus on the three here. And that's where I'm saying, I can save you so much time by just understanding how we branch select on a structural level, right? The cleaning process allows me to fill in. I can familiarize myself. The cleaning process allows me to identify any structural issues that I need to just more clearly understand before I can decision make. The structural selection process ultimately saves me a tremendous, tremendous amount of time, because it just allows me to get rid of things before I spend the time pruning them and cleaning them in that really refined way. And tonight is all about the crude work. Even the initial structural wiring is all about not necessarily making all of those decisions, until you've gotten that structure into a position where you have the capacity to decision make, OK? So I'm going to go ahead, and I'm just going to blast you in here so that you can see what I'm working on. Because this one right here is a cut stub that I was able to eradicate when we were doing the repotting process. You see that little stub right there. And that is the first. Now I have one, two. I've got a little bit of trunk internode through here. And then I've got this big branch right back in there in the very back, which is tough to see. I'm going to go ahead, and I'm just going to take this out. Now, if I had more room and more flexibility, I would absolutely rip that off. I think Rodney had a tremendous point when he said, look, if you cut a Kingsville boxwood down with tools and you make a nice, refined cut, it forms a very circular, I believe he called it like a puckered asshole or something like that. He said something like that. It's like this tight, round hole on the tree that's always there. And I thought about that for a minute. And I thought, well, it does look offensive. It sounds offensive. It looks offensive. And I don't want that. But to rip, and it's really interesting when you get into the very base structure of boxwood, they're quite flexible. And when Rodney tried to rip that off, it took a lot of doing to rip that branch off of that boxwood to create a deadwood snag, which is very natural to the oak form. But when I'm dealing on the interior here, and I have a hard time gaining the leverage or the mechanical advantage to be able to tear something like that, and I know that the major flexibility in boxwood exists more at the base of the branch than the tip of the branch, I don't have any qualms with coming in here and just trying to whittle that piece out of the way. I know it's going to accumulate a tremendous amount of small little growths around it that I can utilize to kind of disguise as well as to heal the cut. But getting that out of the way starts the process of branch selection from the perspective of, now we have a nice clean, and go ahead and come back in and show me, now we have a nice clean distribution. You see my two branches here, you see that inner node, you see that major structure there. OK, now I'm going to rotate around to the front because there's a piece in here that I feel like probably holds a little bit of a key to the puzzle of this tree. And I think it's going to be interesting to talk about why. But when I'm looking at the front of this tree right here, I've got a trio right in the front that's kind of opening up the rest of the tree. I've got a trio of fine branches here. And this might be an odd place to start, but I got to tell you, in branch elimination, when we start making selections, you have to enter any way you possibly can. This is like you find your little sliver because it's complex enough and there's enough confusion that if you don't enter and put your foot in the door, it's going to close. You've got to find the way that you begin the process. And I see this in the front. And I have these two very moderate-sized branches here. These are really close and equivalent to each other. Now, most of us would say, OK, I'm going to eliminate the one that's closest to the next branch over here in structure. And by eliminating the next one over here that's closest to the next branch in structure, I create more space. But I've got this kind of small spindly piece here that is sitting directly underneath this branch above it. Right? And I look at that and I say, gosh, no matter what I do, I'm never going to be able to reconcile those two pieces. And so I'm going to start by taking that out. Now, when I start by taking that out, I'm just going to stream of conscious here with you for a little bit. I'm going to take out some of these dead pieces. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take out some of these spindly pieces. I'm going to go ahead and I'm just going to handle this area for a minute. I'm going to massage it. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to eliminate branches. I'm going to check for threes. I'm going to take out any dead stubs. want to see how far with this first piece that I prune how far can I massage the aesthetic of this area to be able to execute and I'm taking out threes out here on the finest tip I've got a bottom growing piece here I've got a two on top I make a little space for that piece right there I've got these pieces coming out that looks pretty good let me take away that knot okay that feels good that looks about like the kind of density and let me just show you what we got here that looks about like the density that I'm going to want yeah in order to be able to work through this little piece here now did I make the right decisions or not I don't know I don't know I'm not super concerned about it I'll be able to use wire to kind of change the scale and scope of things I'm going to take off these buds right around that crotch just so that I know down here on the branch where they're in that free zone I'm totally legitimized to go ahead and leave them but I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to start to kind of just clean up this area all right and as I'm cleaning up this area I see this next branch and this is where we start to see the cause and effect okay now this is very very dense I've got a multitude of branches in here I've got an inner node and I've got a group of three all the way back in here let me rotate towards you I've got a group of three right here I've got one on my thumb one on my index and I've got this main piece that I just pruned now this main piece is highly ramified when you're making branch selection processes or decisions you have to understand first and foremost you've got to think about the continuation of this line the transition of taper etc a lot of people think I'm going to cut this big thick in piece off back to this finer secondary tertiary piece and you say okay that piece is never going to merge the transition of taper with this piece I actually want to keep that length and I want to keep the quality of that structure okay and so if I'm thinking about that I'm also thinking about in branch selection which one has the more quality ramification this bifurcates here this bifurcates here the bifurcation is very quick it's very close that is advantageous towards creating a larger tree image in a miniaturized tree form so when I start to think about that all of a sudden I'm able to start to make value decision propositions go ahead and zoom out for me Jesus I make the decision on that group of three and I get to pull out something like this now pulling out something like that creates my first hole in the canopy I love that listen if you are pursuing boxwood design or any broadleaf design and you think that this is what you want oh my gosh that's a finished tree this is the last thing that I want this is the lowest possible quality of aesthetic in a broadleaf tree a big ball you want informal billows you want space you want to see the branch lines you want interior ramification billowy pads smaller scale this substantial execution of nature in miniature through the creation of proportion right and we have to create openings in the canopy I'm able to facilitate that now it's interesting because that opening in the canopy just brought me into a place in the tree that I haven't even been able to see to this point well guess what I'm going to do now I'm going to sit here and I'm going to take away all of the little spindly pieces that are in the areas that are dysfunctional I'm going to take off any pieces that can't be used growing off of the bottom I'm going to save any buds that are in areas that are potentially usable and I'm going to work along this branch to try and find my areas of three that prevent me from maximizing the quality of this material now take a look at what I have here I'm going to spread notice that I have this branch growing down and I've got this other beautiful branch that's growing up well when I close this that branch that's growing down is actually down here but it actually originates up here at the top you see this one that has mobility and now I've got this one down here that's a perfect opportunity to go ahead and clarify the lines of my branching in a way where we blur what the top of the branch is with what the bottom of the branches this is the same thing that happens with the precumbents juniper precumbents juniper a branch starts at the top of the apex and works its way all the way down winding and twisting through the canopy and it starts to form a branch that pops out as you're defining branch at the bottom of the tree right we don't want that and Kingsville boxwood and any boxwood for that matter inherently tend to do that naturally okay so just by got clarifying and quantifying where that branch occurs and where we want that branch to end up in terms of all of the pieces of the ramification that starts to help me make some of these decisions i've got a little piece hanging off here that's a three i go ahead and i take that out i've got this piece above it where i took off that bottom dropping branch that moved through the canopy in an inconsistent way i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to work my way up into this now follow me here okay i've got a group of four right here i'm going to take out the dead branch which gives me clarity i've got a stump right here i'm going to take that out now i've got a really beautiful branch off to the left that occupies its own space i've got this branch that exists below this billow i've got this branch that exists occupying that space i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to take off the branch that doesn't have sustainability okay i've clarified that area now i don't have any dysfunction there okay i get up into this area i've got two right here i've got a top growing piece i'm going to take off that was a stub okay now i'm to another grouping of three i've got one that comes to the foreground one that sticks up and i've got one that sticks off to the right now i already clarified the right i've got this branch that's encroaching on the one that sticks up this one in the foreground occupies its own space because i'm trying to clarify the tip i'm going to take that piece off now that's the piece everybody wanted to keep because that's the density but notice how that created the space that allows that billow and every branch in that billow to exist as its own individual sustainable piece of foyer mass that right there is the decision in the branch selection as we started in the very base of the branch we kind of worked our way out towards the tip of the branch and at each junction that we came to we made a decision on a grouping of three that eliminated the flaw from the base to the primary secondary and all the way out to the tertiary now i know that i don't need to come back and necessarily worry about that until i work on the refinement pruning i and i get to the absolutely tertiary level which i'm just going to go ahead and do a little bit of absolute tertiary level of refinement and then i'm going to go ahead and figure out a four into five out the whole thing so i'm going to kind of sit down and kind of work with this punto and really입니다 which is clarifying the threes throughout the totality of this got good there i'm really good there got a three right there that i'm going to go ahead and take out to evenly distribute my mask so that i've got the same spacing ok i'm looking here i've got a three that's sticking out at the top and it's a little bit long so i'm going to reduce that length i've got a three over here that's creating that big long piece that's sticking out that looks so awkward the tip and i'm going to go ahead and take out that central piece so that i distribute that space and now all of a sudden that piece is done really really nice now take a look at this look at the space that we built in you can see just as my hand kind of moves through that you see the space of that piece let me show you the space of this piece you don't see anything behind this you see that density right there now let me show you again notice the spacing that we have through that branch you see how you see the color of my hand and the clarity of that that's the kind of breathability and again right here notice how we don't have that breathability that is what we're looking for when we finalize the pruning process and we're saying listen this structural branch elimination you're talking with us about uh secondary tertiaries i'm talking with you about how you get your foot in the door of being able to decision make okay because with the density of this making decisions is a lot easier than making decisions with the density of the branch if i just say yeah you just come in and you prune this branch and this one you know what principle are you abiding by are you abiding by a traditional bonsai model are you making this look like a pine tree are you going to make this look like an oak if how do you make sense of all this right and this is how you make sense of it you have to enter and get your foot in the door of the pruning process before you can actually start to functionally understand style and design and you're saying well you understand style and design because you planted it on this with this image of an oak i i did i did i understand what i see in terms of the trunk line and root system of this tree right i understand what i saw in terms of the potential here i have no clue right i'm almost completely removed from what this is going to look like this is objective decision making based on branch pruning that allows us to select the best branches that have the best merit continuation of taper bifurcation tight inner nodes appropriate length the correct orientation to evenly distribute space and full your mass inside of a positive pad that is where i am setting the tone for the rest of the work through this little piece and you're going to watch this propel me into the upper canopy of the tree i'm going to finish doing this little area right here so that it's done and that's going to allow us to see just an entire world of opportunity inside of this thing so that we can make those structural pruning decisions that we kind of set out to achieve tonight colin's got a question is wondering any special considerations for variegated varieties of boxwood um that's a good question i don't have anything off of the top of my head or from my experience that suggests that we need to make any sort of different decisions in a variegated boxwood typically you would say a mutation of any sort which a variegation is a mutation would tend to have a little bit lesser vigor in terms of the mutation grows with less vigor compared to the parent material case in point kingsville boxwood is a dwarf and it does not grow with near the same rate near the same thickness near the same aggression uh as a pure strain boxwood okay um but as far as variegation with that color change that does that cause any weakening or any consideration of the amount that we can reduce or anything like that to the best of my knowledge it does not i think that buxus uh variegated varieties of buxus unless they are a dwarf variegation which now is combining two mutations into one single poor unfortunate destitute soul as you know a potential species in your garden that doesn't have a lot of viability based on that compounding factor of mutations unless you're talking about a dwarf variegated mutation i don't see where variegation would change your behavior decision making or considerations kim's got a question are you pruning most of the interior back budding uh i am pruning the back budding at the junctions where my branches occur because i know that the back budding that i have at those junctions is not something that i want to facilitate i've got strong woody branches there and i'm actually trying to clarify their visibility so that we can start to get that sense of scale and perspective in design so i'm i'm i'm actually not worried too much there are some occasions where they're clogging up the bottom of the branch line but bear in mind never did i say that bottom growing pieces are necessarily my selection process or any sort of factor that i take into account in a boxwood because one of the beautiful things about mimicking this like coastal oak form is that i'm really working towards creating the informality of the billows and i'm embracing the fact that branches growing down are just as important as branches growing up in this particular style of tree in this particular ecosystem and growth habit of a tree that we're trying to represent through the miniaturized form so i'm i'm willing to embrace downward growing branches if it's a very beautiful uh highly ramified continuation of the line that gives me a proportional transition of taper etc i'm going to keep that downward growing branch in place of an upward growing branch that's straight poorly ramified disproportionately large or small etc the the dogma of branch selection where you say okay we're going to go and we're going to eliminate all crotch growth uh we're going to go ahead and we're going to take off all downward growing branches and and then we're going to work with what's next that's an antiquated oversimplified uh version of how we go about the branch selection process does it apply more often than not i would say so uh is it what we want to be using as we expand our skill set in bonsai i would say we need to mature and grow into a much more uh evolved decision-making process if we're going to be selecting the branches that make the very best tree and that's exactly what we're talking about here okay all right so now that piece is done that piece is done we're starting to make some progress here okay and i'm not going to make you watch fine pruning for forever but i am going to i am going to carry you down the process as i would be pursuing it if i were doing this on my own now let me just show you this for a minute because the big question are you removing all interior buds bring me in tight there jesus i'm going to leave these are buds along this big long branch line i have to leave that that's a bud that creates scale now if there's clusters of buds at elbows where i've got ramification if there are buds at these knuckles just pan up slightly lonnie if there's buds at these knuckles where this branch joins this bigger branch and i'm going to go ahead i'm going to take those off but i'm going to leave little tiny buds right inside here where i can see the ability to create a branch i might select down to the strongest two buds and i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to go ahead and �i'm not going to cut back on any of these bud that are growing at any cluster of buds that's bud that's how i'm handling bud selection i'm going to take buds off of the inside of curves i'm going to leave buds on the outside of curves i'm going to again select the very best buds that can potentially become branching but i'm going to leave interior growth on my kingsville i do not want to strip out all of that growth because that is what becomes the future continuation and perpetuation of ramification it's also what becomes the ability to continue to cut back a kingsville to branches that are going to be damaged and so if i move my hills to a certain degree that we're building over the course of time on the interior that can give rise to our capacity to reduce the size and scale should this tree grow out of proportion right and that's important you always have to give yourself an out when you are doing the branch selection process okay so I've got two here I've got two here I've got two here this whole thing feels really really sustainable now if I just have twos and it still feels overly cluttered I'm gonna go ahead I'm gonna get rid of some of this again I've got this kind of I've got this piece that's hanging down here and it's really sort of notice how this creates this whole ball of foliage here that's not how an oak looks it doesn't have branches on the very bottom of a big tree that creates a ball I don't again want to just automatically prune off bottom branches but sometimes those bottom branches if they're shorter than the top branches it allows me to create a really nice not a flat pad because we're creating billowy pads but it allows me to create a nice transition of length and length and that sculpts the pads in a way that is accurate to the growth habit of the tree that we're trying to represent and so from that perspective I am willing to alter and adjust some of those pieces that are at bifurcations that I would otherwise want to keep just to be able to take the ball growth away that sort of round topiary looking habit and replace it with a style of growth that has a lot more representation to the native form of the tree that we're actually trying to communicate through the composition we've built Andrew's got a question have you ever had leaf miners on a box how would you treat it they are a total nightmare first and foremost any insect or disease on your tree is doing you a favor it's telling you that you have a bigger issue and leaf miner is just another insect that's feeding on a lopsided amount of salt in your system it's drawn to the tree the tree asks it to come the tree asks for its help to reconcile the issue of having two trees and it's not just a tree it's a whole bunch of insects that are growing too much salt in its system okay so when you see leaf miners our first thought is kill kill kill that I would I would I would challenge everybody to start to think about insects from a different perspective do we have to like them no you don't have to like them in fact I would encourage you not to like them but you do need to look at them as an indicator I thought about this when it came to the Robins that were destroying my moss and everybody said oh they only destroy the moss when they're building nests that's not true I'm going to be feeding on the root system so I started to recognize that trees that were being impacted by birds I needed to really pay attention to grubs feeding on the root system that was a major indicator I stopped being so worried about the birds I started treating the grubs guess what now birds don't destroy our moss that's a trickle-down effect of the logic of why these things happen okay so when we start to talk about leaf miners on boxwood we've got to get rid of leaf miners they deform the growth horrifically they're very challenging to get rid of because they exist inside of the leaf itself but you also want to be recognizing that a leaf miner is there because your tree has too much salt in the system and the tree has called the leaf miner to come and help reconcile some of that imbalance okay bring me in tight here okay I've got a situation here where I've got a grouping of three and I'm just going to spread this open because this is a really nice illustration here go ahead and come in tight I've got one I've got two I've got this big one that's bifurcated here is three okay and that central one is a not much of a shoot okay but if I go ahead and I take off that central one and I leave this big one notice how this is forming the greatest bulge in the foreground of this pad okay I want this to be a billowy pad that transitions out I don't want it to come out to the foreground and cut back in and this is where you can adjust the length of your Kingsville box would watch this cut boom okay now watch closely I take that out and now all of a sudden I've got that space and I take away that protrusion and what I see is that the the only thing I can see on that is that I actually had a much better interior branch that I couldn't see through all that clogged up disproportion and that starts to really build a beautiful a beautiful branching distribution inside of this that allows me to go ahead and access that design now do I want this piece in here I've got an awful lot of things that are existing I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take this out could I wire that up I could wire it up I've got enough branches and watch this bring me in tight Jesus you want to be thinking how do I go ahead and handle these branches in the process look at that boom I filled that space I didn't fill that space to the point of density I filled that space sustainably with that branch by taking off that bottom piece by making those length selections I gave myself the capacity to maximize the distribution of my very best most highly ramified woody branches and lignified pieces inside of the structure of the tree that is effective pruning when we start to talk about broadleaf evergreen trees I've got another one right here look at how long this is on the top here it's keeping that ball you see how high that is I start to look back and I say do I have other options boy oh howdy do I watch this I'm going to take this out being this is going to this is going to be tough for people to make these kind of pruning decisions but now look at how I've regained that contour in the branch okay I come back in here I have another group of three I take that tall piece out now I come back down in here and I start to eliminate my threes eliminate my threes and all of a sudden you start to see this branch have the same distribution of foliar mass as your other branches and you start to say oh wow okay so pruning is not a process of cutting back the exterior in it's a process of coming back to the interior and starting to work the interior so that it accommodates the exterior shape that you want they call this type of pruning drop crotch pruning in the larger sort of macro tree arboriculture endeavor of pruning large trees in the landscape etc. drop crotch pruning very important things to remember about pruning large trees garden trees etc. very important thing to learn if you're going to be pruning bonsai to the best of your capacity okay so now you can start to see the difference okay that branch let me just show you that branch has air see how you can see through it now you can see my hand through it here that's exactly what I want when you start to look in here you can't see anything through there that is a dense mass now look at this look at that oh beautiful and if you will look at an oak in the macro environment you can see that's exactly what you get right really really really nice transparency nice light and air circulation now what that's giving me is it's giving me the ability to show you the interior of the tree now okay I'm going to come back to the trunk and I'm going to take off a lot of these smaller spindly or pieces off of the trunk I don't need these smaller spindly or pieces trying to grow on the trunk they're not going to give me a branch in my lifetime in a bonsai container to be sure okay and I'm going to be selectively removing and again if they're on the inside of these pieces I'm going to take them off okay but if they're on the outside of these pieces I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to happily keep these I'm going to select the best one and I'm going to leave these in the strategic positions where they can contribute I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to continue working up now you might be saying well aren't you cleaning something that you might cut off I have an inner node here I have a structural branch emerging along that trunk line if I cut this off that would be the stupidest and maybe the biggest mistake of a cut I could make on this entire tree because when I rotate you around and I show you the front of the tree here look at that look at that that drop down to the back is the only thing that holds your eye in the design of disappearing look at the bullseye of the structure here I'm not going to cut off this big thick piece I'm not going to change the movement of that trunk that's the only branch that holds you from disappearing in the design and staring at that abyss of that vortex right in the center of the tree that is an inner node that's an important piece so I'm going to continue working here I'm going to continue to eliminate branches that are clogging up all of the visibility in the design I'm going to open it up to questions because we're just starting to actually get into the interior structure and the pieces that give us the capacity to really change the design of this tree Gary's got a question how much of a stub are you leaving when removing primary branches and when will you come back to clean it up so I'm not I'm not leaving any of the branches that are clogging up I'm not leaving any stubs as I'm cutting these back now if I were removing a big and we haven't started to remove primary branches but we are going to be removing primary branches if I were going to be removing a heavy heavy heavy for your load with a big major structural branch reduction I would leave a one or two inch stub just as a as a as a courteous consideration of the tree knowing that that helps it compartmentalize prevents it from dying out and takes some time to we're going to cut down no Cada to you I'm working with you the more arid lower water mobility of the broadleaf evergreen genre of broadleaf where we recognize they are very adapted to to having their water conductivity cut down very quickly lost and they're very capable of continuing to deliver water in a much slower and sustainable way so we don't experience die back in the same fashion and we don't have to leave near the large stub doesn't mean it won't die back but i and that's why i do leave a stub just as a cautionary courtesy on the biggest branches but i have far less of a necessity to transition slowly in the broadleaf evergreen model than i do in the broadleaf deciduous model that is a a major difference in the pruning process that we can go ahead and take into consideration write it in the book and understand to be true organ jeff's up next and says the color looks so much better than when i saw it last what was the change in fertilizer or nutrition that helped the boxwood and did they all have the same deficiencies uh so i would say in general across the board in most of our bonsai you're going to see the same deficiency the boxwoods are and and almost any tree in the bonsai cultivation which we're using akadama pumice and lava or just in this case straight akadama in in the in the broadleaf form calcium deficiency tends to be the culprit of almost all um sort of nutrient related imbalances now you might have a tree that's green and it's calcium deficient right you might have a tree that's growing and it's calcium deficient but the more calcium the more that you apply heavy amounts of potassium heavy amounts of nitrogen heavy amounts of phosphorus and you don't have a calcium that you're applying heavy amounts of magnesium and you don't have a calcium that you're applying eventually you will have an accumulating toxicity and deficiency system going because the plant is always trying to proportionally balance the resistance the nutrients that are going to be going to le inflam starts and actually by�ravum in 아�um where monsieur from ph 문 thileahum beetiro so who didn't think about temperature and the high levels of the balance its nutrition inside of itself. So it's upregulating the intake of calcium in the soil system to be able to balance this disproportionate addition of potassium and phosphorus and magnesium and nitrogen, right? It's upregulating its intake of calcium to balance that. Well, eventually, if you're not supplying enough calcium and you're continuing to apply potassium, magnesium, phosphorus, and nitrogen, your plant just starts to go more and more lopsided, become more and more calcium deficient, and you see growth slow down. You see new growth slow down. You see the green color leave as magnesium tops the calcium ratio and potassium shoots through the roof. You see potassium triggering insects. You see chloride spike and cause yellowing and desiccation at the tip, and all of a sudden, we're into a catastrophic meltdown. By upping the level of calcium, we rebalance that distribution of energy. By slowing down the delivery of potassium and treating that more as a very strategic addition, but not as a constant mass application, we really do have a much better impact, okay? All right, so now we're into this position where we start to be able to see the upper canopy of the tree, and as I get into the upper canopy of the tree, I have a division here, and I've got a bunch of dead branches. I've got a bunch of stuff growing off of the bottom, but I don't have the design of this tree reconciled in any way, shape, and form. In terms of how to handle this multitude of branches coming from singular locations in the upper canopy of the tree. Now, most of us are completely and totally frightened by the selection of branches. Go ahead and zoom me out, Jesus. Most of us are frightened by the selection of branches in the upper canopy of the tree because we say, listen, I don't want to cut anything off and break off the big, beautiful green ball. I don't want to disrupt it. It's such a big, beautiful green ball that if I break it, it's going to be hard to get it out of the tree. It's going to be hard to get it back to the big, beautiful green ball, and I continue to tell students all the time, hey, we're not trying to create a green ball. That's not what we're doing. Why are you worried about breaking it? You don't want the green ball. Dissect the green ball. Chop the green ball apart. Let's create some space in the green ball to make something that looks like a tree and not a topiary hedge, right? So as I get up into this, this is where we start to see the objective decision-making. Now, look at what we have here. In one single area, I've got a big, go ahead and bring me in tight, Jesus. Jesus, yeah, good. Okay, I've got this long inner node. I've got one, two, three right here. One, two, three, right at the tip, okay? Now, I'm going to assume that I'm going to use this tip because it comes out and extends and gives me length, but of these three, I've got a big, tall piece back here. I've got an intermediate piece that's highly ramified here, and I kind of have a weak, spindly piece in the front. I'm going to use this tip because it comes out and extends I'm going to take the weak, spindly piece off because this is a major portion of the canopy. Now, go ahead and zoom me out, Jesus. First cut, and like I said, break up the green ball. Watch what happens here. Bing, okay? Just a little bit of space, a little bit of space, okay? Now, I'm going to look into that space, and I'm going to start to dissect that space, and I'm going to say, oh my gosh, I've got a gigantic, and let me just go ahead and create some transparency here. I've got a gigantic structural conundrum in there. Look at that nest. I've got a big, straight branch right here. Let me show you that again. Big, straight branch right here. I've got a big branch coming off to the right here. I've got a branch going to the back. This big, straight branch sticking straight up, ramrod straight out of a tree that has no other straight lines. When I've got two side branches that have better bifurcation, that's an automatic for me. I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to come in here. I'm going to take that sucker off. Okay, now watch closely. Zoom me out, Jesus. Okay, look at that. Look at that. That just created a gigantic hole right there. I love it. Now, we're starting to talk about having the capacity to actually be able to build out some sort of interesting canopy as a result of that selection process. Okay, stay with me. I will come back to the questions. Don't worry. I haven't forgotten you, but now we're in. Now, we're actually in, and now we're doing our job, okay? I feel really good about the branches back here. I've got another big knot on this branch that I said, man, I've got this big lateral branch right here. I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to open this up, and I've got a trio right here at the tip, right here at the tip, right at that tip that I value. I've got a trio, okay? Bring me in tight there. Yeah, okay, so I've got one on the foreground, two right here. These are both intermediate, and then take a look at what I've got here. I've got this big jumbo branch right there. Well, I'm at the upper portion of my canopy, right? Do I want a big jumbo branch? Do I want the symmetrical green dome? I don't, so I'm actually going to take the two moderately sized branches, and I'm going to take that out. Now, watch closely. Boom. Uh-oh. Uh-oh. I broke the green ball. I broke the green ball. Now, we have some serious problems because guess what? There is no going back now. I ruined it. You realize what it would take to get this Kingsville boxwood back to that full big green dome? I mean, you're talking years of our lives to get this back to where it was. I understand why it's scary, okay? But the process of branch elimination at these structural locations, and I didn't start at the bottom necessarily. Where did I start? I started where I could get my foot in the door. I started by cleaning. I started with some conservative moves. I created a little bit of space. It led me to the back of the tree. I worked into the back of the tree to get access here. Once I got access here, I started continuing around the tree. All of a sudden, now we got a big hole in our canopy, and we're saying, gosh, this, did I, did I make a mistake? No, this is, this is where you want to be. This is making bonsai because we're making decisions that are forcing us to age the tree. Now, I'm going to take out a lot of the dead branches, which is pretty much every single interior branch because this is unsustainable without sunlight getting to the interior, okay? I'm going to go ahead and get rid of a lot of this stuff. I mean, you're talking about so much incredible garbage that's occurring from these. Now, do I want to sit in the back of the tree? I'm going to sit in the back of the tree. I'm going to sit in the back of the tree. I'm going to sit in the back of the tree. I'm going to sit in the back of the tree and clean each one of these? No, I don't want to clean these pieces. I'm just getting the pieces out of the way that allow me to see some more of the structure and be able to access some more of the design. Okay, I have a nice fork right there, kind of working down. That's kind of swelling. I've got this little, I've got this little kind of conundrum here, which is this little offshoot that's kind of a product of a joint that exists below this big knuckle, but is continuing to swell. I'm going to get rid of that. Let me just go to my beautiful bifurcated pieces here so that I see that clarity. I get that sunlight into the interior. Even if these are too long, guess what? I can wire these. I can change their shape. I can change their direction. I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to look in here. I'm going to get rid of any of these accumulations of threes. Most of these are dead anyways. I want to be careful that I'm not cutting off live to exchange them for dead. That's one of the things that we've got to be very careful of. Okay, that feels pretty good. I don't need to work on that anymore. Let me go ahead and come through here. Okay, I'm just going to get rid of the dead. Nothing special. Okay. Oh, my goodness. This is fun. This is fun. Okay, now we can start to see what's happening here. Lonnie, can you see in there? Yes. Yes. Take a look at that. Okay. So you see where I cut that branch off originally, right? I cut that big branch off. This was the big vertical piece. Now I've got that lateral. I've got this lateral. Now around this lateral, I've got a vertical here. You see this vertical? Yeah. And then I've got this piece that's a little bit finer and I've got an even finer piece in the back. Okay. All the way back here. You see my thumb right there? A little wiggle, wiggle. There's my thumb. I got this piece right here. Okay. Now I saved my two branches right here. My two branches here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take off that small spindly piece in the back because I've already got a really nice comprehensive amount of ramification in the back. Okay. And once I take that off and I start to look up through here, I start to recognize that this big chunky piece here, this is making one of the major, major sort of high points in my design. And it is incredibly robust. And that might be what I want to keep, but I've got to decide, do I want this big canopy or do I want to bring that into proportion? I personally feel like, gosh, as great as that is, I look at the structure of the branches around it. Maybe they have something to contribute. Maybe they don't. Looks like they actually might have something to contribute. Do I have as high of a quality of ramifiable branch? When you see in here, bring me in tight, Jesus. Okay. When you see in here, you see this long spindly piece there. You see this better bifurcated piece here. I certainly don't want to trade this for that. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take that piece off right there because that's causing that junction to swell. Now that that's gone, I've got another piece in the back that's giving me height in the back. I've got the ability to spread that big piece out. When I first started, I thought I would probably be taking that big piece out. I'm going to take that big piece out. Now the objective branch selection process, now I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to keep that big piece. I'm going to keep that big piece. Okay. Now in keeping that big piece, let's follow through on the process. Okay. Go ahead and come right in here. All right. I've got to take off my dead branches. That's branches that are not able to contribute no matter how much I like them. Okay. I've got all these interior deceased pieces. These interior deceased pieces occurring in groups of threes. And now because I've taken out, those different planes of branches, right? I took out branches that existed here in the foreground. I took out branches that existed here in the background. I've got to be thinking about leaving branches in this piece because this exists in this plane. I want to leave branches that fill here. I want to leave branches that fill there. So when I'm starting to think about my groups of threes, now my groups of threes and my consideration change to occupy the space through wire of those areas that we opened up. And our initial branch selection process. Okay. And this is where you start to adapt and you start to adjust and you start to recognize, okay, now I have a different motivation in branch selection. Once I've made branch selection, I've got to be making branch selection that complements my branch selection. Okay. So I'm going to be taking away threes on these pieces that aren't working into those planes. Right. So for example, I'm working in this backside here. I've got this piece that functions inside. Of this vertical plane, I've got two pieces moving to the back. I want to take off that piece so that I create space. And actually, that big one was the sport. Okay. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take off that sport. Now I'm directing growth to the back. I'm directing growth to the front and I'm creating a hole in the middle. That's what allows me to distribute branching through that branch selection process. Now, here's one thing that you should hopefully be taking note of as we're going through this process. Here's one thing that you should hopefully be taking note of as we're going through this process. Have I stepped back to look at the design of this tree? Have I stepped back to look at the design of this tree? I haven't. I haven't. And that's not to say that I'm not thinking about the design, but it is to say that these decisions, these objective decisions of branch selection, to make branch selection decisions that are accurate and are going to benefit the overall aesthetic and shape of the tree, these objective decisions come down to whether or not the branch can function. in the structure of the tree and nothing more, right? Because what's going to happen is I'm going to come back and I'm going to set the structure of this tree based on my branch selection process. And I'm going to take the very best branches in that space, not structurally flawed, appropriately handled, go ahead and take that, not structurally flawed, appropriately handled, so that we can make the very best canopy and the very best design with the branches that give us the very highest level, the very highest level of structure. of shape, of bifurcation, of orientation, of ramification. Well, guess what this saves you time doing? Saves you time wiring the tree. Because now you're not having to wire every single branch based on the fact that it's a crappy branch that you've got to do something to try and salvage. You're only wiring the branches that haven't been pruned or weren't capable of being pruned into the position where they needed to be. You're filling holes with the branches that you've placed through intentional pruning to be able to occupy the tree. Occupy the hole that you created by removing a branch that had no prayer of being a quality portion of the design. And you start to recognize, oh my gosh, this whole thing is like, it's like almost sort of already pre-built. And the answer is yes. This is what I tell you all the time. That the tree, it's predetermined. The shape of the tree is predetermined if you learn how to listen to the structure of the tree and make decisions that are objective to the tree. It's already built into the tree. Right? Now, would we all make the same decisions? No. We're going to wire a branch and we're going to give it different movement. We're going to put it in a different location. We're going to make a different size pad. We're going to form a different shape of pad. We're going to create the length in a different area. We're going to direct the apex in a different direction. But if we're all speaking good bonsai, if we're all speaking fluent bonsai, this selection of branching, this is almost, this is almost a uniform objective understanding that there is a difference. There is a right and a wrong. There is absolutely a right and a wrong to branch selection. You should end up with the best transition of taper, the seamless lines, the greatest proportion, the most ability to create scale in a sense of size and design when you start the branch selection process objectively and you follow it through. Okay? So let me just show you where we're at now because this is a little frightening. That's what happened to our ball. Look at it. Oh my gosh. You drive a drive a, looks like we carved out a room for a power line. You know what I'm saying? That's like a public utilities wet dream right there. Just, just like, oh man, we, we could, we could actually put a, put an entire, you know, community's power through that. Okay? I'm going to open it up to questions as I clean out some of this frass, let some of this digest and hopefully I'm able to answer and solidify some of the knowledge. Danny's up next. How long has it been since this tree was pruned and styled last? Uh, it's never been, well, I think these trees were, these trees were grown at Shanty Bithy in Connecticut, which, uh, for anybody who used to read Boneside Today, Shanty Bithy was always on the back cover of Boneside Today. And from that perspective, it really does hold a tremendous amount of, uh, nostalgia for me as a Boneside practitioner, because it was basically the most utopic, uh, the most utopic perspective I had seen of a Boneside nursery when I was just starting the endeavor. And they grew these in the field. The original Kingsville boxwood came from Kingsville, Maryland off of a mutation. Uh, and I would say Shanty Bithy was at the cutting edge of propagating, planting, and field growing Kingsville boxwood, which is where you got to the boxwood that Rodney worked on. Just this massive, massive monstrosity, uh, of a boxwood that had probably been in the ground on, honestly, as maybe one of the original cuttings from one of the original sports. So how much has this been pruned? It's probably been pruned a lot in the field. I've pruned this tree one time after it was dug from Shanty Bithy as it was sitting, uh, in a student's growing bed, healed in, uh, just to kind of work on the initial structure lines, et cetera. We pruned all of his, uh, Kingsvilles to set them up and then let the, the power of the, uh, in-ground environment help heal, help, uh, more rapidly develop the transitions and, and whatnot. But beyond that, it hasn't been pruned. And I'm going to say, uh, that was probably 10 years ago that, that we did that and it hasn't been handled since. So this is really long overdue and it's never been wired, which is really where this all gets, uh, incredibly fun. All right, Joe has a question. Is this tree in full sun or is it in morning sun with afternoon shade? Uh, this tree sits under shade cloth and I would say that this tree gets under the shade cloth, 30% shade cloth under the shade structure at Mirai. Um, this tree is getting, um, maybe some direct morning sun and then it's getting, uh, after, uh, mid-afternoon shade completely and then it's protected from the hot afternoon sun. But the hot afternoon sun is shining through the shade cloth on the upper canopy of this tree. Um, and that's where the shade cloth is really protectant of it because that hot afternoon sun would absolutely bleach out the foyer mass of these and turn them very, very yellow. Even, even if it's a healthy tree. Kingsville boxwoods and boxwoods in general in a bonsai container, a shallow environment, do not typically tend to thrive in, in full sun in terms of having a beautiful color and being able to tolerate the kind of heat and the rugged conditions, uh, of that heat. They just don't have the reservoir and the root system underneath them to sustain themselves in that environment in a bonsai container. Kurt's up next. Do boxwoods like deeper pots and larger root balls? Or do they do away? Or do they do okay in shallow pots? Um, well, I mean, this one's planted on a stone and I've got quite a few planted on a stone and I've got quite a few in shallow pots. Uh, but I would say in general, when you start to talk about, um, sheen-based trees, right, uh, that's, uh, that's, uh, all of our conifers. Um, we talk about sheen-based trees in terms of flowering and fruiting broadleaf deciduous. And then we talk about sheen-based trees in terms of broadleaf evergreens. Because they have a necessity, um, to be able to pull on that sheen for the regeneration of their roots, for the moderation of their biology and, and their water allocation, et cetera. A deeper pot facilitates a more healthy sheen in trees that need it. And boxwood is no exception. As a broadleaf evergreen, it does tend to do better in a deeper pot. Now, this is not a deep pot. This is on a stone. So do I have to work a little bit harder for a boxwood on a stone? Yes. Can I put a boxwood in a shallow pot? I can. Do I have to work harder for a boxwood in a shallow pot? I do. Right? Um, so that's the aesthetics of bonsai then demanding some degree of horticultural compensation for the gluttony of the aesthetic we're trying to accomplish. And that ultimately permeates the totality of this art form. Because if we really wanted any of these trees to just be robustly healthy, we'd plant them in the ground and let them grow to a full-sized tree. But that doesn't execute any sort of conversation or expression of culture or scale or perception. Or scale or perspective of these wild environments or this antiquity that we see that we try to emulate in the miniaturized tree form. And that's why all of a sudden we start to wrestle with this conundrum of, is a deeper pot better? Is a shallow pot better? You know, can we get away with fudging on the sheen and whatnot? And then the answer always is, a deeper pot is always going to make cultivation much, much, much easier. But does it, you know, is that what you want to be doing? Or are you willing to, you know, indulge in the gluttony of aesthetics? And then, you know, flog yourself with the necessities of horticulture to compensate for that? Moon's up next. Do Kingsville take scion grafts as well as common Japanese boxwoods, boxes, microphylla? Do they take scion grafts? I don't know to be, I don't know to be honest if they do take a scion graft. I've never tried to graft boxwood because they so readily and abundantly produce. Buds on old wood. And you're going to be grafting what? A two-year-old piece of growth onto it. So you're getting a two-year jump start. And then you're going to have a lag year for it to take and establish before it really starts growing. So ultimately by the end you're a year ahead of a bud. And then you might have a scar and it might fail. And all of a sudden now you've got a detriment to the branch. And you would have only been one year ahead. I don't necessarily know that I see that being advantageous. But I don't want to poo-poo on. You know something that I've never done before or sought the value of. So unknown but also when I look at it seems a little bit frivolous and pointless anyways. Truebeard Steve. Are there any physiological reasons not to enlarge a quote unquote puckered orifice. This is going to be a tough one. On a boxwood into a Euro. And Euro. If a Euro would enhance the design. So I think one of the great demonstrations. Of age and. Just just to be clear. Steve's talking about a hollow. This Japanese term for a hollow. Euro. And. The greatest demonstration of age when we start to talk about you know with junipers it's the dead live dead interaction. And the more dead wood a juniper has and the less live wood a juniper has that starts to create. The aesthetic of age in the trunk of a juniper. When we start to talk about creating the aesthetic of age. And a broadleaf tree. It comes from the hollow right. And I do think that there is. Motivation but here's the problem. Boxwood doesn't really deteriorate it's an incredibly hardwood. It's an incredibly durable wood. And as a result of it being hard and durable. You know to remove it it means we carve it because it's super hard. It carves and finishes very very smooth. And because of it carving and finishing very very smooth I would say. You're best to not try and hollow it out and carve it. And you're best to leave some sort of torn. Some sort of torn remnant right. But if you can't get the leverage on those big structural pieces. Then there's really no conversation to be had because again. The big structural pieces at the base of their connection point to the trunk. Are the most flexible pieces on a boxwood and that's what makes it. A little bit challenging to create those dead tears. That avoid the puckered orifice. As the appropriate term. You know Steve gave us the appropriate terminology. More diplomatic terminology. So anyways that's my thought on that. I would avoid carving and artificial hollows in creation as much as possible. Now I say that and we're going to bring a broadleaf evergreen into the studio. That I am going to carve on a stream this next month. So you know do as I say not as I do. You know what I'm saying. Let's see Adam's up next. If low calcium is the issue. How do you correct that? You just loaded up with bone meal. And Thomas had a similar question. Where do they sell calcium and how do you apply it? Yeah, yeah, yeah. So you can't just apply calcium and suddenly everything is better. Bone meal would be the farmer's almanac way to supply calcium for sure. It's not necessarily in a plant of interest. It's not necessarily in a plant available form immediately. It takes a long time to become available. It has to be broken down by biology. So bone meal has its limitations. And there's always a byproduct of using animal based nutrition. Which I'm not saying animal based nutrition is bad. I'm saying animal based nutrition has repercussions. And those repercussions typically tend to be high salt content. Which is exactly what we were trying to raise the calcium content to fix in the first place. And so when you start to talk about this, you need an aggregate form of calcium to avoid the side effects of applying a plant or an animal based calcium resource. And that's really when you start to get into aragonite and elastinite. But I'm not saying you should go get aragonite and elastinite and apply it to your trees. Because chances are it's not going to be in a form that's digestible. And this is really where we come full circle to James Agent and the Blue Eden podcast. Because people had a lot of strong reactions to him. And saying that guy didn't have science and didn't have proof. And was talking a bunch of craziness and stuff. Hey listen. James Agent happens to be producing the very best nutrition on planet earth for plant growth. Through the use of aggregate minerals. Through the testing of apical to understand the delivery rates that allow the plant to alter its content. But if you just apply calcium. If you just apply Mega Calcil. Or you just apply Cal King. Which are two different forms of calcium. That impact the tree in two very different ways. If you just apply those without balancing the phosphorus. Without adding carbon to purify. And doing some of those other things. You actually could do more harm than good. And this is where we're really working hard. With the apical team to try and get this information delivered and digestible. So that you guys can all apply it. Okay. So stay tuned. We are getting closer by the day. To being able to fully roll this out. We're getting ready to create future content. On how to take a sample. How to submit it. How to get a rec. How to read the rec. How to know what products to apply. How to know what rate to apply them at. How to know the methodology of application. So that we truly can. I mean it has dramatically altered the state of trees at Mirai. I feel completely comfortable saying this is the future at least for us. Right. But now we've got to educate everybody about it. So that it's usable for the entire community. Thank goodness you guys are part of Mirai. You're going to be the first. You're going to be the first. Okay. So now you're starting to see what's happening here now. What time is it Ira? 717. 717. In an hour and roughly you know 10 minutes. We went from a gigantic green dome. To now we have a radically different. We've got the utility line running through the canopy of our boxwood. Radically different structure to our boxwood that exists here. Now I'm really partial to this branch here. I love how it sort of cascades over the rock. It feels so good. But let's just be really clear. I've got a major grouping of three. Bring me in tight there Jesus. Because we can see the silhouette of it. I got this one. This one. And that one. The major structural pieces. I've got a major grouping of three. Right at that junction. But as I continue to rotate. Watch what happens here. I start to see a completely different opportunity in the design of the tree. And the structure. When I start looking from over here. That was completely invisible when we potted the tree up. I mean that was not even in the realm of possibilities. Right? So maybe there's another design that's going to take place. That does not change my ability to make structural decisions. Okay? I'm looking here because I've just got a little bit of a trio conundrum. Actually right here. And I've got this big kind of robust vertical piece here. That I'm not super fan of. But we might have to come back to this one. Okay? Let's go ahead and let's work through these other areas over here. So I haven't touched the right side of the tree yet. This is all completely dense and whatnot. Let's kind of break into this. I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to keep working here. I like the questions that we're asking. Let me clarify some of the garbage around the junctions. And then we'll see if we can structurally improve this piece. And keep moving forward. Treebeard Steve's up next. Would you do this amount of pruning on a broadleaf evergreen that was repotted this spring. With significant root reduction? I wouldn't. I wouldn't. I wouldn't do this on any tree that was not completely well established. All right. Kim. I noticed that the canopy leaves are a bit larger than the lower branch leaves. How do you get the upper leaves to match the lower leaves? Yeah. That's a good question. And I've been looking at that. And it's like is it reverting? But it's not really reverting. I think what's happening is the upper canopy leaves have had more access. Have grown faster. They're elongating much longer. But when we get into the interior of them, they are the Kingsville. They're not shooting the reverted sport. They just have a little bit more vigor. And I'm guessing that is a phototropic effect of apical dominance on a tree that has not had its growth managed but has had its roots reduced and managed to a degree. So I'm guessing that through this pruning restructuring of the branching redistribution to get sustainable design and sustainable expression. And then exposure to sun and air circulation. I'm guessing that that will merge. I don't totally know for sure if it will. But that is my hypothesis. And again, it's not a reversion that's causing that. You saw the dramatic nature of the sports that we were looking at. It does seem to be a repercussion of the upper portion having grown. And when we've been doing this nutrition, strongest areas of the tree are moving the most resources. And the strongest areas of the tree are responding the most resources. They are responding the most rapidly to the nutritional applications that we've been performing. So it makes sense that there might be or would be a natural sort of lopsided distribution in terms of the apex and the upper canopy gaining vigor more rapidly. Okay. I'm at the tip here. I've got a trio of threes that I'm kind of dealing with in a little bit of a challenging way. Because I've got this big ball. It's kind of sticking up off of the top here. And I've got a tremendous number of branches coming off of the ball at the top. But it's like this vertical piece. And you can kind of see it here. That vertical piece sticking up. And all of these interior pieces are kind of dead. But then I've got these really beautiful moderately sized pieces out here. Now, I'm not going to cut off the elevation and make a flat pine pad. But look at this branch back here. This branch back here gives me the verticality. So notice that this is forming this section. This is the same contour here. I don't like that. I want to pull that back. Bing. Okay. Now look at what I've got. Now this piece fits in here. Now that exists there. Look at the contour of that now. And I've got some pieces hanging off the bottom. Now I can start to work. But just by making that small decision, I carved out a space for this piece that's otherwise been, I would say, a little bit, you know, sort of malnourished in terms of fighting for light. Fighting for space. So that it can really grow and become a really big, healthy, strong, strapping branch on the tree. Okay. But giving it that or taking advantage of that malnourishment or that slight degree of reduced vigor allows me to reestablish the contour that exists inside of that branch or that pad. Okay. So now I'm kind of working out into this area. I see I've got some interior pieces here that are a little bit sloppy and kind of long and a little bit challenging. Okay. So I'm going to start to take some of those back out of my threes and threes just to give myself a little bit more workability and management. And I'm kind of working up into this area. I've got another really prominent three. And now I'm working in here. Okay. Now watch closely because I, again, have this big long piece here, a group of three. I take that out. Now I've got a much more moderate, much, much more moderate distribution of branching through the rest of this piece. And now I can go back and start working my way out. Along these areas of three, selecting the branches that I want, creating the space in these areas of three to be able to continue building without that structural flaw or building on something that's only going to continue to have issues over the course of time because I was too afraid to go ahead and make the big decisions to remove it. The same story applies across the board. Each time that we encounter a group of three all the way out to the tip, we have to make a decision. And we want to make a decision. And we want to be thinking about that transition of taper. We want to be thinking about that distribution of foyer mass, taking into consideration all of the branches, all of the branches around that region. Okay. So if I'm not looking at all of the branches, then I'm not looking hard enough because I've got to be thinking when I cut this piece off of the top here, I'm making room for a piece that doesn't even occupy that space yet. But now you start to see the shape of this billow coming to fruition based on the objective selection of this piece. Okay. So I'm looking for the best piece that's going to be able to create and give me control over the size of that contour, the thickness of that contour, et cetera. Okay. So now I just come through. I continue working, working, working, working, pruning, pruning, pruning, making good bonsai decisions. Gary is up next. His question is, so are you saying that, A, if you had done this ten different times, the branch selection would be identical? And, B, that if ten high-caliber professionals have done this, their branch selections would be identical? No. I'm saying if I did this ten different times, having not seen the tree the nine other times, that each time I would have done it, it would have turned out identical because the objective thought process is the same, right, just in terms of what's usable, what's not. Okay. But all of a sudden, if I came back and I did this a second time, I'd be like, well, I'm obviously going to want to mix it up a little bit. Like, I'm going to change it up. And I did that last time. So let me go ahead and try something new. You know, I probably wouldn't plant it on this stone. I probably wouldn't plant it at this angle. I probably would have made different decisions all the way from the very beginning of how I set the composition up to be something that gave me a little bit more variety because I don't like repetition. In fact, I rage against repetition in bonsai. This is why I'm so insistent that if you're recreating the same thing, you've got the big green dome on top of the contorted trunk, like that, there's no artistry in that. Okay. That is a craft. There's nothing wrong with saying it's a craft, but that is a craft. You're not being an artist if you're repeating the same thing over and over and over again and applying the same preconceived concepts to every single new piece of material that's offering you the ability to make objective decisions that allow that to stand out as a unique piece. Okay. And so for me, I do want to continue to try and challenge myself. Now, what you should be asking is you should be saying, okay, well, if that's the case, then what you're saying is there is choice. Yeah, there is choice. For sure there is choice. I made decisions to eliminate longer branches and keep shorter branches. I made the decision to eliminate a right branch instead of a left branch. I could have kept that left branch if I wanted to change it up from keeping the right branch in the canopy of the tree, and that would have changed the direction of the apex and altered the design. But if I hadn't seen this tree and I didn't have that preconceived bias where I was trying to go in a different direction because I don't like repetition, then I would have made the same objective decision because I chose the best tree. I made the decision because I chose the best branch with the best transition of taper, the best bifurcation, the shortest internodes, the highest level of ramification in the position that allows me to achieve asymmetry over the course of time. And that becomes my ethos for branch selection that I'm trying to pass on to you. You want to study a different type of branch selection, you would have to understand the ethos of the person whose branch selection you're trying to understand so that you can make sense of the decisions that they're making. We are creating old trees. We are creating asymmetrical compositions. That builds the ethics and the concept of Mirai's aesthetic. Okay, so now I've got this big monster piece and I've got this just completely and devastatingly large mop that's existing up here. And this is an interesting piece too because there is an argument that this is a trio. I think you have an internode here, or I'm going to make the argument that there's an internode. We cut this big branch off. We cut this off right here. That was sticking out. Okay, that was the big straight one. And I definitely think there's an internode. Stay with me. Stay with me. Stay with me. There's definitely an internode here. Okay, I feel comfortable with that. So I think I can keep this and I think I can go ahead and I can utilize this without having to eliminate either of those pieces. But this is a big gargantuan kind of messy subject. I've got this big branch in the back. I've got this piece sitting over this and this piece sitting over this. And this is a bar branch here. So take a look at this. Okay, now look. Yeah. Now we see this. I didn't even see this. I hadn't even gotten to this yet. Obviously, this branch in the back is of paramount importance. This branch right here, spindly, let's go ahead and let's just take that off. Okay? That's the break that I'm looking for. Nice clean sort of natural break. I can even tear a little bit of that tissue. Zoom in for me, Lonnie. And just show everybody. Instead of the puckered orifice. Now we've got that nice natural break, little snag. I like that little snag. Okay, and now you see. Go ahead and pan up for me and zoom out a little bit. Stay with me, Jesus. Okay, now you see the length. This is a big gargantuan, lax taper. This is almost disproportionate for the rest of the tree. Should we cut this off, we've got some significant spacing here. I can wire these back in. This is where we've got to be careful of the runaway train. You hear me talk about it from time to time. When we start cutting things, we start feeling good about things. We're emboldened by our decisions. In the beginning, our trepidatious decisions that keep us in check. And allow us to make sustainable branch selection processes. And now all of a sudden, we start to get up here. And we're like, I've been pruning and pruning. And this thing has gotten better and better. Let's keep the party going. Let's keep this completely and totally rocking and rolling. I'm going to just, man, I've got a branch. I'm going to cut that off. I'm going to cut that one off. And all of a sudden, you step back and you go, oh gosh, darn it. I was doing well. Like, ah, you know. This is where you have to temper yourself. Because maybe the move is cutting this off. You see, look at that big line up to the right here. I'm talking about that piece right there. That guy right there. That is a tough, that's a tough line in design. Look at how far to the right that carries our apical region. Okay, now we haven't reconciled this grouping down here. We've got threes down here. Do I feel like I need to reconcile this area of three down here? I probably do. It makes me feel sad. It makes me feel very sad that I need to reconcile this grouping of three down here. Would I ever take out this entire midsection? The entire midsection would be this entire piece here. Would I ever take that out? It feels awful aggressive. That's a really interesting. That's a really interesting and intriguing set of branches. Would I take off these pieces? These give me, this kind of gives me my asymmetry. I kind of like these, you know. But like is so, like is so dangerous in this game. This back piece here. This is the only real depth that I have. If I take this out, I kind of have this like spindly piece. I do have the ability to maybe move this into the depth. Gosh, I would hate to lose that as well. This is a real sort of lose-lose. And if I take this back piece out, now these two are stacked on top of each other. Maybe I can move that back there. Maybe I can redistribute a little bit. But I lose. I lose a lot. I lose a lot in any reduction that I perform at this point in time. But you say, okay, so you're going to lose a lot. Does that mean that you don't make the decision? And it's like, well, no, it doesn't mean that I don't make the decision. I know I have to make the decision. And you say, okay. Well, if you're going to make the decision, I mean, you just got to kind of commit. And you say, I do have to kind of commit. But I just need to gather myself for a minute. And if I take off this middle piece right here, do I cause a disconnection from here and here by losing that interconnected piece right there? So now all of a sudden this branch is way down here. My canopy is way up here. And I've got that high amount of space in the middle of this design with the apex not fully committed. Maybe that's what allows me to shorten that piece. And now I go here. This is the tail end of branch selection. This is the tail end of branch selection because I've got a piece that's over there that I don't know what to do with. And I've got pieces right here that I've got to make a decision. And I've got a group of three here. And I've got to take it down to two no matter what I do. Before I leave tonight, I've got to go ahead and I've got to reconcile this. Now maybe I have to go ahead and maybe I have to sacrifice my love of the branches moving over this stone. And I commit to the tree moving in the other direction. And maybe I need to save that length. And that apex moving in that direction. And I go ahead and commit to that full rightward movement. Feels like it disengages the stone. The stone is such a big part of this whole thing. Here we go. How come they never break when you want them to? And they always break when you don't want them to. I'm just going to have to. This one is like refusing to break. There you go. There it is. There it is. Now. The reason that I wanted to get to this point is so that we could start the structural wiring process. I cannot even. I can't even tell you how painful that just was. I don't even want to talk about how bad that hurt. I love that branch. That's an awesome branch. I'm going to strip the bark off of this. I'm going to turn this into a definite piece of deadwood that's going to exist on the front side of this tree. Rest in peace. You know what I'm saying? It's the price of objective bonsai design. And if I'm going to go ahead and do that, guess what? I've got to do something here. So let me go ahead and let me make a decision here. Let me go ahead and let's prune here. And then we're going to set some structure to go ahead and mend our wounds. Painful. Painful. Was that painful for you, Ira? Yeah. I don't know. I think it didn't look. It's dramatic. But I think that back branch saves your eye when you look through from the front. Yeah. You've got to save the back, huh? It almost wasn't as dramatic as I thought it was going to be even though that was a big branch. Yeah. When it's objective like that, sometimes it doesn't hurt as bad. I really liked the branch. I love the movement of it. I love the structure of it. It just happens to be disproportionate to the trunk in terms of it was almost the same size as the trunk. It had great movement. It's going to be a great piece of deadwood. But that connection point. This comes around as the connection point. These can come up as that connection point. And all of a sudden now, I'm going to put some wire on this. I'm going to go ahead and forego that right side. Let's just see if we can. Just because I'm having major sadness. Not regret. Like I didn't do anything wrong. I know I had to do it. But I'm having sadness. I'm having sadness. And it's a little tough to recuperate from. So the way that I'm going to fix my sadness is I'm going to wire a tree. Okay. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to use copper. The boxwoods at this point in time have pretty much uniformly evenly distributed their sugars and starches. So we don't have as scuffable of a bark. And that's typically why we wait on any broadleaf tree until this point in time. Now we obviously are not wiring our broadleaf deciduous when they're in leaf. Because we just do too much damage. And we don't want to knock those leaves off. But our broadleaf evergreens are always in leaf. Right? And so we do have to develop the skills to be able to wire them at this point in time in the year. And I got just a smidge of a scuff there. But I want to try and minimize as much as I can. You say, okay, well wouldn't you paper wrap? I could paper wrap. I don't think that I'm going to do enough damage at this point in time to justify the time for paper. The time for paper wrapping. And I do really want to set the structure. But if you're ever concerned about scuffing, absolutely take the time to paper wrap your wire on your broadleaf evergreen. Olives will scuff. Your boxwoods will scuff. Does scuffing matter? It doesn't necessarily hurt the branch if you just do it in one area. It will leave a mark. Right? Do I have a problem with a mark on the top of that shoulder? No. It actually kind of feels like it probably belongs there. And adds a little bit to some of the interest. I've got a trio here that I'm kind of looking at and trying to figure out how I handle. But I'm going to go ahead and place this branch first. Just cleaning off some of the garbage. Stabilize that. Let me go ahead and get this guy. It's good. Okay. . . . . . . . . . . . . Giving it just a little bit of a lift, giving a little bit of a division, because now when we eliminate those pieces, we've got to start to allow these things to occupy some of these spaces and start to create and merge some of those openings that we've created. Okay, now that goes a long ways towards just getting pieces into positions where we can start to experience a little bit of healing, right? A little bit of emotional healing. Okay, now I'm going to work on this one, and I want to swing this branch around, and I think this branch is the big bridge. I'm going to drop this piece into the back a little bit. I'm going to go with foregauge on this. And recognize that in the structure here, we're not going to use the structure to shorten anything, right? We're not going to take a boxwood and snake it around. But if I've got a branch down here, and I'm able to bring it in, I'm going to go with foregauge on this. I'm going to swing it up to here, and then I can take the secondary tertiaries, turn them in here, turn them in here, fold them back here into that space. This space, watch closely how I can occupy that space. Let me just do this really quickly. I'm going to get my foregauge into a more appropriate position. Okay, and then I can use this. Watch closely how I can use this. And I can just sort of move. I've got to be careful of that crotch. It's going to want to tear at that crotch, but I can move that into that space. And then I can carry that in. and I can move this piece into that space and you see how all of a sudden we just start to fill that space very subtly just through the application of wire and the strategic moves that we're making it's not the same type of bend that we're applying when we have coniferous bonsai and we're making this big massive gesture from the shoulder this is more of a of a slow of a slow steady conversation where we're saying all right all right I see you I see you in there right start to fill that space now we haven't pruned any of this yet mind you this is one that we haven't pruned yet so this is gonna continue to change and now that I've spread that out I have a group of three here I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna take out one of the groups at one of the threes okay and when I take out that three now I create the space for this piece to be spread and to start to occupy this area you and once I come up in here and I start to prune and get rid of all of the unnecessary is here we're gonna see this have the ability to be spread and occupy the space this is this is that part that we that we talk about with the pruning process opening the door for design okay so I'm just gonna open this up a little bit I'm gonna come a little bit farther yeah good yeah let's see if I get okay now we're starting to fill that space look at that that's interesting huh and now we can bring this piece in here we can start to fill this space we can start to spread this piece out just a little bit start to access some of this I'm going to take off some of these pieces that are on the interior here again when I come back in here and I wire this now we have the ability to give this a much better position and we can combine it to this and we can start to flare these pieces out and all of a sudden we start to see that stone we see those layers were reconstructing the informality the whimsy of the tree okay and I'm just gonna touch that little I'm just gonna touch that little scuff here with a little bit of cut paste that we haven't been negligent and taking care of our boxy box everything's good there good okay let me go ahead and carry this out to here all right and now I'm gonna go ahead and move to this now I'm really excited to show you the floor when we finish here because this is structural work the floor the way that it looks is the way that structural work looks in bonsai and get this on I'll try to focus here be very accurate with my wire hold good you you you you you you you Thank you. Okay, coming over. There's that. All right, now, filled space, and we're saying, gosh, I thought you wanted that space. Don't worry. Don't worry. This is just putting the big branches. Now, from here, we start to spread out all the smaller branches. Expand into that. Create that transparency. I'm just forming my primary lines that are going to have that ripple effect of executing the concept in the spatial distribution, okay? And I'm completely and totally happy to bring this piece up to foreshorten this line that we see across the front right here. I think that's going to be magic. Now, look at the stone engagement that we have there. And maybe we decide to leave this down, or maybe we decide to carry this one down so that we have some of that continuation of that original sort of hanging branch. But I think in terms of the structural positioning, we're starting to, and this is really where you play with bonsai design. Do I want this to hang down into here? It's kind of nice. I've got these interior shoots. Go ahead and bring me in here, Lonnie, because this is of utmost importance. I've got my interior shoots right here. Bring me in tight, Jesus. These are what we're going to build with. Now, is that going to take forever to make a branch out of? Yeah, it's going to take a while. But also, if you're not waiting for it, it happens sooner than you think. But I could always bring this in. I could always go in front of that and hide that, or I could always flirt these over into here. And some of you might be saying, well, what about that branch? Never going to happen because I can't cross over this branch. This branch created the billowy body of this mass right here. So I feel really good about the distribution of branching and what we have going on here. But I love this branch. I love this branch coming back into that space and starting to create some sort of relationship in that space. And that starts to bring us into these pieces here. Now, what do we do when we start to look at? Slightly loose. What do we do when we start to look at these? Do we pull these into the space? And what do we do here? That's where we've got a decision to make now. We've got that big line. We've seen that line. Unfortunate line right there. Do we get rid of that line? Maybe. Maybe. Maybe we go ahead and tear this whole thing off. And then look at what we can do. We can fold this whole thing back into this space. This right here. Look at this. We can fold that right back into this space. Maybe that's the move. I don't necessarily love this big, huge extension of this line right there. It's not the sexiest thing that I've ever seen. I love what's happening in that lower portion of the trunk and how that's interacting with the stone. I think that is just rock and roll. To the nth degree. But I don't love that. I think we've got to do away with it. See what we can do. That's better. That's better. That's a better boxwood, yeah? For sure. And you might be saying, goodness. Goodness gracious. You said runaway train. This is a runaway nightmare. There may have been a question about the runaway train in the chat. Huh? There may have been a runaway train question in the chat. Good. I hope so. Because now we can set the structure in these pieces to start to occupy that space. I think that's as far as we go structural elimination. I think that's as far as we go. Okay. Now, did I have a loose idea of what this was going to become when we first started this process? I had a loose idea. I had a loose idea of what this was going to become. Did I know it was going to be this bare? I knew that it was going to become relatively bare. Let me go ahead and show you the front of this. And then you can see the aftermath on the ground at the base of it. Okay? And I don't know. We probably don't have a before and after. But the big ball that existed on this. Okay? And go ahead and show all the things that came off of it. Hey, Zeus. Yeah. And I'm talking. Just for scale, there's my hand. Right? It just looks like. I mean, that's like a lot of branches. Okay? But all of that, you know, when you talk about branch elimination, all of that started with just this small little branch right here. Entering, slipping your foot in the door. Right? And starting to work on the process. And then one thing leads to another, leads to another, leads to another, leads to another. And all of a sudden, you say, okay, all right, now we're in. Now we're in. And as long as we can buffer that sort of loss of control in the runaway train, this tree needed this kind of decisive action to become the best possible version of itself. Look at the scale of the trunk now. It looked thin when we began this process. It is very thick now. It's very profound and prominent now. The discrepancy of the apex. The big, incredible green. All of that is gone now. Now we can actually build on this tree. Okay? This is the time of the year where we have the capacity to make these changes, understanding that our broadleaf evergreens reach that point of post-hardened pruning, where we have the capacity to make these structural decisions, and now we can follow through with the design process. Okay? All right? I'll open it up to questions. I'm sure there's a lot. Yeah, we've got a handful. So Thomas has a question. This is from a little bit earlier. How often do you water this tree, and do you let it dry out very much between waterings? I would say that this boxwood is probably the tree that we take the most care of in all of our boxwoods for watering because it was such a gigantic canopy on the root mass that existed underneath it. We don't let this ever dry out. It doesn't ever fully dry out, and in fact, you know, it's pretty moist right now. It looks a little bit dry because of the leaves, but the backside here, it really particularly dries out. And so, yeah, you can see that right there. Go ahead and zoom them in, Jesus, to the close-up shot. Yeah. You can see it looks, I mean, it even looks a little bit dry right here. I mean, it is using a tremendous amount of water, but you saw the leaf mass that it was holding. So I'm assuming that it's going to use less water after this working. And we never let it fully dry out. There are other boxwoods in the garden that stay much wetter. They don't dry out much at all. Those are boxwoods that were repotted this spring that for one reason or another still haven't recovered. If a boxwood is staying wet, you've got to let it dry out. If a boxwood is constantly dry, you never let it dry out. You've got to adapt to the needs of the tree, and certainly for boxwood, any tree that's staying wet constantly is a tree that has an imbalance of water and oxygen, or a root-related issue. And the only way you fix it is by establishing that balance of water and oxygen, cultivating the roots through that balance of water and oxygen so that it produces enough roots that it starts functioning and utilizing water at a much higher rate. So for this tree using tons of water, I don't let it dry out. For the tree that is never drying out, I have to let it dry out. Treebeard Steve's got a question. Is reversion usually a response to serious stress? He has a landscape dwarf, Alberta spruce, with a branch that's reverting back to plain Picea glauca. I don't think so. My experience with reversion is that it's a response to excessive vigor. And the reason that I say that is if you leave Alberta spruce in a landscape and they get old enough for long enough, they will inevitably revert. Just based on the vigor, the mass, the accumulation, and the fact that mutations are inherently unstable. They're inherently unstable. The Zuisho white pine is one of the most stable mutations. It's also one of the only mutations that I know of that's stronger than the parent plant. But if you look at Kokonoe, these are Japanese white pine mutations. You look at Kokonoe, Kokonoe is destined, I mean it's destined for problems from the beginning to the degree where it can even abort the graft 30, 40, 50, 50, years later on a Kokonoe. And that's why they fell out of fashion in Japan as a usable dwarf cultivar. So it's my feeling that that comes from vigor, not stress. But there are probably a lot of reasons why the genetics of a plant adjust and adapt. And I could also see sort of a survival mechanism of a plant and the pure genetics shining through on a tree that is under stress. I could very much logic my way through that. Whether that's physiologically what happens or not, I don't think so. Thomas is asking, when do you choose to use raffia? When do I choose to use raffia? I use raffia when the bend is going to potentially compromise over a long piece of tissue. The bend is potentially going to cause too much compression to put force on the tension that's amassing as the tissue stretches. And I use raffia to compress that. Okay. These bends right here are not bends that I'm focusing a straight flexing of the tissue where compression is going to push up and that tension is going to release on the branch. So raffia would have no implication in terms of the protection of these bends that I'm making. But if I took this big straight section here and I just cranked this down, that would be a situation where maybe raffia could be applicable towards helping me bend this and have a little bit more success. That's not the way that I'm going to do it. I'm not going to handle any of the bends on this tree. Moon's got a question next. It seems the Kingsville is quite a bit more flexible than the Japanese boxwoods that I've worked on. Do you think it is species specific or perhaps age or climate related? He's talking about some landscape plantings on his experience. I think it's species specific, like the Kingsville genetically has that kind of flexibility built in. I think it is. I think there is a seasonal component to boxwood being flexible. And I think when you start to talk about the tissue being hydrated in boxwood, when you go about the bending process and the wiring process, hydration is key. Now, there are other species that when hydrated become incredibly brittle. You know, if you bend a limber pine that's wet, that tissue is inevitably going to break on the structural level. It's actually kind of freakishly shocking. How brittle a limber pine can be just because the tissue itself is physically wet. So this tree being filled with a lot of water that's balanced out the sugar starch concentration at this time of year is probably what's leading to a lot of this flexibility. And I think knowing those nuances and quirks to a tree allows you to work a tree in a responsible manner and have the highest level of success. When I used to try and style tamarisk, right, I started out with a very famous tree from Masishi at Chukugo Inn. It's the only Masishi tree that I have at Mirai. And I bought it because it was the only tree that they would sell me when I went to visit their nursery when I came back from Mr. Kimura's. Like literally every tree I wanted, I said, what about that one? I said, not for sale. What about that one? Yeah, that one's not for sale either. What about that one? That one is not for sale. And what about that one? Well. Well, think about it. Let me talk to mom, see what's going on, talk to Mrs. Ishii. She said, he can have one. He can have one tamarisk. He can buy one of those. I bought a tamarisk. I brought it home, wired that thing up. Bam, broke. Wired it up. Bam, broke. Wired. Bam, broke. So I'm thinking, okay, so tamarisk can't be wired. But they've got to be wired because you see them wired. You see the dog-legged weeping style. Somebody's wiring that in because they grow straight out into the ether if you don't touch them. And at each season, early spring, mid spring, late spring, I would go and I would bend a branch, right? It would break, okay? I would move on. Next season, mid spring, late spring, bend the branch, break. Early summer, mid summer, late summer, break, break, break. Early fall, mid fall, late fall, break, break, break. Early winter, mid winter, late winter, break, break, break. Early spring, which I probably started with early spring, but I shouldn't have. I should have started with early summer. Early spring. Oh, now it bends. Now it bends. Now I can bend a structural branch. Now I can bend a secondary branch. Now I can bend a tertiary branch. Breaks every other time of the year when tamarisk is just producing their foliar mass. Not when their buds swell, but when the actual leaf mass is emerging from the stem. That is the most flexible a tamarisk will be. Boxwood has a similar conundrum. When they are dry, when they are not moving a tremendous amount of water, they are incredibly inflexible. But when they're moving water, their bark is almost incredibly, is almost so delicate you can't touch them. So you've got to hit them on the cusp of when that bark is hardening off. And that comes with the post-hardened period of time. And we're just entering that period of time right now on boxwood and our broadleaf evergreens. And so this is when their flexibility is of greatest capacity. Joe's got a question. Why allow the branch to almost go straight up on the branch that was repositioned instead of angling towards the outside? It's that area. This one? I think it's the one on that lower branch on the left. Oh, this one. I think that one, yeah. Yeah. Straight up. Definitely not straight up. So it's got a curvature back towards the trunk. And a lot of these branches are coming up in these informal, sort of informal vertical ways. I want to continue to piggyback on that theme and that thematic. I'm not going to start introducing new movement or different sort of aesthetics into this tree than what already exists in the branching themselves. I think what this tree possesses is absolutely spectacular. What it has going for it. And I'm just trying to piggyback on that. But I, you know, maybe I'll push that a little bit more. I've also got a crotch that I'm pulling apart. And I know that wants to split just as an inherent structural issue. Maybe I can get a little more out of it. But those are the things that I'm going to refine as I start to prune, as I start to clean, as I set from the bottom to the top, the branching structure. Some branches are going to break in this process inevitably. I've already pruned off a lot, right? So I've got to sort of calculate and calibrate how far I want to push something until I know. I want to push it to the nth degree to achieve just that finest realization of line. Maybe that needs to move. I kind of like it where it's at. But we'll see. We'll definitely see. Thomas had a little more of a general question. Did this tree have enough to sustain and add? Well, I mean, the top was growing. Like, I mean, you know, it's just stopped elongating. I mean, it's just hardened off. But these things were. I mean, when boxwood is growing, these are super fleshy. Very, very soft and delicate. Now they're all very rigid. The color is darkened almost uniformly across the growth. That is the formation of the cuticle. That is the recuperation of the root mass. That is the hardening off that allows us to start to think about the styling process, right? Now, do I recommend, you know, that you come in and you just super go aggressive on your boxwoods at this time of year? If it's a big, robust, healthy tree, that's not an issue. If it's a tree that doesn't have a tremendous amount of foliar mass that you're trying to set structure on or whatnot, this is not the ideal time. Do it prior to the push of growth and know that you have a limitation of flexibility. Do it after the hardening off phase, right, in the early fall. But know you can't prune any branches. I'm in the July, early August period of time. I'm prior to that transitional phase. This is a great time to go about it because I have maximum flexibility. I knew that we were going to be making big moves post-structural decision making. So be it. Sean, will the... Will the large cuts ever heal over? Would it heal faster with a bud around the wound like on a Japanese maple? Probably heal faster with a bud around the wound. And what's going to happen is it's going to bud back profusely all over those wounds. Boxwood heals relatively quickly. People say boxwood are slow growing. They produce a tremendous amount of vascular tissue from my experience. The boxwoods that we've worked on the stream and we will work on more boxwoods in the next month. That are inspired by different environmental conditions have healed very, very rapidly. And so I don't hesitate to think about those wounds healing. The buds that are going to occur that can perpetuate the water delivery are great. But think about this too. This is different than a Japanese maple or a broadleaf deciduous that's high water mobility. This is a moderate water mobility tree at best and even some of my broadleaf evergreens have been the most challenging. Even more so than pines, more so than junipers, more so than any of the crops. Even the conifers, the broadleaf evergreens have been very challenging to change their nutrition because they transpire very little amounts of water. And so when you start to think about that, that transition and when we said I can cut without leaving a stub and I won't see dieback because they're not a high water mobility tree. I can go ahead and prune and know that that wound will heal without having a bud around it to draw water to it because it's a low or a moderate water mobility tree. I'm not as concerned as I would be with a broadleaf deciduous tree when I handle that. I'm more concerned with a broadleaf evergreen species. Olive is the same. Camellia is, I won't include camellia. Olives are the same. Oaks are the same, right? And when we start to think about those species, they behave with that same kind of broadleaf evergreen moderate to low water mobility behavior. And it's the same reason a pine can move resources laterally as well as vertically. It's moving water more slowly. It can take that time. It's not as dependent on that constant stream of rapid moving water to keep the living tissue or water moving. It can move around wounds, active and metabolizing and rolling. It's different when we talk about lower and moderate water mobility trees. We are all caught up on questions, and Jesus has the before ready for you if you want to take a peek at that. All right, Jesus, give it to us. Okay, now, I want you to take a real solid look at the scale of the trunk and the stone, all right? Scale of the trunk and the stone. Bring us back. Yeah, yeah. Okay, and we haven't even started to move the upper canopy here. But when we start to move the upper canopy, we're going to further see this thing close up. We're going to further see the trunk gain power and prominence in terms of the design. Really, really nice, interesting discussion into that structural branch selection process, right? I'll give you the 1-360. We've got a lot of space. Okay, don't fear space. Get your foot in the door. We're here. Work on your structural flaws. Objectively select the branches that have the best transition of taper, the best bifurcation, the most health, the highest level of ramification. Those are the branches you want to build your tree with. It is an objective decision-making process, okay? We good? We are good. Oof. I'm so happy that we just did that now that we're all speaking plainly and I'm off of the teacher soapbox. I've been looking at this tree, and I've been thinking, what are we going to do with it? What are we going to do with it? What are we going to do with it? So excited to see the design actually pan out. And I did not anticipate removing this central piece. That was not in my thought process. I mean, that is just a bang up. Look at that movement on it. Look at the... But that's going to be a hell of a piece of deadwood in there, isn't it? I mean, that's a craggly, beautiful contour. We've got more delicate, proportional branching around it. It was the right choice. A tough choice. It was a painful choice. You saw the pain on my face when we made it. But nevertheless, it was the right choice for the tree, for the aesthetic, for everything else. Okay? Love you guys. We're still working on the app. It's coming soon. The beta's going to be opening here, I hope, within the next, you know, four to six weeks. That would be unbelievable. It's taken a lot. It's taken a lot to get to this point. I think the... Lonnie's going... Because we're... Because we're all just like, let's rebirth this thing into the world. It's going to change people's bonsai experience. It's going to be a building process like anything else. Start out small and expand. But there's no doubt that it is a very functional tool. So we're working diligently. We're continuing to focus on nutrition. One of the manipulations of the nutrition model, now that we understand sort of the salt component of things, is recognizing that historically in bonsai, we're not going to take the heat of summer off of fertilization. But we're delivering a fertilizer that has a tremendous amount of salts based on the animal byproduct as the backbone. When you start leaning on aggregate forms, you pull back on nitrogen a little bit. You focus on calcium, phosphorus, and carbon. The most important time to fertilize is through the heat of summer. Okay? And this is a big shift. And I'm not saying go apply BioGold right now. That would be catastrophic. I'm saying in this nutrient shift, we've recognized different behaviors in plants and different ways and modalities to deliver that nutrition in ways that help our plants. And this is really when you see plants struggle. Right? This is when you see discoloration in the leaves. You start to see insect spider mite issues, scale issues. I saw adelgids attacking new growth on the forum Q&A today. And how do you address that when you're entering a period of time where you're supposed to go hands off? The only solution to date has been chemical. You know, treat it with chemical, drench it with chemical, spray it with chemical, stay on it, stay on it, stay on it. That can't be the solution moving forward. That's just not sustainable. So, anyways, David's going to be here on Friday. We're going to talk a lot about, you know, developing the total release of this information. But the discussion for the August lecture, which is next week. We have one more stream. We'll see you on Tuesday. Next Saturday is nutrition. And you're going to want to be here for that one. Okay? All right. We love you guys. Let you go. Mwah! . . . . 
