what's going on everybody super tuesday loving boxwood boxwood in the house with rodney clements tonight we've been waiting and waiting and waiting for rodney to get here we had a pandemic you know how all that happened uh it's a long walk it's a long walk it took him a while to get here but uh but he made it and it's time and we've got something very very special and impressive for you tonight uh in terms of what rodney's gonna share with us so uh i'm gonna turn it over to you i'm gonna assume the position in the chat we're gonna go through announcements and then we're gonna turn rodney loose like a caged animal because that's kind of how he rolls yes all right okay what do we got for uh oh that's right so uh we've got alani on the mic this evening hello hello and uh josh producing the stream from the mothership he's here he's amongst us jesus on the detail what's up jesus and i am on the chat which is abnormal but i'll try not to screw things up too bad let's rock and roll man all right well this is uh quite an honor to work on a tree this good it's been fantastic to pay attention to it today today's been a long day just playing with it fondling the boxwood and um it's it's been fantastic this is a big one for the kingsville for the micro phila compactus and so it's a pleasure to work on it it's going to be fun i've got a large area and with kingsville's it's a lot of leaves you're taking off a whole bunch of leaves so it's a slow process i'll go at it kind of the way i go usually and that's kind of a progression of how i attack the tree or or adjust it and somebody some trees think i attack but really i'm pretty soft and gentle but i'm looking at this tree it's got a great base so i'm going to go ahead and turn it around what what i've done is i've picked the side that's a little bit larger a little bit rougher to do some of the pruning on tonight but i've already worked a lot of it because i didn't have anything else to do here and i wanted to do the back so i'm going to show you the quality of this tree and it's all about the trunk this top we're going to make it look a lot like a live oak but um we're going to start with it and let me tell you the base is incredible i'm going to spin it around and uh look at that pretty impressive base so this has been edited a little bit opened up so that you can kind of see what's involved in there you can see that undulating branches the movement that's in here fantastic i'll be taking off some of the larger branches not many because the tree is really nice the way it is some of them cross each other there's a spot here that the branches twist around each other and i'm going to spin it around each other but it's fantastic trees do that naturally they have this reverse taper you got branches all coming out of the same spot that's the way a live oak grows very natural for me this is a tree that as far as the live oak would go i grew up in florida i would have sat here for hours and hours or put a tire swing off of it it's a great tree so we're going to come around and i'm going to show you one of the things that i'm about taking branches off boxwood very thin skin they their cambium is very thin heals very very slowly and so you make a cut that's a rounded cut the way we've cut off things with our pruners and stuff that cut is going to last for an awfully long time this is an old tree so that cut will last for years and years and years and it gets like a bullseye your eye goes right to it so if i'm going to take a big branch off i'm going to make it look natural the way to do that is just take a little aggression out and rip the branch off and then the the damage that's been done there's a story there it looks like okay this is what happened you know a limb hit i like going to meteors meteors hit trees all the time so but um i'm gonna go the one thing that's maybe something i'm going to be dealing with it's not maybe i will be is this root that comes off over here the the tree's got a nicer shape without it so that will come off and that is a spot where it's right in your eye so if you're depending on how it's potted that is going to be always very very very visible can you show that to us can we see that and just just show yeah let jesus go ahead and rotate it towards jesus and and uh and yeah and show them that yeah perfect yeah right there yeah this is a this is a funky one of all of these now i just want to give the background because i think a lot of people are asking but these are kingsville boxwoods that were planted how old do you think this is how old do you estimate this it's it's tough because it was planted in the ground if um the the tree was the plant was introduced to the nursery trade in 1912. and so it it's no older than that right but um it's it's a good um 60 plus years 60 very conservative you could go up from that yeah it was estimated at between 80 and 85 years because it was planted by the original uh proprietor at shanty bithy which used to occupy the back cover of bonsai today and when they shut down they still had these in the field and um the last of them were dug this was probably the biggest of them we have uh five of them seven of them here at mariah this is by far and away the most impressive one right rodney rodney came in and lost his mind for a moment just like what to change my pants that's right that's right so um but but when you when you talk about kingsville you said first kingsville 1912 what does that mean well um kingsville was a mutation a sport that was spotted on a boxwood in pennsylvania and that sport was some shenanigans maybe some horse trading went on but henry holman was the one that got that and uh he was the one to introduce it to the nursery trade and he this is where the name comes from i think kingsville his own nursery was in kingsville maryland and it was um called kingsville nursery and so it's you know that's sort of the start to it but the thing is it's a sport it's a mutation and this plant continues to mutate so you get a lot of different forms of it and but it's henry holman's first species um he's called kingsville nursery and it's his first species and his first species is this microphila compacta and that's that's really um what it should be called but the kingsville is one that um especially with the tinier leaves this is a little bit of a larger leaf hence one of the reasons it grew so nice and so large was it was a faster growing than the smaller variety of of the kingsville but they're still all microfilas they have that growth habit and and you know very nice so what i now that the besides the mass of this tree one thing i like to be about it, keep turning it to where you can see it, but this white color, that really jumps, and I meant to clean it up today a little bit with some rubbing alcohol and a toothbrush, but that, you could get this bark almost white by just cleaning it off. The green color that I'm seeing anyway is an algae on it, and so that can come right off, gets really white, and what that does is really just the contrast between the foliage, and the trunk, and even the container just jumps, it makes all this movement that you're seeing just really stand out, and that's, that's the whole thing that I love about these microphyllas, is the fact of how this undulation is all about. And you see some looking through it, you see just branches crossing each other, it's, it's fantastic because it's not just doing things that we've been taught not to do. But you see a live oak in nature and a Kingsville in a pot, and they do that. It's a natural way. It makes them look a little bit more natural. When you're looking at it from this side, you can look through and see that this side's been raised a little bit. That was done in the field. I cut very little off that was going down. But you see these pieces back here that are hanging down. If this was the back of the tree, I could leave some of that to really stop the eye, give you depth and everything, but I'm not so sure. I want to work it where both sides, both ends could be the front if we choose to. This is going to be a work in progress, so sooner or later the decision needs to be made, but it doesn't have to be tonight. We can look at it, vote. We're going to have a difference of opinion. Maybe I'll vote. Maybe I'll keep count, but my vote's the one that counts. I think you should be a dictator tonight. Yeah, I will. I think you should be an absolute dictator. I'm going to just show you a little bit of how it's approached from my side. That's these low branches. I'm going to just go ahead and take them off. I'll just get them started. RA looks better to me. You can see I'm under it. I see another one. I'm going to kind of work on two, but I'll do that later. I've got them. They look like this. I'm going to see if they'll go ahead and break for me. Yeah. Yeah. First program I did for my mom's garden club, I went to break a branch, and the whole trunk. I broke, and I have one branch to work with. It's a tough way to start a tree. That was an accident for you. That's intentional for a lot of people. Yeah. And a quick interruption. Gary was wondering, can we zoom in on the point of the break? Oh, yeah. Get the detail? Once you've broken a few, take us back to that. You do what you've got to do and create the space, and we'll kind of watch you handle this. Take us back and show us that detail. This one's not breaking, so help it. They call these nippers for a reason. Let's see why it's not breaking. Weird angle. You generally consider Kingsville to be pretty brittle, or do you feel like they're relatively flexible compared to... They are flexible, you know, when you're wiring them and everything. They're generally not brittle except in the crotch, so your wiring has to be done correctly so it doesn't break in the crotch. The thing is, you've got to push them to get them to set their wood, because, again, they're thin-skinned, so it takes a while for the wire to really set. If you get damage on the tree, usually it's the way you wire it, but that'll show for a long, long time. With the whiter the bark is, I've had trouble with copper wire, for instance, because as it's oxidizing, it leaves a stain on the white that takes a while to come off. If they get moss up the trunk and everything, that also takes a while to get back to being white once you clean it off. I usually use rubbing alcohol, but that little spray gun for dry cleaning really works nicely also. But you see, so far, see, that raised it up quite nicely, where it looks a lot more equal, right? You can kind of see it. Here's a good example of how this tree continues to mutate. This is a mutation from the mutation. So I'm looking for one that's really tiny. It's got to go that way also. So you see them get smaller, actually? You see the mutation. So these are sports? Would you call that a sport? Well, it's a mutation from a mutation. You can call it a sport, which is brooms. The original one, it could have been called a witch's broom. I have not seen one that goes smaller than the Kingsville witch. But theory-wise, it's got to be there. Yeah, yeah. Now, Rodney, you're from Atlanta, Georgia. You have historically, or at least you are known for focusing on boxwoods and inside of boxwoods compacta, but how did you, when did boxwoods come about in your bonsai career, and how did you develop the knowledge to, or refine your knowledge of them over the course of time? What's the name of your garden, too? The name of the garden is All Good Bonsai. And so we enjoy the Kingsville. Obviously, we've got a lot of them. So we really do enjoy them. It was the tree that taught me bonsai, taught me how to see the line in a tree, because the one, the best teacher of bonsai is Mother Nature and looking at the trees. And the live oak was the first tree I climbed. The first tree I fell out of. So I looked at it, I knew it quite well. I was having trouble, I was struggling with finding the tree within the tree. And so when I saw the first boxwood, it was like instant love because this looked like a tree to me and following that line and everything that it presented was fantastic. So Atlanta's a lucky spot as far as the history of Kingsvilles go, because there was a father, a monk and a monastery in Atlanta. And Henry Holman actually gifted him one of the first boxwoods and said, you should try this. I think it would make a good bonsai. And so Father Paul did. That tree is probably the most well-known of all the boxwoods of the Kingsvilles, I mean. And it's one that I've had the pleasure for the last 15 years of curating and keeping going. So it's a great tree, looks really old, super white. White bark, very, very tiny leaves. So, you know, I've broken off some. That's the fun part. It goes quick that way. Now I'm going to start pruning. So I'm looking at it. I'm bringing things up. I want to get the eye into it. And I'm going to open this up again. If I was doing this at home and I was taking my time, just this amount of foliage, this amount of mass, I would spend several days doing it because you start, your eyes go across at a while. The other side, I went a lot faster. I was trying to get it to where we could see some of it. So, you know, I'm going to start. I usually start at the base. The one thing I'll tell you about any of the, this is really a broadleaf evergreen. It's a shrub. And so the side parts, they're the most dominant. They're going to be the stronger. The apex is not quite as strong. A lot like an azalea. So you got to be careful with the apex. If you lose the apex for any reason, damage from tree limbs, poor pruning, frost, whatever, that's going to be the end of the tree as far as being able to work it for a long time. They're slow growing. The apex, you lose it. It takes a while to do the comb over and get it back to looking right. Sometimes you have to cut them way back. It's a tree that you can cut back. Pretty far. So you have one thing I've done cleaning it up is you've got this foliage mass here all up underneath all this foliage you're seeing are little buds. The buds pop out all the way down into the crotches. Even down here. You could probably show that Jose, if you wanted to, I didn't get them all, but it comes all the way down here. That allows you to cut this tree back almost as far as you want to, if you do it equally. So it's gotta be an equal prune job. Now, what is the scope of work that you're doing right now? And is now the best time to do it? Well, you know, it's a very forgiving tree. And so there are many times to do it. And there's a reason that you're doing it through the year. This is a good time to really work the Kingsville and all of the microphyllas. And the reason is when you open it up right now, it's really too late in the year for it to start growing again. And so it sits there. And so the sunlight's getting to it. The breezes go through it. The buds activate. And so when spring comes, rather than doing a hot flush where you get the large, large leaves and their hot growth, wherever the strong spot is, you get a consistent growth. They're usually smaller leaves and they come out all over. So it's a good time to prune. If I'm gonna edit one of the older boxwoods, then, then I'm gonna do it. I'm gonna do it this time of year. So this is almost like a time of year where you get a refinement, where you get a refinement. And I think you're gonna show us how to handle those branching clumps, right? Okay. But this is to get a finer response. Are there other times of year that you would prune a boxwood to get different responses? Absolutely. So this time of year, when you're pruning it, again, you've got from now until the 1st of April in Atlanta to where you're gonna sit and enjoy the tree. It's putting buds in. The buds out, you're gonna see all those, but the tree stays looking refined for a long period of time. If you prune right before, and there's reasons to do it right before the flush of spring happens, then the tree kicks in. It's gonna try to replace those leaves really fast. And the way it does that was the big leaf. Now there are reasons to use that because the tree's really trying to grow. So you could put on a lot of hot growth if you wanted to, if you wanted to make a branch grow, more than the others, you could do it then. But I generally will repot at that point because it's the easiest, but you can repot these almost all year long with that right aftercare. Very, very strong root system. Pops genetically dwarf the root system, didn't know that. They're very strong root wise. So you can do a lot with it. And so if you make the mistake of really trying to refine an old tree, in the spring, the tree's gonna kick into growth. And so right after spring, it's gonna have another flush. You're not gonna like that either. Then you're gonna prune it again. It's gonna have another flush. It will keep doing that all year long. If you wait too long and do it at the end of, say summer, first of fall, then what takes place is that new growth that comes out at that point and have time to harden off and will winter burn. And so that's what you don't wanna do. Quick clarification. Is this for boxwoods in general or specifically Kingsville? Well, where I'm in my wheelhouse is with Kingsville. But yes, it's generally is for all the boxwoods. I kinda have focused on Kingsville because they give a far, you see the tree far away because of the size of the leaf and everything. So that's why I do it. Some of the... My favorite boxwoods are some of the japonicas that have a much larger leaf. They're stronger. So it really almost needs to be a larger tree for it to work in my mind the same as this does. But the leaf really matters, the leaf size with that. But you can use the same practices. Yes. We've got a billion and one questions, but I don't wanna keep you from rocking out. So as you work, I'm just gonna talk to you. All right. But show us what you're gonna do there because I'm really curious to see this. I watched you work a little bit today, but I'm learning as is everybody else. Okay, usually I start at the base, but the hard part is I've grown today. So I'm a little taller than I needed to be. So I'm gonna kinda start in an area that's just really comfortable. I go in, I kinda look at it. What I've done mostly is clean it up today and I've got it where most of the dead stuff is taken away. I'm taking off... The danglies like we normally do, then I'm taking the branch, separating a little bit and I'm going in and opening it up and cutting it back. So I'm going into the fold. I like using my scissor at an angle so I can go in and not cut leaves. So if I can get away with not cutting leaves, again, they brown, they're there for a long time like that. You end up having to go back in and pick the brown leaves off. Now this tree, even though we're doing a lot of work today, I plan on if I have time tomorrow, just really sitting down with it and nicely adding what I'm doing today. So it kinda cleans it up. So are you taking it back to two or three shoots? Are you taking it back to... How are you handling those clumps? Well, some of them, because this is a... Normally, if you have a tree, if you have a tree, if I were working a tree that's already been worked on before as bonsai, then I'm doing it consistently even. I'm not counting the leaves, but I'm pretty much doing it anywhere from two to seven to something like that. And I just, you pick a weak spot and kind of prune it up a little bit, then you go to the rest of the tree. So you're pruning the elongated shoots back to that leaf count of the weakest shoots, but are you taking the number of shoots at any junction down to two or three? Today, I will not, but yes, I'm gonna... I'm gonna go in there, and it's always two, two, twos if you can do it. If I'm gonna use three, it's two up at the top, and I might do a low sweeping branch or something like that. But it's a matter of just really coming in and getting the tree looking consistent. And the consistent, you're making it look good, making it look consistent, but at the same time, what takes place is even growth. That's always what you're trying to look for. And even growth, you're accomplishing even growth by pruning at this time, which is gonna give you a more even push out next season of really small leaves. And you're getting that even growth by pruning the stronger areas down to the weaker areas in terms of leaves, so that you have, wherever you have leaf mass, the leaves in that positive space, the branching density and leaf density is the same. Equivalent. Yeah, this is really interesting. It's really enlightening to hear your discussion about pruning in the fall at this point in time gives you a nice, evenly distributed small leaf push next spring, as opposed to if you prune next spring prior to the push of growth, you're gonna get a big rampant flush. You're gonna get a jump. Which would give you strong branching if you wanted to build branches with. You could build secondary branching with. You could build maybe transition taper with that stronger flush of growth and you're gonna get a little bit of a back or whatever. Yeah, I mean, one way to look at it would be if you had a young tree and you're wanting it to get larger quicker, you're pushing the growth, you're making it kick into its strong suit. So yeah, there's the reasons to do it. And, but when you're working on a refined tree that's old, then you're wanting to have that slow growth. The one thing about the fast growth, the hot growth as I call it, what takes place is, when it grows that strong, that fast, like with anything, it grows a very straight, non tapered branch. And so when you do it this way and it grows slowly, the branches undulate. You get a lot more of the movement that you're seeing that this one grew as. Just in the ground. Now let me ask you, what do you desire in terms of soil composition for a Kingsville that's in a bonsai container? Currently, this is, this is the native field soil that it's grown in for the past 80 years. And then we just, we built this cedar box cause it was bald and burlapped and we put it into pumice. We sifted out the 16th. So it's basically one eighth to one quarter pumice. And we'd only plan on it being in here for the next year in this. But what would you plant boxwood in? And would you plant Kingsville in something different than a standard boxwood? No, no. Again, their root system is so strong. They will grow in a lot of different mixes, but you know, basically the mix that we're getting great results with is just basically a bonsai mix, a normal mix. I'm starting to add a lot more Akadama to it than normal, but then I used to, but it was a three-part mix most. And we get it to where maybe less lava cause we need the moisture. I call them really a duff plant. They grow in their own litter. They're like an azalea. So they grow in an area where their leaves are coming down. The root mass, the soil level is usually rising on the tree. So that root level will continue to go up and it grows a fantastic root system. A lot of, an azalea is another good example of that. But the consistency of the soil, what you've got to have is the fact that it needs to stay, evenly moist soil, but gets a lot of air through it. So, you know, it's not wet soil, it's evenly moist. And so, you know, that's why you don't want to compact the soil around them in the ground, but in a bonsai pot, it's perfect for them. They love pot culture because of that. So, so you're going one, basically standard mix, Akadama pumice, lava for lack of a better term, but you're saying as you've progressed, you're saying, as you've progressed, you're going with more Akadama in that. Right, you know, it's been a transition for me because, you know, I feel like I grew up in bonsai before Akadama was used like it is today. I mean, I love it. And so the first soil that I used that just really kicked it was some decomposed granite from what we live in an area with a lot of granite, you know, stone mountains right around the corner. And so some of the decomposed granite, Granted, it's a lot like the pumice in a sense. You can sit there and squish it, and it breaks apart. It's really, really nice. And so we used to use that. I used to use decomposed pine bark. A lot of people still do, but when it's decomposing, it's also rotting, and part of it, I like to go as long as I can without repotting if the tree's really healthy. How long on a refined tree specifically would you try to push a boxwood? Well, it's a great question. It depends on how. If I'm going to change a pot, and that happens a lot, I just see a better pot for a certain tree, then I'm going to do it at any time. I don't care if it was a year later. But my teacher said that basically most people repot their trees too often. And so his thing was once you start seeing the tree stress a little bit, slow down a little bit, that's when you want to come in and repot. And so we're looking for that. I worked on a customer's boxwood that was in fantastic condition. And so I took it out of the container. Great root system. They weren't too compacted around the side. It was a matrix of roots all through the soil and everything. And I looked at the soil, and it was like a soil I hadn't seen in a long time. And I was like, oh, my God. I'm going to die. I'm going to die. I'm going to die. I'm going to die. I'm going to die. I haven't seen in years. And I said, how long has this thing been potted? He goes, I don't know, probably about 35 years ago. Wow. And it was fantastic. Wow. So, you know, that's, I've not seen another one quite that extreme, but. Yeah, interesting. And would you ever gravitate towards 100% Akadama? You know, I listened to your live stream about boxwoods not too long ago, and it was like, why not? Yeah. I've tried. I've had. Yeah. So, yeah, I've already done it. Oh, good. It would be interesting to see how it goes. The answer is yes. Yeah, cool. Cool. And then, because I'm just, like, fielding questions as I'm, as I'm, as the chat is going, and I know you're going to, you're getting to a lot of this, but when you, when you see boxwood, and I've had this experience as well, Southern California stands out as having a high water pH and a high mineral content, and their water, and boxwoods in Southern California do tend to be more, more yellow and, and look a little more stressed. This tree, super deep, dark green, coming out of, you know, the Northeastern United States. What do boxwood like for water quality, pH, or fertilizer? And how would you rectify a boxwood? I know it's obviously challenging to say a yellowing boxwood, this is how you fix it, but, you know, what do they like and how do you fix some of the commonality? Yeah. What are some of the common issues with boxwood? Well, usually when I see a yellowing in boxwoods, I'm, I'm looking at one thing, it's always kind of from the roots up, you know, I'm looking at the roots, what caused that? And a lot of times it is the water quality, and, you know, when, when these trees, plants like to be in the ground and they're, they're growing nicely, they're in a, pretty much an acid soil, and so, you know, it's, it's 6.5 to 6.8, it's their perfect zone. Yeah. And in Atlanta, just our city water can be 8 to 11 to 12, depends on the day. Oh, wow. And so it's very alkaline, and so that's what a lot of people are dealing with, so when you're dealing with that, then, then you need to adjust, and there are ways to do it, but one of the things that boxwood get is a mineral deficiency and need a little bit more magnesium. Ah. And you start seeing little yellow raised area around the outside of the leaf. I don't really see any on this one, but you, it's very common, and so one of the things is magnesium sulfate, epsom salts, so we pretty much, that's something we just go ahead and prophylactically do, every month or so, we, we sprinkle some on. And that's with your very basic water that you have, so do you think the alkalinity is causing the magnesium deficiency? I'm not really sure, but all I know is if you overdo the magnesium, it doesn't burn, it's not a salt. It, it actually just turns. Your soil more acid. Uh-huh. So the benefits are there, but, you know, that's the only thing I've been able to, to really discern about it is it does work. Now, as far as, these guys love organic fertilizer. I mean, they're, they're the poster child for using organic fertilizers. They, their leaves don't blow up as much, and so the, the old nursery fertilizer of choice was, cotton seed and neom. And they love that, and I think probably the acid content of that. Yeah. Yeah, it's interesting that you talk about the epsom salt, because you're talking about magnesium sulfate, and sulfur is, uh, also, uh, an element that will drop the pH. So if you're dealing with very alkaline or poor water quality, that little treatment of epsom salts, that gives it the magnesium, which it sounds like boxwood has a predilection to be deficient in, in alkaline soils, as well as the addition of carbon dioxide. of the sulfur which would drop the the acidity or would reduce the alkalinity making the magnesium nitrogen and iron more available that all that all makes a lot of sense to me that makes a lot a lot of sense to me the other thing with fertilizer that i see a lot of people making the mistake on is is really over fertilizing with a boxwood they just don't need a lot to um to eat and so we we fertilize we try to fertilize twice a year and we're doing it with a very mild dose we're not doing weak fertilizer but we're doing with a mild dose and so um you know something with not a lot of nitrogen and and so it's just slow and steady for you yeah and uh what about winter tolerance boxwood are they tolerant to significantly cold conditions when you put them in a container does that change um it changes a little bit uh you put them in the ground um it's always because of the root temperature it's always better the coldest at in atlanta that i've had boxwoods and they were the old one that i have was sitting on the ground had sawdust up to about right in here and maybe a little bit higher if this was it and everything below was fine everything above it cracked and blew up now it was 75 degrees was the coldest it all the way up until christmas eve and it went down to 12 below zero overnight oh and it just blew up a lot of stuff yeah so you know they i see them all over i know that um um some of some of the people i've talked to like up in upstate new york and everything they can't grow boxwoods even in the ground but i mean obviously in maryland there's a big group of these around the white house so washington dc they're in the ground without any trouble at all i've seen them up in cincinnati and graveyards and rose gardens and stuff so they make a great border they henry holman grew them for sort of the english knot garden which was very popular in his day he was kind of known for um boxwoods so he bought a lot of them in boxwoods and japanese maples so you can see i'm kind of working around this very slowly i'll come back in and edit this up what generally i do is is bring the tree back into a certain zone where i've got it as far back as i want then i'm going to edit and create rather than pads i'm creating areas like this to where the negative space becomes really important when it fills back in then i'm going to go in and keep those little negative areas focused so you can see through it the air can go through and the light can get through rodney will you do me a favor will you spin it to the untouched back corner there so that that back corner yes and keep going and just just face that to you the unworked corner here because there's a lot of quite yeah there's a lot of questions about hey approaching a tree like this with this kind of like lack of definition where does rodney begin how do you even crack into this tree what's a what's a basic way that we can access design when we're faced with a giant mound like this yeah it's a good it's a good point um good question so generally what i'm going to do is is i just kind of crack it open and start looking at the inside and so i'm looking at it i'm seeing how the branches are growing and i start editing ones out that are weak or going out of where i want to see the zone is not where i want to see so an example is this i'm going to say right here this branch in here it's a weak branch it's not taking up a lot of space i will say this there might be a small branch that's weak in the center of the tree i'm always going to follow it up to the top and see what happens at the top because it could be might be small might be thin but it could be a very large section of the top of this tree so check it out first you know check it out then cut so i'm going in i'm cutting this branch right there you can see that started opening it up just that one cut then i'm starting to see the negative area so i've worked this one spot now i'm going to come in and start just opening it up and cutting it back i'm going to take it back as far as i can within the silhouette that i think i'm going to go i can always go back in there it's hard to adjust and come back out of course but i'm going to kind of get it to where you can see it you ever uh so you're talking about just a general um you're talking about just a a general sort of slow application organic fertilizer periodically over the course of the growing season you ever for your feed you add a little bit of epson salt which is magnesium sulfate periodically because you're dealing with very alkaline high ph high mineral content hard water to compensate for boxwood's predisposition to be magnesium deficient but if you were dealing with neutral water and you were just feeding with organic fertilizer you feel like that would be enough or would you still think boxwood would be magnesium deficient you know i don't know but i'm going to say that the magnesium being that it's not a salt that's just a supplement it's not going to do any harm the plant's going to take in what it really needs if it doesn't need it it's going to slough it off it's going to turn the soil acid which you know i don't think it'll turn it to acid we've got three water sources for our bonsai we've got the county city water we have our well and we also have a lake the lake is perfect it's it's nicely acid the well water is pretty close but um the you know the basically the city water is is just off the charts not helpful but the masacuni nozzles don't get clogged up with all the debris yeah right right right right yeah that makes sense so so um coming back to the kelp or any thing like that in addition to just a a basic balance then honestly cottonseed meal is high nitrogen low phosphorus low potassium yeah so you're basically just saying for kingsville's with the foyer production that they pursue the biggest setback is over fertilization and people over fertilizing them but just just a sort of moderate application of of a higher nitrogen lower phosphorus lower potassium you find that to be what they prefer the most well i don't know if you can tell us about that um well in general we're we're we're in a state where we're um we're not um we're not adding um things to it but we're we're just not over fertilizing with a lot of fertilizer every month and stuff like that we're going to fertilize um generally i let them have the first flush in the spring then i'll fertilize so in atlanta it's going to be may and then that kicks in gives them the summer growing period and and then they slow down for the summer dormancy my favorite time to fertilize them because that gives them really nice a lot of energy to go through the winter then put all those buds i'm talking about so would you be fertilizing in the fall and then following up in the late fall with a pruning like this as a refinement pruning and that you have the energy in the tree but then you just distribute it in the fall and you get a much more even push out next spring and that is kind of your major strategy yeah that's beautiful for refinement specifically that's a really beautiful piece of knowledge that you're dropping on us are they so i i just checked it out boxwood in general just as a as a broad generalization of boxes usda zones five to eight obviously in a containerized environment there's going to be more sensitivities depending on the soil mass also you talked about the rapid temperature change that caused your boxwood to fail from 75 to negative 12. no secret there that would be stressful but yeah it was for me too yeah oh i can't imagine yeah but but winter bronzing and whatnot anything to be concerned about if boxwoods i've seen them turn yellow i've seen them turn orange brown etc and they come right back out of it in the spring is that just standard course yeah you know everyone doesn't do it and they don't do it every year i'm not really sure it's scary the first time it happens to your trees but it does come out the leaves that are orange don't fall off we see mostly orange ones they don't fall off they just it's amazing and it's early in the spring spring or late winter that they all sudden they start greening back up i don't have an explanation for it but it's like one of those miracles that's you get comfortable with in the end but first time it's pretty scary yeah interesting i don't know of another tree that does it quite so radically as the boxwood and there for a while you know we're we're taking sports from sports from sports a lot of times with these cuttings and the ones that have the larger leaves and are a little bit further away from the original look of the kingsville is they turn the orangest of any of them which ones do the ones with the larger leaves like this gotcha and they show that winter bronzing more the little tiny leaf one stays dark green most of the year yeah and so we'll get sometimes tip you know if they get a hard freeze they'll get a hard freeze on them before you know they really calm down and get into winter hibernation they'll bronze then but not much and um do you think how well let me just ask how do you think the humidity of atlanta might change the way that you handle boxwood compared to and you work all over the country on boxwood and client trees all over the country students all over the country does does the timing techniques and considerations change and drier regions versus more humid regions i'm sure they do i mean i'd i'd generally work in more humid areas than out in the desert and everything like that and and i i've i've seen a lot of people with you know you go keithville's and boxwoods are are good deep into florida but not all the way past him florida's got a lot of zones but you can get out of their comfort zone and so um they're one of the plants just changing the subject slightly that um my mom lives on the on the water in florida so she gets a lot of salt um to the breeze and even the hurricanes and stuff of course they're they're pushing salt up into the soil it doesn't seem to bother the kingsville's they might burn a little bit but they don't get bothered by that too much so they can tolerate it yeah and do they tolerate it better than other boxwood species i think all well and y'all the kingsville the microfillarses are from japonica and uh and so those all seem to handle the salt very nicely japonica in general yeah yeah but i i think you know you're low humidity no humidity would be a tough one to get around now it's interesting because i know i know in the mediterranean regions of southern france the boxwoods that's inünüz that that there's a native um variety of boxwood and you see those like uh francois gao or john paul pullman's has a really notable or francois jacquier has some really notable collected french boxwood and those are growing very very close to the coast they're growing in a little bit of a mediterranean region humidity would be higher but they have pretty dry arid summers in that region as well uh but but of course that's not the japonica that's not coming from the japonica the japonica comes from high humidity uh and some of the sort of central southern regions of japan and i and and so it makes sense there's like uh you have some durability to heat you have some durability to cold extremes in either way uh probably compromise boxwood and that become more sensitive in a containerized environment but that salt tolerance is an interesting one humidity tolerance is an interesting one there but there probably is a threshold there's somebody on the chat uh who's cultivated boxwood and there's a lot of boxwood grown in landscapes on the front range in colorado uh-huh and you have a pretty low relative humidity but they're being grown in landscapes where i'm assuming they're having to be irrigated and hydrated and having that relative humidity from sprinkler systems as well so there's you know i think for everybody that's trying to grab on to what are the you know what are the constraints of boxwood etc it's a loose it's a loose constraint in a containerized environment where we have the ability to manipulate the micro climate but but they are a moderate they are a moderate tree in terms of their behavior it sounds like right right and again you know where where they're growing is in a duff layer so it's moist it's it's cool and moist generally because their foliage is shading it and a lot of air but it's moist interesting i wonder if in more arid conditions or in uh in warmer conditions with a boxwood by providing shade to the container that's a that's a you're making a very strong point there it's almost like it's almost like larch in a bonsai container if if you keep the container shaded they're very tolerant of warmer conditions and you know maybe color the container might be a you know in the atlanta area one of my favorite colors is almost a dark black green because the the combination of the foliage and the pot makes it a little bit darker and it's a little bit darker and it's a little bit darker makes the trunk even jump more but you know it still heats up a good bit that color so yeah yeah and and would you ever would you ever consider boxwood to be so strong that you could dig a tree out of the ground and do this kind of work or is that is that assuming too much of the boxwood in terms of being too aggressive um it's a plant you'd be very aggressive with i think just like with anything if you take a boxwood out of the ground that's really healthy you can do a lot to it and so when when you're taking them out of the ground they're very healthy the story energy is out the wazi so you can do a lot with it we'll we'll go ahead and with the boxwoods of course they grow in that duff layer so the whole bottom part of the tree is a generally a six inch deep band of just the fibrous roots you can pretty much take a shovel go around the outside and use the tree itself and push it over and just maybe a few roots that go past out of that zone so it makes a very very easy tree to go ahead and put into a bonsai application we generally go into a box or a deeper container we bought a lot of mica so we use mica for that and so it works fantastic but we're we go ahead that first time that we're pulling it out of the the ground we're going to go ahead and clean all the way up to the bottom of the trunk on the inside so we've got it to where we never have to go back in and then re-investigate the root system where you're cutting big roots cutting them further back cutting them further back they're full of energy we go ahead and really um cut them all the way back to where we've got them to where we can put them in a bonsai pot that's shallow makes the trunk look larger and everything in terms of the depth now now would you would you wash the roots would you actually wash all the you know generally you try to not bear root we we try not to bear root and and generally with the boxwoods i call it a plate they they get a hard surface you've got the bottom worked you're the biggest deal with finding the roots is really calming it out being very careful they scratch easy so you don't want to use a root hook or anything but you kind of you can wash that part off get it down we'll spend as much time cleaning the surface as anything because that's where the tree is that's going to tell you everything art-wise so we'll we'll clean that up very nicely but we'll get that root system really apply so that you know it's a little shallow find the top and work that and then the sides we're going to bring in and generally after that if the tree stays healthy we do not have to go back into that plate area and so it's it's something we never really wash we generally are bare root because the root mass is so thick at that point it's just a fibrous mass and when you put it into a good soil it jumps so you know i don't know if i'd answer your question totally but you know i would be happy to answer your question if you'd like to where the fruit are where the root are where the boiled sugar is where the sugar runs where what it's going to be where the fruit are and then there's where the the thickest a lot of fun and it takes about four hours to get all the nutrients and I don't know if I'd answer your question totally but when we pull these out of the ground you can you can easily do the whole thing and get them into a bonsai pot but it generally should be a deeper pot so it you catch it back up but you could you could do the get it into pot culture the first year after the first time you've done it and you could prune it back and the balance would would be there if it's healthy because it's got so much strength coming out of the ground yeah this makes sense it makes a lot of sense but if it's weak no yeah yeah so it's almost like treating them you know when you do a broadleaf deciduous and you pull pull those out of the ground in the spring and you cut the heavy roots back and you do all the root work and you can cut the branching back at the same time that that stored energy that moment coming out of that situation is kind of where you have maximum access what what will you do with the aerial root the big aerial root on this tree this has been a big question in the chat over the course of the stream what's going to happen with that how do you handle that if you're going to remove it how would you remove it what's the skinny okay you want to go ahead and remove it no i i just want you to see i'm not saying to do it i'm saying this is what people are asking oh i'm jumping all over doing it it's hard for me not to do it when i was cleaning the tree oh really yeah because you you look at this um say you know i've been i've been kind of i'll go ahead and get right to the chase because that will help with what i'm about to say is is so far spinning the tree around and looking at it today where this rock is this area would be my go-to spot right now for a front of the tree and it's not i'm not saying that that's where i'm going to go in the end but that's the part that i like the branch structure and more importantly i like the way the roots work together giving you that spread you see the sort of the live tissue coming up you got swelling different ones so it gives you some trunk coming up there's actually just um different grades and and each branch you can see where it's going down but there's movement there even in the trunk a little twist and everything this kind of breaks that up and so it hides what's behind it so i mean i was dying to take it off you know i'm glad everybody wants to see it see it done but first thing I'm going to do is come in here probably not it's pretty hard wood and once boxwood lignifies it's very hard and so in Germany and places like that they use the wood itself for carving so it's very strong wood I've experimented because the live oaks have the propensity to have some dead wood on them that lasts for a long time for you know a broadleaf tree and so you know I'm always experimenting and this was one that you could also decide if you're going to cut the system off and maybe show a little spur of a dead root that's one approach to this. I mean would any and boxwood wood would last for a fairly significant period of time? Yeah long enough that you know it's not going to be like deciduous it is going to rot and so the deal is I don't I'm not going to lime sulfur it so I'm not getting that just a fungicide and I don't want the the wood to get light like the trunk and so to stand out you know I'm going to let it age naturally but if I was going to seal it quickly and make it look better I'm going to use a good bit of India ink into the lime sulfur so it darkens the wood makes it so you get the contrast. Yep and so removing a root like this if you had a bunch of them would you remove them at this time of year or is this uh is this because you're doing one it's safe to do like how do you? Well another good question um it's very safe because this root's up high and it's got the root below it that's really doing the work also so it's a high root you get around to some of these other ones like for instance this one yeah I would love not to have that space in there there are ways to um let the tree fill that in and you know one of the things that I would love to do is I would love to have that space in there one is raising the soil the other one if you want it high like this is um where this is the grade of it then we'll fill that up with some kind of muck and moss that so it looks good you don't see the the um your eye doesn't go through it but the tree itself will throw roots up into that and actually fill it up and that will form uh what looks like wood so it's um it doesn't take that long. This is going to be the one to get the close-up on if I do my job you're in there is this he's going to break he's going to he's going to break the break the living daylights out of this so it's not breaking too easily so I'm going to come in and cut the odds down I'm shortening this I can get my hands in there I'm going to rip up I think that's going to be the better look than going down and messing with the root system. So I'm going to come in here snip a little bit at the bottom nice I see what you're doing just kind of weakening that bottom point of attachment to give yourself an entry point right and I'm hoping that's what you're doing. Oh it wants to go. It does. It wants to go. That's close. Can I use the tool now? Yeah you're free to crank on it. I don't want to do that. I'm just going to keep going. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. do it all the time didn't really do what I wanted so what I would do at home right now is go ahead and cut it off and then carve it and go up a little bit I'm still going to try to do it there you go nice so after it dries a little bit I'll there you go nice so after it dries a little bit I'll enlarge it just a bit. It's easier if I do it now it seems like it I don't get as much of a tear. Because it's so wet? Yeah. Those these also have been sitting outside in the rain for you know three weeks so pretty hydrated. I'm trying to take this little protrusion off. So that's that's sort of the way it looks now without the root being there. You can kind of see now. The monumental difference. Huge in there this movement that comes up and again this this guy here is a problem that I would deal with and there's another bit of of perch here where the water or air light can go through and I'd like to seal that up just pushing a little muck in there even some fines of the Akadama would do it and so this area here if you're looking at the front you get this little bit of a 90 a little bit of an elbow there and so I'm going to work on that too and the way I would do it is basically take a grafting knife and just slightly cut this this outside. Bit down and then I would go on the inside and scar that a little bit that scar tissue will bring that out and this will go and that makes that flow just a little bit better then again filling it up I just trying to get rid of that 90. Interesting sculpting the roots. Well yeah yeah I mean there the other way to do it is raise the root level and these roots so easy you could do little scars little just indentations in it and you'll get roots at that spot so we'll take a chisel and kind of I call it lips but we go from the side so it interrupts a lot more just a little almost a like a rice shaped piece and so it you know you've got water going up starches and sugars coming down and it hits that spot and you get more roots in that one spot like an air layer or something these roots so easily air layer so easily. Even a piece like this in here will root in fact I've rooted a piece this size actually Charlie my wife rooted a piece this size really yeah and so she she did a lot with some of the cuttings I had to stop her because we started getting too many but a piece like this if I was going to take this we could cut it almost like a long piece of firewood lay it over into a pot and it will actually root and then you'll have tons and tons of little trees sprouting out of it so you get like a little forest that one would not be a good one because it doesn't have good movement but you you get a branch that's got a little bit of undulation in it and it makes a great sort of a raft style with a little movement on the top I don't like ones that are just flat and straight the other thing I would like to see done this branch bothers me right here and it it stops your eye from going up and seeing all this so it's a softer tree with this but I would personally take that off and this obviously is going to be harder to rip so but I don't want to really see how well it's going to do and you feel you feel like you you feel like you've got the front dialed in to where that's your you're pretty bold on that well I've looked at it all day long yeah yeah you're based no doubt about it so you know it's it's the tree's got good movement you've got this root system you know it's a combination with boxwoods you're not going to change a lot very quickly but um I'm looking at first off I want to see what the best possible spread of the roots are I want to see how the trunk works for those so this one's got that little bit of a love twist and trunks so it's got that very nicely with the roots and then you get up you've climbed the tree you get up into where the branches are and they've got to work and so that that's sort of the progression that I I go to it might be you know that the branches really don't work at all from that and you have to go to another one that maybe the trunk is not maybe the roots are not as good but the branches and all work you're not going to cut big ones if I cut for instance if I don't like a branch that's not good enough like this size for instance and I make this cut that scar is going to come down probably kill this root and so you would have a almost a um it's it's not you're going to not be able to control the depth of that side right you rock out man don't let me I I haven't been looking at this tree all day and in fact I don't even know what you're proposing but you do what you need to do on this tree oh I will okay yeah you told me I could I told you 10 feet between them I told I told you you could wow you need a bigger one of these I I felt like those were pretty big you know yeah finally just get it started not really working for me today but there was um a big old one that was in front of the old family house and the house burned it was hard of pine in Florida and it burned and really scorched everything around it and that tree got burned on on half the the side and uh that was in 1945 and the gins and charries that are on it are phenomenal and they're still there from that fire so I always try to kind of show those kind of looks of things and I think it was that the only solution was $1 a month when I was taking care of my family and I remember all these guys all hanging out about getting on the train and all that stuff and then we were either going to the restaurant or I don't know they were all waiting on the bus so I was like wow this is like a good thing for kids you got to go out there it's a good thing for kids you're a good kid you got to go out there and all this stuff was there you get to kind of see the environment because it's like it's not really a big country just like I don't want you to know what you're doing that's not really a big thing but no I was like okay I'm gonna get the money and I'm going to go up and So, I'm going to work on that for a little bit longer, but I mainly wanted to go ahead and show what took place by opening that up. See, it maybe has worked my front a little different where that front is now. Did it change? I don't know. I don't know. I see where you're trying to create a visible spot that you're guiding people to, right? Yeah, so it could be over here now, but I still like it from the initial spot, which is good, but I did not like that branch which came out. It was a little bit straighter, stronger, and now you see because it's not there, we'll probably reduce that a good bit. I took one back earlier and kind of left it. I get one to crack right. Oh, yeah. Come to mama. That's more what I'm talking about there where that branch that was there, you can see how it got torn off without looking at me do it, and it looks just like that came off, and when that heals, and it will heal, it's still going to be around this outside edge. That center part with all that breaking will be there for years and years and years. See that? Again, what I'm wanting to see is all this undulation through there, and so when I get it to this stage, this part is just opened up. I'm still going to go back in and leaf prune this to the point where I'm probably going to be taking off a fourth to a third of the leaves that are left on this. And when you say leaf proof, cutting back the strong back to the same density quantity of leaves as the weak, essentially. Yeah. And I might even get into an area like this and just start, you know, this one that needs to come off, but I might get into an area and just start coming in and picking leaves off, you know, so you can really adjust a lot of the look just by taking leaves off, taking the big leaves off, taking the underside off, but, you know, I'll pick. To show one of these guys, there's... days of picking leaves and stuff, and so good pair of scissors, you can go in and cut one leaf at a time. But I'm going to open it up, each little space going through. I don't like creating clouds or pads in these. I want to kind of keep it really open. Also, I don't know if you can show this or not, looking up when there's sun on the top and you've got it pruned nicely on the top, then you should... should be able to see the dappled light going up through the tree. That's a beautiful look. Insects. Nobody's asking about insects? There's been a lot of questions about insects and we've kind of been waiting for that. Leaf miners, other things, how do you manage and control insects on... boxwood? What are you... deal with give me the skinny okay the skinny is really it's one of the the best things I don't know if I'm if you think like a bug and you try to chew on one of these leaves they taste like crap so you know that it's not something that really a lot of bugs like we are looking for different types of mites we're looking for some leaf miner thrips and even scale but I don't see very if the tree is healthy we don't see any of it and so the main thing is to keep your tree healthy I don't think you'll have to worry about that they usually come to plants that are stressed and with boxwoods they're generally not stressed too much and they do there's a taste to them deer will only eat the leaves that are healthy and we don't see that in the wild they only eat them when they are really hungry they're starving they will eat them oh if your boxwood does have leaf miners how would you go about resolving that issue yeah that's a tough one they're hard to catch with tweezers you know we're gonna we'll try different ways you know we we're in a nursery situation where we are and so we can't treat the same way a lot of people could go about it but I'm gonna wholesale spray the first thing I'm gonna use probably as towel star to do it but there are there are many other contact sprays to get it the issue really is how good you are at spraying because it's a very hard plant to really spray and so are you gonna spray or you're gonna mist well when you miss you're getting a lot of bad air. better coverage it throws it in there he goes all through the plant but it also gets all over you when you missed and so you gotta wear hazmat suit just about so it's a lot easier to really do it from the inside out so systemic serve the easier way to do it and that's what we're kind of been going to and you know there's there are good ones and there's not so good ones and most of them are not so good but essentially you can knock down leaf miners or anything in the plant dealing with systemic like an imidacloprid or something like that yeah you can knock down insects on the exterior with tau star or a contact you can knock down mites with a miticide but what you're ultimately saying is hey listen get the tree healthy yeah get the tree healthy and you shouldn't have those insect related issues in it and and honestly it sounds to me like part of the health is is is doing this type of pruning opening them up allowing air and light circulation getting the roots healthy continuing to work on continuing to work on the on the roots and this kind of brings me to something that's been hovering in the chat which is boxwood blight and and I'm surprised it took this long no no it was one of the first questions and I've just been waiting until the time when was right to talk about boxwood blight are Kingsville susceptible what is boxwood Blight is there any cure Hope treatment Etc um I'll start with the back end of that question um boxwood Blight it was a scary thing you know it's it's sort of um it's scary for anybody that's a boxwood lover and so we we thought a lot about it we tried different things um when I traveled with you know it's my life if if I lost it or you know got it injured I would it kill me and so um to to take it someplace we're going through an environment especially it's like one of those things you don't know actually what's causing it it's a you know it's a blight it has a sticky spore the spore gets spread by contact by tools you have a lot of landscapers pruners some of the original culprits that were blamed were wild turkeys carrying it around so usually gets into a garden and um will annihilate this tree very serious there's no known cure that I know of I'm kind of always asking always looking but no there's not um the microfilas the Asian boxwoods are the most resistant of any of them um the the I've heard the Harland box or the Harland eye is totally resistant I have not seen boxwood blight on any microfil at all I've not seen it not saying it isn't there but I've not seen it and I've I've looked you know I've looked at a lot of them so if there's any any any any question about whether you have one that you're worried about the blight on that you think I mean you look at it's like having a bad cold or something when you look up the symptoms you have them all every day in a sense you know you you get the scorched leaves you get any of this problem you're going to immediately go to the boxwood blight is the culprit but send send some leaves off to one of the extension people let them really look at it with a microscope and that's how you're going to get the definitive on whether you got it or not but I've seen it on the what we're seeing it on in our area is the um European and the American boxwood yeah so I've not seen it on any of these yet not saying it doesn't happen I've just not seen it yeah is there uh is there any so no known cure though is what you're saying nah I don't know of one yeah I'm general recommendation is destroy the material yeah burn baby burn quarantine it until you confirm yeah the extension agent and then if it is if it is boxwood blight in fact we sent off samples of one of the boxwoods that we were originally talking to you about and you said boy that looks a little suspect and we sent it off and when we told Oregon State Extension that we suspected it might be boxwood blight they were very very serious about it like very serious about it and they put it through multiple tests they asked us to quarantine the tree while they tested it was a real it was left it it was a real it was a real situation it it came back it was just a completely not Options benign but it was the pathogen that was a product of the canopy bing too dense in the Pacific northwest wet weather and just by opening that tree up and poem ing it properly and getting it into good so it completely rectified the issue yeah and now get it healthy adyck Hoyt Yeah not the killer one. It's pretty quickly how they'll take, how fast they'll take them out. Yeah. But what we do when we're moving around, this was something that a nurseryman told me is basically using Xerothal 2 because it's an oxidant. You can spray it every couple hours if you wanted to. It's not going to hurt the tree, but it does destroy the spore. You know, you can't, once it gets it into the tree, it's not leaving, but you can kill it and knock down the spore. With Xerothal, which is basically a super high concentration hydrogen peroxide, more or less. Yeah. And you talked about another dwarf boxwood variety that you said you thought was totally resistant, or at least it's purported as totally distant. What was that variety? Well, it's not necessarily a dwarf, but they have several of them. But it's a harlandi. Harlandi. Yeah. And it's from Asia. I think a lot of them originally came or you know were from Taiwan or that area anyway. And do you handle them? Now that's not politically correct to say that now, but still, but that's where they were coming from and we've got a few of them that, now you see some that are very dwarf. They have little bit larger leaves than these. They're Corky trunks, that's the draw of them, Corky trunks. Not quite as winter hardy, so you almost have to protect them inside if you're in a colder area. But we've got some that are, when I collected them from a nursery, they were about eight feet tall and about eight to 12 feet wide. And so big trunks, and it was fun to collect them, still have really not done anything with them. Yeah, yeah. So do they, I'm sorry, did they call that the Taiwanese boxwood then, Harlandi? Yeah, that's one. Yeah, so they are less winter hardy and more of a tropical, would you say? Semi, maybe. Semi-tropical. We've had this discussion on Mariah a lot about the Taiwanese boxwood. The thing is, obviously in the ground in Atlanta, we can get cold, we're a thousand feet, they're fine in the ground. It's in pot culture, I think, that you have to really protect them. Yeah. Would you mind speaking to the differences between the Harlandi boxwood and Kingsville? Oh, that's what we were just talking about, the Harland boxwood having the corkier bark, but being less winter tolerant. Yeah. Oh. Yeah. The bark doesn't really cause that, but in our area, the one thing about the corkiness I don't like on the box, for one thing, it doesn't really cause that, it gives you scale. How far can the tree be away from you and be that corky? And then you see it. But gosh, in our area with the humidity and everything, the moss and the debris, like with this, you can clean it, you can scrub it off and everything, but with the Harland boxwood, you get moss in there growing and stuff, and it is hard. It's like a pine tree. You start getting moss on a pine tree, and getting it off is just not easy without doing some damage. Now, do you prune them the same way? Do you handle them the same way? Do they show you the same behavior? No, they really don't. They're more of an upright grower. You can kind of, I'm not gonna prune them to look like a live oak. I've not really gotten real comfortable with them in the sense where, it's not like I hate to sound prejudiced, but I like this look better than the Harland that I found. I mean, that's why I've got these big ones. They got great trunks and everything. Still haven't, I'd rather work on something else rather than those. So it doesn't float my boat is all I can say. So Ronnie, there's kind of a discussion then, because we're not gonna get to see you necessarily realize the finished form of this tonight. Now, maybe over the next few days, as you chip away at this, we might be able to see a form that would be representative of what you were aspiring to, create, but for everybody watching. That's why I tried to kind of do the side that people could really see. Yeah. How do you handle the crown though? Are you gonna leave it as one big dome? Are you gonna try to create elevation differences? Is it, does it move asymmetrically in one direction or another? Or do you feel like the current layout of the branching is as you want it? Like what goes through your head from that perspective? Great question. That is a great question. Okay, when you look at these trees in nature and we're looking at the live oak, you look at other trees too, with this kind of shape and everything. I call it a complex apex system. And so you'll have this system and it's not developed yet by the pruning that I've done so far. This, I spent a lot of time just cleaning this up today. It was frustrating how long it was taking me. But you know, I felt like I had to do it. But there, each one of these areas, when you go up with a branch like this wide here, this should be in a way an independent apex. And it could be a little higher, but there could be a little separation. From the distance you look at it and it's a overall silhouette that works together, little indentations here and there. But when you look at it up close, it really should come down to being a little bit of its own apex. And so over here, with this branch, it's a little higher. This branch coming out, it gave itself that feeling to where it's already starting to develop this little apex over here. And so each one of these, you've got this apex, you'll have this apex, and there's a couple in the back. And so over time, those should be developed. And I'll prune to next few days. I'm not gonna let this go, you know that. And so I'm gonna keep pruning and I'll get it to where it's pretty close to showing that. But as it grows, you're editing, you're editing. This is just the initial, this is a great tree and it's gonna look really good right from the start. But you know, of course, 10 years from now, it's gonna look off the charts better. So all the editing just adds up. Well, we'll put a, what we'll do is when, you know, as far as you can get it over the next three days, we'll put the finished, whatever you finish as and feel good about, we'll put the finished. We'll put that on the end of this in the library so that people can see the finished product of it. Cause I think it's gonna be paramount for people to see your final vision of it. Yes, it's, and you know, it's like, you get into a situation like this, it's a lot more, well, I get a lot more done by talking about it and explaining what I'm gonna be doing because the detail that needs to go in this shouldn't be just cut as fast as you can. I could, you know, I've done it that way, where I just take the pruners and I can pretty much just prune to shape, but I'm cutting leaves in half. I'm cutting some branches that maybe I wouldn't have wanted to, but it is hedge cutting it. So this, I would rather go in slowly and do it. And if you, well, let me ask you, is there such a thing as over pruning boxwood? Could you completely defoliate this thing, cut it all back to bare wood and have it grow? That's a tough question to answer truthfully. You could, we all, you could, right? You could cut a boxwood. That's not something you wanna do. Well, one time you gotta watch what you ask for. One time we had a lot that, maybe not this thick, but they were this size and I, it was like, people, they intimidated people. So in my mind, one day I said, well, I wonder what would happen if I just cut all those boxwoods back. A couple of weeks later, a tree from across the lake fell, went across a bunch of bonsai pots and the top of it slapped all those Kingsvilles. And so right there was the start to cutting them way back. And so now I've got some very fat trunk Kingsvilles that are much more compact and it worked fine. They've got so many buds on them all up and down here. You can, you can cut them way back. I would not recommend cutting past the foliage for somebody that is not prepared to give them the correct aftercare. If the tree's in any way not healthy, that's just a really tough thing to do. Will it work? It more than likely would. But I would not recommend doing that because what if it doesn't? And you're tired. So you're talking about broadleaf evergreen, having the capacity like a broadleaf to, to be cut back to bare wood and bud, but you also have, I would think a consideration, especially in the dwarf cultivars of boxes or boxwood, how long it's going to take that bud to turn into an actual branch again and start to give you ramification and something that's going to be workable. And it's, it's like, you just cut off everything to now have 30 years to grow out secondary tertiaries again. That's your, that's your answer right there. If you could say you say it will pop and it will more than likely, and you could let all these pops come out, then cut back to those. And it's almost a sure thing at that point, but you cut back to this and you're, and you're losing, you're losing the length of course, but you're losing all the, the length of the tree now. So, you know, it's, it's, you know, if you have to go back and do the slow twigging, the taper going into this, it's going to have to regrow that. And it, it, it takes a while. Yeah. And so it, it takes a little bit, not a little bit. It takes the elegance out of the tree. Yeah, it makes it a chunky thing. These trees are, you have to almost prune them to be delicate. They're thick, they're robust. And so you, when you prune it, open it up correctly, and come through but you make it chunky thick and um it just looks like it's stiff and it's always going to be there because it is stiff what kind of pot now do you do well let me see do you see any angle changes or do you like it being presented as it is and then a container you have any ideas keep putting my tool back up um you know with the boxwoods especially i very seldom change the angle of the root system i do sometimes but um it mainly the the angle that first look of the roots how they work how the trunk works is is what i'm doing by spinning it if if i'm going to alter it a little bit it's it's just to adjust by the roots now a lot of times we'll take them out of pot culture before we put them into bonsai pots pots and so we're cleaning all that stuff soil that's collected it always builds up on top we're cleaning we're finding the root system and it could have been planted funny or whatever the root system might be up more like this then we will change it that'll give a sometimes real dramatic look to the the trunk itself and the top and everything when when you're going to back up to what you're saying about the canopy that's in the apex you can put a lot of force and a lot of directional movement in to these trees by just say if I wanted to we're looking at it I wanted the eye to come this way just have this one larger than the rest and it's going to take the eye out that way so you can do a lot of directional pruning or by using the apex to do that what kind of pot would you put this in well that you know that's a great question that's so subjective it's incredible you know it's like my wife and I Charlie we have a game and we'll pick out for a good tree we're gonna pick out our favorite pot for the tree and sometimes we pick the same pot and fight over this we don't fight over it but that's a sure sign that we both agree and and it's gonna be a good she's very good at it so but we're gonna hold a tree this good we're gonna not really assume that we know that the pot that's gonna work the best so we if we try one on it doesn't work good we're gonna go to another one but I mean the simple pot for this and it's so simple that that I try to push it to a different pot all the time would would be a just an oval you know just a shallow oval you know you could go as thick as this you could go a little thinner you could go a little thinner you could go a little deeper you could go deeper make it easier for yourself we've put shapes like this not quite this big but on stone or like a stone like container so you've got a flat area and looks like more it's in a field someplace the moss coming off of it on a stone works fantastic my old big one's in an elongated rectangle with rounded corners a real burnished almost red color to it the tree jumps out of it's a great container for it so you know sometimes you just you just got to go I'm not the kind of person the way my mind works and everything I don't plan things out to where I'm always knowing the exact container I'm going to put something like this into I want to kind of play with it a little bit I want to make sure the the tree and the container sing together but an easy one would be sort of a an oval shape it could be rounded rectangle and then you get into what what color what what's it going to be and and you know again I want to sometimes we'll put them in a light color cream color even white container and it the container make goes up and makes the trunk really look larger and everything then the foliage really jumps and then if we go with a darker container the the dark black green is what I call it kind of matches the foliage so that all the structure in here just really jumps so that looks good so interesting that's really I've never heard anybody describe it like that so it just and what what I want to see with this is really not the foliage although of course you want to see that it's alive and everything but what what's so unique about these guys is all this movement that you're seeing in here that's that's why it's important to open it up I'm telling you Ryan about that little seven-year-old girl that laid down on the ground and it was a Kingsville that she looked up into and it was like man I'm gonna keep doing that so you learn from keep an impression yeah yeah I'll lay down in front of these trees and look up so I can kind of tell what the beauty is you can look at it from the top when you're pruneing it all all you want you get spots that you pretty much got it but you lay up underneath and look through it you can see the spots that are need to be pruned out there as well. added to it a little bit more and so that's that's a fun way to to deal with it do you do you handle uh boxwoods that you would be developing branches on that you would be trying to get more secondary ramification on differently than the way that you're pruning this one because it does sound like the pruning in the late fall is how you get good even distribution of growth next spring but but but for a boxwood in development these ones got that got crushed and all of a sudden you're letting them grow how do you develop a boxwood uh in terms of building branches building secondaries building stuff just let them grow as a bush do you thin the bud like no no you if you let them grow as a bush you're giving them the ability to do what they want and so you get little hot spots clusters you get branches that become more dominant than other ones and so you get a little hot spots clusters you get branches that become more dominant than other ones and so you kind of want mostly an even growth then you decide the art of it where you're putting the negative spaces and all that and so you know opening it up is always good you have one that's been crushed or you've lost part of it it's it's hard to get it to fill back over that spot unless it's popping out from below that takes forever to grow up and become part of the canopy and look natural look like it didn't happen so you can make it show that it actually happened and that's part of the story or you could um go in and work it a little differently but what we'll end up doing is opening it up clean it to where you're getting all this you can see there's algae on this it's it could be whiter and i meant to do that today i got carried over trying to get it pruned but if if i and i'll do it tomorrow to show how white you can get this just by washing that that algae off and dirt and stuff you can get this really really white but you're cleaning it up they're buds i can feel them all up and down this thing so you're cleaning it you're getting sunlight to it you're getting the air to it and then you can cheat a little bit and mix a foliar fertilizer up and fertilize the stems themselves and that will prompt those buds to pop now i'll do that in spring early spring we'll do it but you can do it all through the course of the season you're not going to get a lot of action during the wintertime yeah and then once those buds start to grow do you bud select to prioritize the energy into each bud so it grows faster this this plant it's a constant with these they're going to have you know in this section here there'll be a hundred little buds sprouting they'll they'll be just wads of foliage and so we're we're always cleaning that out there's a point where we might want to you know on the find the one that you see but right here on the outside of a curve or something we white might want to let some of those grow so you have a little incidental serendipity can you point to that where you would want that just so like jesus can get you yes stay right there for us for a second you got that cool right there it kind of give a it break this line up a little bit of a tough and um you can do that but you want to get in there it's going to grow that tough but one i'm going to get a little bit stronger and we'll prune around to where that'll start developing into a branch itself and pretty quickly you can get a small secondary branch out you can't reproduce this but you can get this to where it's looking like a little branch that's real tight but the the other thing that you're working with with a boxwood is over time you prune this and got an old tree to begin with i've had to do it on a lot of really old trees is the outside, you're keeping it somewhat consistent, but you're slowly dealing with older and older leaves. And so even though you're taking them out, there's that area that gets tired. And so about every, I'm gonna say 20 years, you might have to go in there and prune past this outside edge of foliage. And that's when all these little buds and stuff that are constantly being a nuisance really pay off because they're there. You can, you let them grow just a little bit, cut to those within two years, it's grown out to where it looks like nothing's happened, except that your foliage is a robust green. And that's what we're all looking for is that dark black green foliage. So it's almost like reinvigorating an azalea, a Satsuki azalea where they get too woody, not enough water flow. You're saying boxwood will do the same. Oh yeah, yeah. And for me, that's a good comparison with an azalea. Both broadleaf evergreens kind of treat them. Now, azaleas pass the foliage pretty easily all the time, but with boxwoods, we're a little bit more careful. But yes, that's exactly what takes place. And would you wire, and do you wire these Kingsvilles? Like, do you like to wire them? Or do you just, how do you handle wiring boxwood? Yeah, you know, it's however, whatever it takes to get there. Yeah. And so I have no problems wiring boxwoods. They're very, very thin skin. They have, the cameo layer is not very thick. So it takes a little bit of manipulation to wire them. If you are correctly and everything you wired is gonna stay on there for a long time. If you wire it incorrectly, a lot of damage is done when you wire and you're using the branches of fulcrum. When you're wiring a boxwood and you have that thin skin, if you use the branches of fulcrum and you're damaging the cambium there, you can form that scar tissue that looks really obvious on a boxwood, it's that white color that scar just jumps. Same thing with if we're getting one of the real white ones, and this might not be as white as some of them, but you get a real white one and you put copper wire on it, I love copper. This is not a slap on copper at all. Love it. It holds. They can put a much smaller wire on this to work it, but if it's white and you put the copper wire on it, it oxidizes. That stain gets on the plant itself and it takes years to get it to wash off. Yeah, it makes sense. It's amazing. So we do a lot with wire, yes. But we do a lot with just pruning, just clip and grow. We'll cable things. So say you want to pull this around, pull this down, you can cable these together quite nicely. It just makes it brittle. So you hit that piece of copper wire that's holding it together, your chad wire, it easily could break the branch that it's holding. They disappear, and again, they're on there for a long time. It takes a long time. Sometimes it doesn't set the branch, so it's just one of those things when you're showing it, when you want it to look good, you've got it on. It might not tape. We did a lot of experimentation at one point where we were taking a triangle-shaped chisel and coming on the bottom of the branch and cutting a groove out. Then wire. And our theory was that groove would form more scar tissue under the branch and hold it in place more. But it didn't work as well as I wanted to because it was really hard to do. And so we went other ways, of course. But that's the kind of thing you're trying to experiment with these. We have done some with gins and shawrees, and it looks great. But that wood does rot after a while. There's no question about it. So basically, as far as follow-up work, you're going to continue, and you call it leaf pruning, but you're shortening the strong, elongated, fleshy green shoots at the tip, and then you'll be shoot-selecting down the twos. And you're going to do that across this entire tree, and that is a solid, thorough late fall working. Yes. Well, you know. The tree was a very refined tree. For instance, the tree that we showed two years in a row. I spent about two weeks, five hours a day because it gets to you mentally, just doing little bits of nipping here and there. But mostly, it was a leaf selection thing where I was actually cutting back in places to stem where I might cut off two leaves to ten leaves. Yes. But then I'm also cutting a leaf off. And so I'll go in with a thin pair of scissors and go in and take leaves out. And so, you know, you can adjust a lot of the look just by taking leaves out. And, of course, guess what? You take the big ones out, and that really helps the overall look of the tree. So you can equalize the sizes of the leaf, taking the big ones out, making the small ones be the substantial number of leaves, and the tree looks further and further away. So that's what I mean by leaf pruning is really individual leaves. But you know, directional, even with the leaves, you have one coming down, might take that one leaf off. But now that is for show, and I'm not saying I would do that just as fall maintenance. But we're going to edit to pass this point for fall maintenance. So where you get to where the light does get in. So we want those buds popping out all over. And they will pop out all over, and you'll be coming in with, sometimes we'll use a tweezer, sometimes chopsticks, sometimes just the fingers if you catch them at the right time, and rub most of those off, leaving just where we want to see them. What else you got for us, Rodney? You feeling like you gave us the business? Well, you know, there's always more to anything. And so I'll put it this way. This has been a pleasure working on this tree, let me tell you. It's kicked my butt today. So that's been fun. Now I want to see this tree, of course it's perched right now in this soil, you know, the height of this, compared to the container, it's going to look a little bit better with it being back, you know, where it's more like this, obviously. You know? Yeah. Yeah. But it's working great. It's got good drainage. I love wooden boxes. But there's just, you know, it's a great tree, it just needs to be slowly exposed. And again, you know, you can only do so much in a day before it really gets your eyes crossing and stuff like that. And so this tree, in the next couple of days, will go a long way. Can you go ahead and just give us a slow rotation of the tree two or three times so we can take in the full scope? I think it'll help people see the work you've done from different perspectives. It'll show the unworked parts that you're going to be tackling over the next few days. I will. And I'll put it this way too. And I will be turning it and doing that. But what I'm going to do is just visually, I'm going to open up what I consider the front. I'm going to really look at it with fresh eyes tomorrow, but I'm going to open the front up to where I can see in really nicely. The front will be a little tighter also, and the sides will be a little wider, but they'll be open also. The top, especially the front, but the very top, because they're more lateral dominant, I'm going to leave a little bit, but I'm going to really open that up just a little bit more. Then the back, I'm going to leave a lot more on the back to stop the eye. Hmm. When you're looking through this, the back of the tree will have more foliage so that it stops and you see all the twigging and everything. It acts like a screen, like you're taking a photograph of a bonsai and you put a black screen behind it, what that does depth-wise. That's really nice to hear your thoughts on that. And then, yeah, so just give us some turns as I ask you some questions so everybody can see it. There's a lot of discussion about boxwoods flowering. Is there any ornamental value to their flowers on boxwoods? They're so incidental, it's incredible. Most people don't notice it. The fruit itself, it matches the leaf so much. Most people don't notice that. If you want a flowering boxwood, go to the Harlem Dye. They flower with white flowers. It's really showy. They have a lot of fruit. This is going into a different... Mutation right here. And then as far as if you do experiment with the formation of deadwood on boxwood to try and preserve it, especially trunks die on boxwood, especially coming out of big, huge cuts so they're coming out of hedges or something like that and you have dead sections and that, how would you preserve that to the best of your ability? You talked about lime silver mixed with some sumi-i. To take down that bright white to a more realistic gray, but how would you preserve the deadwood knowing that it will eventually rot? Well, okay, I'll tell you what, all I can answer that is with what we've done. And that basically is, here's the fine line to it. What you want the deadwood, and some of the junipers out in your garden work so well. When the deadwood is legitimate deadwood, that's just incredible. You can't carve that, it's all the checking, the splitting, all that flaking as the wood dries and gets hit by the weather conditions and everything. That's what you're wanting on this also. So it's a progression, you're watching it, you're letting it do that. We might barely carve a little bit once we start seeing the grain splitting. We might get that going a little quicker with, but it's very hard. We end up using that little spray gun going in and washing the softwood out, leaving the harder wood. That ends up looking more natural. So we'll do that a lot. But you've got to get it to the checking that you want to see. You've got to give it, got to get it to the color that you want to see it, and then you can seal it. Okay. If it's conservative, that's going to fail too, because the water gets around it, behind it. And so then you end up with almost like you painted it on, and the outside skin is structurally strong. And some of it that's soaked in is, but it's going to rot behind it. So that's temporary. We've really just enjoyed it for the years that it's going to be on there, and then go to the next step, which is when it's not there and you've got more shari and everything, so it's a progression. You have deadwood, say you left a whole branch and it's dead. Well, that died 10 years ago. The shorter it gets, the more checking it gets, the longer it goes back in history. But sooner or later, no matter what it is, it's going to fall off to the trunk and go down there. That's where it's really old. So next iteration of age. So why not just enjoy the whole journey as it's going? But so we've quit doing a lot of the preserving. Okay. We've got preservatives and stuff like that, because it's going to fail. I mean, it's going to be artificial at some point, it's going to look artificial. If you're looking close enough to see the artificial part, then it is. I've seen people even, I've seen where you have a deadwood on a tree that's just been done and somebody will even paint just the front half that you're seeing. I mean, that's how you can do it. But at the same time, why not enjoy it? It is a real event. So killing the branch, sometimes it happens naturally. Sometimes like you were saying in a hedge, that's one thing, but enjoy that progression of age and you can sort of accelerate that if you want to. On the backside here? We did here. Yeah, I know. That looks nice. Will you rotate it one more time? And when you get to the backside where that reversion or that sport is taking place, I want to talk to you about that a little bit. So when you get this kind of formation of a larger, coarser growth, if you let that grow, will it stay that same size or will those leaves shrink? Do you run the risk like on an azalea where you could actually, leaving a dominant flower over a subordinate flower, cause that branch to fully revert? Does that happen? Absolutely. Every once in a while, we've seen a strong runner go out and then go back to small foliage. Every once in a while, and I'm going to say 99 times out of 100, that does not happen. So this will run out. And so every once in a while, what we'll do is say you've got a branch you want to thicken up. We'll let it run on that branch and thicken it up and then remove it. It will take over. There's some trees that we'll see that the sport to this sport, the mutation that's going on, mutating, will be so similar to this at first you overlook it. And then slowly it starts changing the growth habit, the color of the bark, just little subtle things. But all of a sudden it pops out that it's different. Well it's gotten strong. Some of these ones that are very strong can take over your tree. And so the little tiny growth you can see way back in there, but it will change the dynamics of it. Some of the ones we've seen, trunks will get this big, but that's the sport. And so you might have just a little bit of foliage that's the original dwarf Kingsville foliage on that. So how do you know the difference between a sport and what you're calling a hot spot? Well when I'm calling something a hot spot, and I use it on other plants also, that's just a really vigorous spot. And so... The leaves would still be small then? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They could be small, just like for instance, maybe you're not turning it enough. Maybe just one for various reasons is stronger than another area. And so it could be a hot spot where the growth is going towards it. The Kingsville's a sport of mutation, so it continues to mutate, but that's a little different. I wouldn't... That's not a hot spot. To me. That's a reversion. That's semantics. Right. Yeah. Yeah. I think it's a good question. And then there's the other part of it. It's one of those things where you're trying to kick out and again, you can't get a bigger trunk any quicker than letting one of those run for a little while and then remove it. But you got to go back in there and it's like... You see it on a lot of trees where if you don't get it all, it's going to keep shooting out. Then it gets to be a wide, then it gets to be a spot that is always going to show and you have to remove the branch or larger part of it. But I mean, that's no big deal. just cutting it off you can see it stops right here. Yeah hold that for a second just show us where that stops so we can see that transition. It stops right there so you know. Yeah show us that cut that's that's perfect. You need him to wait for a sec Jesus? Hold one sec Ronnie just let him let him see that because this is super interesting. The move that part so you see on a key so it would be even more obvious so it would be okay to maybe cut there but the safest way we're going to also make the art better is to go in and cut. Now I've got to do it to where I can see it but I'm going to cut all the way to where I don't have that stop so this would have been kind of okay to do and probably the foliage difference you can kind of see the difference the the size wise the bigger see how much even this doesn't show it well but how this is straight this one's got a little bit more movement but you take it off you take it back to where i've lost the spot even but you take it back to where the old growth is and you take it all the way to that branch then it's going to look more natural as it grows out obviously i can't find it unless i really look but um and it and it works very nicely if you if you leave that stob you got a percentage of chance that it's going to continue to pop out there if you didn't get it all so you got you got other ones this spot here looks a little suspect so you know they just some of the trees if they if you let them go for a little while you get just a mix of foliage and sometimes that's okay and sometimes the foliage shapes and everything are so consistent or or close enough that that it doesn't matter but it does you know the the longer the older it gets the more you see the difference and the shape of the kingsville leaf is a little bit shorter blunter darker and more rounded it and it dips a little bit so you want to make sure that you're getting the right shape of the leaf you want that kind of same similarity all over the tree where you get into a leaf like this and it and it has a little bit of a roll but it doesn't have that curl and so it it really does not match the um the other kingsville look where so that's a reversion too that's a sport yeah huh interesting so this tree's got several on it some of the other ones um i saw have multiple ones we've got the same thing we used to take more cuttings than we do now and um so we would i mean the sports would be what you would cut off because they're growing faster and they're out of scale and out of line out of the silhouette so you cut those off root them and it was amazing we we probably if i counted the difference of the sports we've probably had seven that off different trees but would have the same tendency that you could we we had one we called curly locks and we potted those up and they they sold because they a little bit yellow foliage yellower than this but they had the curled leaf that was almost contorted people loved them but you know it's you know sort of kind of selling of something you don't really stand behind very well i i couldn't handle it but you've you've got we would put those together and it was like this they grew faster and all that but still i mean the kingsville the microfila that looks good and tight that's that's what it's all about we throw those cuttings away now you're uh you you are in so deep with uh kingsville and understanding that nuance that you're actually crazy enough to go in and prune leaf by leaf to get that aesthetic that's that's that's pretty profound man you get carried away when yeah with life sometimes but you know it's it's it makes a difference in the end all those little nuances we're doing bonsai for what reason yeah we're trying to get there and so um with every every species of plant there's little things that make a big difference and so over time the more you keep it consistent the more you you've got this certain look to it it just gets better and better if you let it get carried away it starts looking sloppy we've you know i see some that that look sloppy to me but that's prejudice on my part but still you know when you when you see um luckily working on father paul's tree the quality of that tree just jumps off the face of the earth for a box with tiny leaves the white trunk the undulations the neat movement that you're seeing with this but even accelerated it's just hard to beat that so you know you've got these classes of of boxwood you know is one better than another well it is to me and so that makes a difference it's worth doing all the work on certain ones we don't do it we don't go to that depth on every one every year but um the beauty is you do it for one year and it will last for a while you don't have to do it every year oh okay they grow slow i mean the the really the tiniest ones maybe a half inch a year of growth that's not much and so you can you can keep that under control just with a prune here or there when you're walking by it watering and stuff and and go on that that intense work you know you you spread it out you do certain trees of course you're doing the more um your your special trees the ones that mean the most to you you're doing more often Okay so let's try this with a tree courtigan I've always thought in terms of the bones I practice the nuance that Japan really embraced and that I think the rest of the world is having a hard time catching up with is the intricate knowledge of the species to the degree where you would understand when you Go to an exhibition the level and the degree to which somebody has mastered the nuances of that species and really brought out the finest level of craft as well as artistry a good shimpaku juniper how do you show age in a tree that naturally mounds or a percumbens you know what you're talking about right now is your eye and your ability to understand the nuances of the highest level of you know japonica macrophylla Kingsville or sort of across the range of boxwoods you would be have a higher appreciation and expect more out of a boxwood that would be a show-winning tree than anybody else in the country to be sure and so it's nice to be as a bonsai professional I'm always trying to enhance my ability to understand those nuances so that when I look at boxwood I can look at boxwood with a more educated discerning eye I can practice on boxwood with a far higher degree of craft and understanding this is very enlightening to see you work and talk about these things you know one thing that happened with me and I think this is across the board what one way you could look at what you were just talking about is is I started out in bonsai you know bonsai back in the day when when I was getting started close to 50 years ago it wasn't that good it's gotten a lot better so when you go to a show and now you see the trees that are being show just starting into bonsai you've already got an accelerated education on what that bonsai what that tree is all about I was lucky I was when I was 17 years old I was I was sitting right in front of every day helping somebody work on a tree that was outstanding as a boxwood you know it was one of the top ones I've ever seen still and I still get to work on it it's great but that tree is fantastic well that tree okay I didn't build up to that I started there yeah baseline yeah yep that's the elevation of level right there yeah is when your baseline is the maximum quality of the previous generation and that's your version of where it is to start that's that's how bonsai and the art form progresses right all right yeah very cool Rodney um I don't know do we miss any other question I feel like we pretty much we covered a lot I dangerous good to have it brought me like oh I think I'll just talk about pruning a little bit and maybe some but you know design and the chat will pull it out of you. The chat's been having fun yeah really appreciating it. Sure it's been great and again you you can't this tree as soon as I saw it it was like oh gosh what a challenge well I even underestimated how much of a challenge it is. There's a lot of mass here biomass in this tree and I don't want to mess it up. You know I definitely worked to the point where I started feeling like I was okay I'm pushing it I'm trying to take off too much at once and stuff it's not a good way to do bonsai so it's good to slow down but the talk was great because I did slow down what was able to talk instead of kept pruning and maybe making a mistake but no mistakes have been made in the sense where you know I'll sleep tonight get up and since nobody will be here in the morning I'll be up in the morning and I'll be able to talk to you. morning, but I'll get right back home. Come on down and do your thing. What better lesson, though, too, and just as bonsai as a practice, when you say, listen, enough is enough, and this is a super intense scope of work and you want to do it well, and the information you gave us is just as valuable as watching you do pruning 3,000 branches the same way, so thank you. Sure. Very good. And it is a progression. You're doing the same thing over and over again, but still. We did it. All right. Thank you, Ronnie. Thanks, everybody. Appreciate it. Yeah. I guess. Yeah. We'll see you at the live Q&A. Live Q&A. Thursday. Thursday, 10 a.m. Thursday, 10 a.m. And there are still slots in the forum. There we go. Throw us your questions and your photos. Yes. All right. Thank you, Ronnie. Sure. All right. Sign up. Sign in and out. Yeah. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. 
