Super Tuesday, really happy to be back in the studio. It feels like, first of all, let me just say, I loved having Todd here last week. We had an amazing week with the Advanced Study Group. If you guys haven't heard the new podcast that's up, that group joined us, Lime and I, up in studio, and we had an awesome podcast with them, a group of very special people. As I said, there are several, you know, Mariah Live students that weren't there in that group, but it was nice to get those guys together and really just kind of get to rehash some old stuff and dive into some new thoughts that we're working on. Amazing to have Todd in studio. He did a bang-up job. I hope you guys got a lot from not only the stream, but also the feature content on our five-needle pine handling at this time of the year. And sort of, you know, one of the directions that we're trying to continue advancing and working towards is executing these techniques and then bringing you back to these same trees. And when we start developing, and when we start working on secondary, and when we start working on tertiary refinement of our deciduous and our broad-leafed evergreen trees, like the Ellie Agnes, like the Coast Live Oaks, several things happen in the same season. And so it's awesome to get to come back tonight and address these trees that we executed these techniques on. And you guys saw how and why we did that. But then to come back, see how they responded, be able to understand the tree's response, and then how we, in turn, go ahead and execute another technique. We got... We got Randall on the mic this evening. Hey. Got Hunter producing the stream. We got Josh on the detail cam. And our silent but deadly night lime is up in the studio box. And it's Lime's birthday tomorrow. For anybody that wants to go ahead and send him some well wishes, we'll definitely be celebrating with a very quality cupcake this evening after the stream. We have any announcements tonight? There's no Q&A this week. No Q&A this week. We got some other projects that are a-brewing. And so we'll catch you guys next week for the Q&A, and we'll announce that on Tuesday with the stream. Next week, without further ado, I think we dive in. Okay, so here's where we're at. We did a lot of work sort of after that first flush hardened, right? So we're talking about on species that don't have that big internode elongation, right? We allow them to elongate and harden energy positive. Now, inside of that, for some of the species that even if they don't have a super long internode or if they do have a super long internode, we could be pinching the pieces that are in refinement. Now, we have the coast live oak that we pinched here with the Eliagnus. We did this defoliation along with this prune back right as it was just starting to show it was getting ready to grow. And now you can see the response to that piece of work. Now, I want to take you back to a clip that we prepared of the last stream just to catch you guys up on the work that happened, the idea behind it. And then we're going to come back. We're going to see where it's at and how we move forward. So go ahead and take a look at this. We'll see you guys back here in a minute, and we'll figure out how we move forward. Okay, broadleaf to evergreen. So basically, we're going to start out with the Kongumi, the Eliagnus. And you guys are going to see what this tree looks like without these leaves on it. And you'll start to understand why we're doing it and what we're going to try to accomplish. This is something that I do on an annual basis once I see the tree waking up. All right, so I'm just fully defoliating. And now you'll notice that you're starting to see that twigging start to come out. I went through and I've already corrected ramification. But this is another opportunity. In the continued evolution and development of broadleaf to evergreens to have sort of an open palette, be able to come in here, take off those really coarse pieces of growth. This is broadleaf to evergreens in the highest state of refinement, still thinking, still thinking about those weakest areas and transitioning, equaling out that strength. Okay, so that catches you guys up from where we were to where we are now. Now, a product of that work. And I read, I've read on the forums and I've heard in some discussions. We followed some of these techniques that we saw on the broadleaf to evergreens stream. And all of a sudden we got these very big leaves and it seemed to cause a lot of panic. But bear in mind what we're trying to do. We're trying to refine and we're trying to ramify a tree that inherently sheds its leaves. And a tree that did have and still does always have this discrepancy between interior strength and the exterior branches of the tree. So I want to come in here and talk to you about that. So I want to come in here and talk to you about that. So I want to come back in now. We've obviously gotten a big robust flush of growth. All of those older leaves that had been halved and had been reduced and had held that shape over the course of the winter time. We went ahead and removed them on the Ellie Agnes. And as a result, and because of all of that stored energy from that big foliar mass over the course of fall of last year, the push out and the response to that was a very aggressive, strong, flushing growth. Now, I want to dive in here into the interior and just take a look at some of what has happened. And we can look at some of those old, old sites. Now, if you'll notice, right in here where we see this sort of small fascicle where the leaf did exist, there's a very prominent interior bud right here, okay? And so even though I've got these big leaves all the way out here, I'm going to be taking a lot of this ramification back to the interior of the really overly large exterior pieces of growth across all of these areas where we did get that significant elongation, okay? Now, if I have, and what you'll notice is these interior leaves, when I start that reduction again, are going to be smaller than the exterior pieces, but we're going to go ahead and we're going to reduce them yet again. And you guys are going to be like, again we have the leaves, again we have the leaves. Yes, because we have this big stored battery of energy from the fall season that moves through the winter time. We defoliate to get rid of that old growth because we know it's going to be shed anyways. And this is the thing about it. Had we left those older leaves on it, we would have gotten the same push out of growth with less light, with less distribution, of energy, but the same coarseness of growth pushing out on the eleagnus. Okay, so we would have twice the density. A lot of those leaves would be being shed right now, and we'd have the same size of flush as we have currently after having removed those leaves. However, what we get is we get even energy distribution and that strength pushed out more evenly across the totality of the tree as a result of that work being in the refinement phase. And when we talk refinement, we're talking about strong, being pulled back to that medium phase, weak, being bumped up to that medium phase of strength, and really holding the tree in that medium realm of strength. So now when we come back, we've got so many of the smaller weaker pieces having pushed out growth, along with the ability to come back in and where those old leaf fascicles were. And again, I want to bring your attention back into this piece of ramification. I'm always going to be cutting back to two. One dormant sort of old leaf fascicle here with a bud already mounted. There's one right here at the base of this piece of growth. And now by taking that strength out of that one at a point where we're in a very significant energy positive at this time of year, sort of middle, early portion of the summertime, great opportunity to come back and do the work on our broad-leafed evergreens, redistribute, stimulate that growth, okay? But you're also going to be seeing some responses that are going to look like this. Now notice the size of this interior leaf. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take that strong shoot off. Notice how small and delicate that interior piece is. These are the kinds of interior pieces that we were hoping to develop that are carrying those dormant buds. We've got dormant buds that are existing behind that piece of ramification. I'm just setting my scissors right around a dormant bud that's existing behind that really fine piece of ramification. This is where we're going to get two pushes of new ramification as a result of this pruning energy positive and the interior having some of that refined growth, okay? So I'm going to work through this. I'm going to work through a few of these branches, start to reduce some of this elongated growth and show you guys how we start to kind of get back into a more refinable phase with the growth that was produced. Any of these big leaves, we're going to go ahead and take them down to roughly 30%. Taking off those coarse pieces, always leaving two junctions, two inner nodes, okay? So that we make sure that we have two pieces, two flushes of ramification coming from where we had one. It's the big sort of response to the push out from that defoliation. We've got a lot of interior. We've got a lot of shoots pushing that weren't necessarily pushing or didn't have strength after we came back in and did that defoliation because we opened it up. We allowed them to obtain resources. And in areas where my inner node is very short, for example here, I just have a very, very short inner node. I'm going to go ahead and I'm just going to take off some of these bigger leaves. I'm not going to prune back because I don't necessarily, where I don't have long inner node length, I don't have the strength to push a second flush. I'm going to leave the leaves on there. I'm going to leave them on those areas and just take off some of those bigger pieces. Now I get here where I've got a little bit more of an elongated inner node and I'll take those off and notice how small these leaves are getting. Notice how compressed and compact that ramification is getting. This is why we did that work to be able to reduce this, refresh that when we talk about that broad-leafed evergreen, that leaf mass gets tired over the course of seasons. It loses its strength. It starts to cause strength discrepancies. We're starting to rectify all of that to re-direct that strength that exists in the stronger portions and really obtain some of that smaller leaf mass that we're looking for that you guys saw on the tree prior to that growth emerging. What type of Eliagnus is this? Pungens or Angustifolia? I remember we had a conversation about it. And I feel like I misspoke when we had that conversation. I feel like we decided it was... I feel like we thought it was pungens, but then we were like, maybe it's Angustifolia. Hey, Troy. What Eliagnus is this again? Pungens. So I thought it was Angustifolia. Troy said, I don't think it's Angustifolia. And that's where I had gone wrong. Eliagnus pungens. For those of you watching, if you scroll down a little bit, you'll see a thumbnail where you can see this tree in the gallery. So you can check that out. Yeah, and you know, the beautiful thing about this piece of work, very few people teach about broad-leafed evergreen work. But broad-leafed evergreens are extremely, extremely durable and extremely strong because, and we see this in our conifers too. When we talk about the durability of different species as bonsai, broad-leafed evergreen maintaining their leaf mass over the course of the year have a consistent photosynthetic resource that they're always sort of referring to and utilizing to be accumulating strength. And so when we start to talk about that leaf mass, we do have to refresh that leaf mass and make sure that we continue to mane, maintain viability of the photosynthetic process as well as maintain that strength distribution as a result of all of that leaf mass accumulating on the plant. So even if I defoliated this tree yet again at this time of year, as long as I've allowed it to get back to an energy positive and I've allowed that growth to harden, I could fully defoliate this tree and what we would see is we would see another strong flush. However, if we defoliated it again at this point in time, that strong flush would be really focused and pretty much localized to the strongest areas of the tree and that's where we would see the weaker areas potentially not produce that shoot or that second flush that we would be asking for. So when we come back, we get back into that energy positive after totally defoliating and doing a pruning of the finer branches and remember on some of the weakest areas of the tree, we left some of that leaf mass to be able to continue to allow them to photosynthesize. Now what you're getting down to is you're actually getting down to those very small leaves and that interior growth that you guys saw at the tail end of last year carried over through the winter time when we first did the work on this tree. So again, this smaller leaf mass and this reduction is going to stimulate a much more refined second flush of ramification this season. So not only do we get one flush, we get two and so we're adding four pieces of ramification to every branch tip, which over the course of time with this tree and again, when I got this tree, it was basically a stump. When I got this tree a stump and I followed this sort of protocol management of strength, redirecting of strength, pruning time and strategy that I'm sharing with you guys and you can see what it's given. It's given this really fundamental sound solid ramification and really small distribution of leaf mass as a result of that redistribution of strength, okay? So I'm not going to do this across the entire tree, but I am going to do one whole section of the tree just continuing to prune back, continuing to tap into those interior pieces of growth. Some of the overly elongated or some of the coarser tips, I'm pruning back to interior growth. Some of these that don't have a lot of elongation, I'm just going to be removing the 50% of the exterior leaf. And then if I've got small leaves or I've got finer pieces on the interior, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to leave those untouched because that leaf mass is what's going to be generating strength in those areas untouched, undeterred and allows our week to catch up to the stronger areas of the tree. Rafi asked how winter hardy are Eliagnus and also David asked if this technique can be applied to cold weather broadleaf evergreens. Absolutely. So again, you know, when we look at broadleaf evergreens, the unifying component that we start to think about because Eliagnus can tolerate quite a bit of cold. Now the bigger issue in terms of can Eliagnus tolerate cold or can a tree in a container this small tolerate cold? That's actually the question that we should be asking ourselves because a tree in a container that's this small has a very small amount of soil mass to maintain that sort of core temperature of heat around the roots. It loses temperature, loses that heat very quickly. So the roots in a small container like this become very cold far faster than a tree in a much larger container, larger soil mass, larger water accumulation, etc. So when we're looking at Eliagnus, could an Eliagnus that's of a significant size tolerate the winters in Oregon? Absolutely. It wouldn't be an issue. Could an Eliagnus that's in a small pot tolerate the winter conditions? Any tree in a small pot has a harder time tolerating those winter conditions. And that's exactly why we would still want to be putting this sort of a small chuhin, shohin-sized tree into the greenhouse to be weathering and overwintering. Just to make sure that that soil mass isn't what's readily damaged, right? And when we think about that, these trees are used to having a buffering capacity of the core temperature of the earth over the course of winter when they're in the ground. The root system is always, always in winter hardiness, the root system is the component that suffers the most. And we see trees that suffer. In terms of root damage, once they push out their growth right around that point where that growth is needing a lot of moisture and allocation of resources, that's when we typically see winter damage to the roots start to show itself. So it's very deceptive because we say I had a healthy tree. It pushed out. All of this should have been great. And then it just started dying back. That actually was root damage from the winter time that is just coming to fruition at that point when we start to see the demand being placed on the root mass that no longer exists. Okay, so even when I'm doing this, I'm looking at removing leaves growing off of the bottom so that I clean up those branch lines. I'm looking at removing overly large leaves and you guys continue to see me. I'm sort of distributing the strength. Notice that I'm thinning and I'm reducing leaf mass so that I have the same general volume and the same general mass across the entirety of the tree. The strongest areas I'm going ahead and I'm taking those back just to two shoots, even if I prune back behind where that elongation has taken place because it's an extremely long shoot. It will push another flush of ramification in the strongest areas. And that's really where I can get away with going beyond where I have leaf mass. Okay, but in the finer areas of the tree, I've got these wonderful little tiny shoots and these little tiny leaves on the interior of the tree and I'm saving those because that's exactly what I was trying to accomplish by executing this technique in general. I was trying. To get that refinement. I was trying to get that finer twig as trying to get that reduced internode length. You know, you have the stored energy. We know we can come back and we can manage again the stronger areas via this technique. So we were getting that refinement and now we're going to take this back again to further distribute the energy redirect from the strong to the medium in the week and really pull the whole tree into a uniform distribution of energy. So anybody that was saying man I followed this technique and I've never seen leaves get as big as they did this year. That's okay. Right because there's probably other things in terms of development. Were you building ramification as fast was the tree experiencing a uniform distribution of energy, etc. There's probably a strong chance that there's a higher level of ramification to be developed inside of that tree. This is how we go about it, but you've got to be able to understand that that battery that we accumulate and that size of leaf that was was created as a response to this process is only one part of a two-part series in terms of how we manage, Broadleaf evergreen over the course of the year. This is that second part to be able to come back into the pruning and to really dial in the distribution of energy. Leonard asked if you could mention sort of overall over time how you're going to achieve a small uniform leaf structure. Well, so yeah, I feel like I'm I feel like I'm communicating that well, but I think it might not be I might not be communicating as well as I might be going to. Cool. Okay, here's here's let me go back. All right, we have a leaf mass on the tree the entire year. Okay, and I'm just going to rotate this so Josh can kind of show you the product of that one talking about this. We have this leaf mass on the tree the entire year. Okay, we know no matter what we do. We're going to have the leaf mass over the course of the fall storing sugars and starches, right and now those stored sugars and starches the following spring. They're going to cause course growth. There's nothing that you can do about it. Now the more heavily. We fertilize. In addition to that leaf mass being on the tree over the course of fall, the coarser that spring flush is going to be okay, and if we go ahead and we supplement in the spring flush, it's going to be even coarser, right? So we have a triple effect here right now. We held back off on fertilizer on this tree after we did the defoliation. We pulled those leaves off of the tree. So we didn't have further foliage mass adding to the elongation, the coarseness, the extending of the internode and the size of the leaf. What we got in this, this leaf mass that we have on the exterior of the leaf. This is a product of the stored energy from last fall. There's nothing we can do about it, right? And so many times we freak out and we're trying to, we're trying to hold this back and hold this back and hold this back. But the tree needs to run that energy out and it needs to put it into the foliar mass to be able to build root system, to be able to store that energy and hold that energy in the tree. We allow that energy to run out. We accept that it's a part of the tree. We allow it to reaccumulate energy. And then we come back into the tree and we start to prune back those elongated shoots back into the interior. We start to have the big long leaves or take the big long leaves out of the exterior. What we're doing is almost a partial defoliation with a pruning right now. And the leaves that we're saving are the finer smaller leaves. The shoots that were pruning are the bigger longer shoots. Consequently, now we're in an energy positive, but it hasn't accumulated the same amount of energy as it's going to over the course of fall. So the ramification that's going to push out, right now, is actually the product of what we did in the springtime, combined with the technique that we're applying now to give us that really small leaf mass over the remainder of the season. And this is how we get uniformly small leaves. Okay, but if we didn't, if we handled it differently in the spring, if we handled it differently right now, then what we can do is we can perpetuate that enlarged leaf size. We can perpetuate that coarse branch tip. We can perpetuate those long inner nodes. We know that this is going to happen no matter what, because this tree has to store that energy over the fall. It has to push out new growth in the spring. So this is how we manage it from the springtime, now after that push out in the spring, in the early summertime, with our broad-leafed evergreens to actually execute over the course of the next few months, that small leaf mass and that really fine ramification that we've been striving for. This is broad-leafed evergreen trees in refinement to the T. Timing, strategy, and execution. Love it. Did I hit the clarity button there? Yes. Nice. Clearer. Clearer. Crystal. It's tough. It's really, you know, there's a lot of... It's a big concept. There's a lot of minutiae in there too, right? Because you're seeing these big leaves and you're like, dude, you're saying you want small leaves. All I see are giant leaves and it's like, yes, but we're going to get giant leaves no matter what we do, right? That stored energy. It's just like in the springtime with a Japanese maple, no matter what you do, the reason that you pinch is to stop that internode length because you're going to get a long internode with that first flush. That stored energy generating that flush. With our broad-leafed evergreens, no matter what we do, we're going to get a big leaf as that first flush. This is how we go ahead and rejuvenate and balance before that flush with the pruning that we did in the defoliation. This is also how we come back in and manage that flush once we're back in an energy positive to distribute, get smaller leaves, and produce finer ramification. Matt asked about the fertilizing schedule for a tree like this. Yeah, so obviously if we're in refinement, okay, and we're looking at Ellie Agnes and we're saying, boy, I don't want this to produce big, thick, coarse growth. We're applying a light application of fertilizer periodically, but definitively not every four weeks, maybe every six to eight weeks, light quantity in that location. And as we said before, over the course of spring, as this growth was elongating, we were not, fertilizing this tree because we don't want to supplement that stored energy from all of that photosynthesis over the course of the fall season of last year. We don't want to supplement the coarseness that it's putting into, number one, the internode length. We don't want to supplement the coarseness that it's putting into the size of leaf that it's already going to be putting out, that's already going to be strong, long, and vigorous. So we let it run out, we let it do its thing, party, reaccumulate. Now when we come in and we check that energy, right now, this is actually the pruning that induces finer ramification and smaller leaf mass on the tree. So it's just a process, you know, and when we see Japanese bonsai, we're, unless we've existed in the Japanese bonsai world and we understand the process that they go through with those species, we oftentimes are duped into thinking that those trees look that refined all the time, and it's not true. They have to grow, they have to be coarse, they have to grow out of shape and grow unchecked in order to maintain, their ability to survive inside of a confined environment. And this is the beauty of Moriah Live is we can show you guys what that looks like because our trees too experience this point where we have to let them grow, we have to accept the physiology of the season, we have to accept the nuances of that fall vascular productivity of tissue. And then we talk about the techniques that allow us to come back, manage that energy, check that growth, shorten those inner nodes, give us that smaller leaf. And this is the time of year for broad-leafed evergreens to become coming back in and executing that, that decision-making to be able to achieve that highest level of bonsai. Rafi asked about show display of broad-leafed evergreens. Is it acceptable to show them with leaf cuts? No, no. I mean, and, and so. Or if you cut at like a folded angle. So you, the folded angle would be one way that we could, it would be like cutting the black pine needles of a few of the needles prior to show, right? It's never the ideal thing to be cutting pieces of growth like this. This is a growth technique to be managing sort of inner node length and leaf size. But, and ideally we would see a broad-leafed evergreen tree ready for show after it pushes out its flush from this pruning because the next flush is going to be quite small. It's going to be quite tightly ramified. And that's the growth that we would be taking into an exhibition. That's really what we would want to be timing all of our technique to be achieving so that when we go into that exhibition, we do have a very, very refined tree. I know that this tree, based on this pruning, if I wanted to show it in the national show in September, and I'm pruning it right now in the middle of July, I will have the perfect flush for the national show in, let's see, what is that? Less than two months. I'll have the perfect flush of really fine small interior growth, highly ramified. I'll have to go in and manage it a little bit. I'll have to do a little bit of foliar distribution for energy. I'll have to remove some of these cut leaves so that you don't see that superficiality in it. But ideally, I would want to be showing it without that present because you want to be showing the refined form that you've been striving to accomplish with the execution of really, really high-level technique. Seamus asks if you run the risk of depleting it too much and pruning at this time. So if we were not building up back to an energy positive, so had I tried to, and this is where I think we, in our fear to try and regain or hold that really refined shape, check all the time on our trees, if we pruned earlier, right, and this tree wasn't back in a really strong state of energy positive, then yeah, you absolutely run the risk of overly trying to manage it. And that's where when we see these big leaves, and I saw everybody's response to this, you know, it's like I've never seen bigger leaves after executing this work. But you're also developing ramification with that energy and you've got to leave those big leaves on the tree to be able to create that energy that we can come back in and further stimulate another flush, further stimulate a smaller leaf, further balance the energy, et cetera, right? So this bigger leaf, this is important. And if we overly panic or we respond in an inappropriate manner to these bigger leaves existing on the tree as a result of that stored energy, then we're going to be potentially pushing this tree into an area where it is going to lose the strength and not respond with another flush and not respond with a really beautifully distributed energy amount in smaller leaves. We may not see it respond. With another flush at all or we may see it become very weak and that's not what we want. That's not what perpetuates high quality bonsai when we're trying to refine our broadleaf evergreen trees. And again, I want to go back to just the idea that as far as broadleaf evergreen trees are concerned, I've never heard anybody in all of my bonsai years talk about sort of the fundamental way that we can go about handling broadleaf evergreen trees to get the smallest leaves in the tightest ramification. We hear about deciduous trees. We hear about conifers all the time. But this is a whole genre of trees that exist throughout the world in differing species, locations, regions, have different merits to the trees that are underexposed and underutilized because nobody puts any focus on broadleaf evergreen as a really strong candidate for bonsai cultivation. And if we start to learn how to harness this consistent capacity to hold leaves and generate photosynthetic resources, understand how to weather the storm of these elongated, coarse pieces of growth. Not panic, not freak out. Understand this is a part of that energy battery cycle. We exhaust that energy, build big leaves. We use those big leaves, energy positive. We get back into energy positive. We prune, redistribute. We partially defoliate to allow air and light through the canopy of the tree, and it produces another flush that's going to be finer in terms of its distribution of energy. This is the natural cycle of broadleaf evergreens as they're treated for bonsai to maximize the results. This is the ramification they put on the tree. So there are a lot of questions in the chat about what constitutes a broadleaf evergreen and a bunch of different species of, you know, does this technique apply to this and this and all these different species? Right. Do you want to talk about that? Yeah, sure. So a broadleaf evergreen, when we talk about what is a broadleaf evergreen, a broadleaf evergreen is a leafy tree that does not lose its leaves in the wintertime, right? And the confusing thing about this is there's a lot of species of deciduous trees in cool weather areas that will be evergreen in warmer areas. For example, a Chinese elm can be broadleaf evergreen partially deciduous or fully deciduous depending on wintertime temperatures, okay? And when we start to talk about, say, like, camellia, camellia, no matter where it is, is always going to be a broadleaf evergreen. Eliagnus pungens, no matter where it is, is always going to be a broadleaf evergreen. What about boxwood? Boxwood is a broadleaf evergreen. Olive is a broadleaf evergreen. Lyona ferrugina, I don't know what that is. Never even heard of it. I'll look it up. Okay. Super sleuth that for me. Okay, but now, as we get all of those big leaves pruned off of the exterior, you guys start to see just how, and most of these, I'm going to say that I've only cut maybe 10, 15% of these leaves. So we freaked out. Oh, my gosh. Look at how big that leaf is. Look at what's inside of it. Look at what's inside of it. Right? And that actually, that tight inner node that's inside of it, those buds really close together that's inside of it, all of those smaller leaves that's inside of it, yes, when that energy gets past that point, okay, so we defoliated those first few nodes, produced really small leaves, and then it just started accelerating into this, and we let this give us positive energy, and now we prune it back, and all of a sudden, we've got this stored energy from these big leaves. We've got these fine pieces in the interior. We're going to push all that energy into those fine, inner pieces and those tighter inner nodes and that ramification, and we're going to get a hyper-refined tree as a result of this. It's absolutely brilliant the way that this technique works. As long as you understand, you've got to believe in it. You have to believe in the mechanisms. You have to believe in the physiology. You've got to be able to understand what's happening in order to be able to embody sort of that developmental process, even in the refinement stage of broad-leafed evergreen. All right. Lyonia is a, it's called a rusty staggerbush. It's a small evergreen. It's a shrub native to Florida. Sounds, sounds evergreen. Sounds pretty evergreen. Sounds evergreen, but it also sounds tropical, right? And tropical can be treated in this same way. This is not just, this is not just unique to broad-leafed evergreen of a cooler climate. Tropicals producing several flushes, but also maintaining their foliage mass throughout the season. Absolutely, you could apply this to that species and have success. And ficus. Ficus, bougainvillea. There's a lot of different species. That you could utilize this with, okay? What about cannabis, Eric asked? You know, is that. Is that tropical or is it broad-leafed evergreen? You know, I think cannabis is actually. Lyme, is cannabis an annual or a perennial? It's a perennial, doesn't work. I mean, cannabis is an herbaceous tree. And this is only for trees that produce lignified woody tissue. Although I know that there's like some debate about that. And I know that cannabis has been made into bonsai before. We don't have a lot, we don't have experience with that. We don't have any, we don't have experience with that. Our neighbors are way too problematic for us to even roll the dice on toying around with that stuff. We have had DEA helicopters descend on the garden in the middle of the night. Thinking that we were a grow-up because we were staying up late with the greenhouse lights on. I mean, we've had it all. We've experienced quite a bit, quite a bit of interesting things. Happening at Mirai. So Chris said, you said this was a stump when you got it. How long have you been working at it to get it to this shape? Yeah, yeah, yeah. So this actually was a tree that I had. I had this tree at, I got it at the very end of college. And I would just periodically as I would come home from Japan. I had a buddy that was watching over it for me. And as I would come back from Japan, I would do more and more work on it. They would execute the techniques. I started developing really a high level of refinement. Once I was back from Japan. Doing the work consistently on it. I would say that from a stump to this point is probably right around nine years of serious work. And when I say stump, I mean, there were just literally I wired the whole structure from the beginning. Built the branches from the beginning. And this is really where it's at after a prolonged period of time. Now every single season that it grows, it just develops another set of ramification. I'm able to reallocate resources, energy further. The refinement, build more twigging, get smaller leaves uniformly distributed across the tree. So this is consistently, this approach has been consistent. Because this tree has been in refinement for probably the past four years. That I've really been working and digging hard at developing further ramification. And we're going to transition. Now that you guys have seen this work on a tree that's in the refinement phase. I want to transition to one of the oaks that was really moving from secondary. To refinement. And the product of the pinching process over that spring elongation. We chose to defoliate this. Eleagnus is a tree that as it's elongating, we don't really pinch it. We allow it to elongate, harden. And then we come back in and prune. Because we get those really tight inner nodes as a result of this process. I want to come back to the original Coast Live Oak. We've got a video queued up for you guys. To catch you up from the first scope of work and the pinching process to now. To see how we got here. When you come back, we'll look at how we address that. This is a Coast Live Oak. Quercus agrifolia. Got a nice strong tip. I have six sets of leaves. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to pinch there. These guys are starting to show some pretty elongated inner node length. I'm going to pinch back to two leaves there. You can see how long the inner node length is there. I'm going to pinch back to two leaves there. You can see that this guy is starting to elongate. I'm going to pinch right there. So throughout this process, I'm just going through and I'm saying. Do I want this to be longer? No. Do I have buds behind it? Yes. How do I stimulate those buds? I'm going to go ahead because this is very soft fleshy growth in the new growth. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to pinch to increase ramification. To control the strength at the tips. And to start to stimulate and activate those buds that are being suppressed behind it. Okay. A lot of these that I haven't pinched aren't quite ready. Tomorrow, the next day, they're going to be ready because we've pinched all the strongest pieces. And now anything left is going to grow. And then we'll pinch those and those interiors that haven't originated are going to grow. And we're going to add ramification in terms of bifurcation of branching. Stimulated by the pinching process. This tree is done. Okay. All right. So in the execution of this tree. As that new growth was elongating. We were defoliating the Eliagnus and trying to stimulate growth in a tree that we don't readily pinch. That's how we transition some of that strength and balanced it in a tree in refinement. This is an oak that was in refinement. And we were getting those elongating shoots. And we were saying. Okay. We had the option to allow it to elongate. To harden and prune. But we knew that there were interior buds that we wanted to stimulate the production of and stimulate growth in those interior buds. And so we pinch that soft tip as it was emerging in the pinching process. We one reduce the length of that inner node that was going to elongate. If we just let it grow freely because we're starting to refine this tree. And two when we took that terminus out. We stimulated a whole slew of interior ramification to be growing and increasing. The density of this tree. Now if we look at the product of this tree. Compared to the density and the ramification that it had on the interior. With that video you guys see that it was wildly effective. It was wildly effective. And I just want Josh to kind of come in here. And zoom in just to this one single branch right here in the apex. Where we pinch this growing tip. Are you in here Josh? You there Hunter? Okay. So we pinch this elongating tip. Right here you can see sort of that pinch tip. We pinch that tip as it was elongating. And all of a sudden we got this bud, this bud, this bud, and one more bud back here. We got four different buds that were not growing prior to pinching that little tip. We got four buds to create small tight little pieces of ramification. One, two, three, four. Four pieces of ramification stimulated via the pinching model. Right? Now the buds were there. They were mounted on the inside. They were swelling. But that terminus that was elongating was taking all of the energy and the oxen that was accumulating in that tip. Right? Was suppressing the growth and the activity of those buds. When we pinched it off we stopped the elongation of the inner node length. And we pushed that energy back into those buds and catalyzed their delivery and their growth. And that's exactly why we start to use pinching when we have the buds in the interior. When we have the ramification. In the interior. And those strongest tips start to elongate. We can redirect the strength from those strongest tips back to the interior. Now this is true of any deciduous variety that has a very long elongating inner node. Say for example the European beach that we created the forest with. If we were in the refinement process we could pinch that. Okay? We've been working on secondary scaffolding to this point. So we didn't pinch this year. Next year we will be pinching. Okay? When we're starting to talk about a stewardia. When we're starting to talk about a Japanese or a trident maple. If we are in the refinement process. If we have the interior growth present. If we have the interior shoots present. And we want to push that energy into those. And that tip starts to elongate. Boom. You pinch it. You take the auxin out of it. And you transition. And what you get is interior ramification building as a result of that pinch. Okay? So understanding the process in the refinement phase. Pinching to direct growth. To that interior ramification. Extremely important. But here's the question. Alright I did that. I got all those shoots to elongate. Now what? Now what? And that's where we are today. Okay? So we're going to come back and we're going to look at a few different situations. Now I want to focus down here. On this lowest branch that really increased in vigor and strength. As a result of the pinching process. Okay? We pinched this shoot right here. This little shoot right here is the one that we pinched. We were elongating this shoot to try and gain more strength. To strengthen this. And consequently when we pinched this. It pushed this shoot off of the bottom. It pushed this shoot out of the crotch. And it pushed this bud that was just sitting inactive on this piece of growth. Pushed this bud into an elongated shoot. Well now when we look at this we've got one, two, three, four, five shoots that exist at the tip of this branch. And we've got to take that down to two. Before we get into the fall season. So that it doesn't start to swell and accumulate vascular tissue. And become a flaw in the tree. Okay? So one of the jobs now. With that pinching and the stimulation of all of that ramification. Is to come back in and select our branches down to two. And refine the ramification. I'm going to take off anything growing straight off the top. That's very unusable growth in terms of you know quality that we talk about. Now this piece that we pinched is an older branch that really doesn't have a ton of energy in it. I'm going to go ahead. And I'm going to take that off. Because I've got these two newer branches that are strong. That have nice tight inner nodes that are very vigorous. Okay? I also have this piece staying off of the or hanging off of the bottom here. I'm going to take that off. And I'm going to cut all of those very clean. So that that node doesn't have any remnants of stubs and won't swell any further. Okay now what I can do is I can come back into this after having pruned that. And I can take all of these shoots back into two nodes. Boom. I can take this back into two nodes here. Boom. And you'll notice that I even have this nice small piece of ramification over here. Take that back into two nodes. Now look at how tight. And look at how ramified that section of the tree is. As a result of this pruning at this time of year. We will get a much smaller finer second flush of ramification on our Broadleaf Evergreen. The Ellie Agnes will for the way we managed that tree that wasn't pinched. The Coast Live Oak will for the tree that was managed via pinching. Okay. Both of them allowed after that management of growth in that spring season to accumulate their foliage mass. Harden off and regain resources. Get back in that energy positive. Now we come back in and make these decision making pieces. A few people asked about when's the best time to repot Broadleaf Evergreens. Same time as any of our deciduous trees or any of our trees really. In spring right as the buds start to swell. Ideal time to be repotting. Our Broadleaf Evergreens. Okay. Alright. So here again. This piece that was growing straight up. It was pinched right here. I've got two leaf nodes that I pinched back to. And consequently it stimulated two more smaller pieces of ramification at the base to form. Now again I'm going to come back in. I'm going to take off that vertically growing piece. I'm going to cut back this piece to two junctions. Two inner nodes. Right. There's one behind the leaf. And then there's the leaf itself. And now. On this first piece that I cut. All of the leaves are quite small. That's awesome. Because those small leaves in terms of the accumulation of energy. That they're going to be putting into the creation of the ramification after this pruning. That energy is going to be relatively small in addition to what was reaccumulated. When we have a big thick coarse leaf like this. We want to cut that in half. Just like we were doing on the Eleagnus. Decrease the photosynthetic surface area. So that that second flush is finer. The photosynthetic mass that's feeding it is finer. That's what gives us smaller finer growth. That's what gives us smaller finer ramification. Okay. So I'm going to be going through each node of growth on this tree. Now. When we get inside of this. And let me just prune this guy out of the way. So that we can see what's happening here. Okay. When we get inside of this. We've got to be very discerning however. Because when I spread these leaves. And I look at this. You'll notice that I have three pieces of ramification. I have one here. I have one here. And I have one here. Now at any one junction. I only have two branches. I've got this piece of ramification in the main branch. I've got this piece of ramification in the main branch. I've got this piece of ramification as the tip of the branch. So I don't need to take any of those three pieces of ramification out. And all's I'm really going to do. Is reduce these back to those tight interior nodes. And if this one only produced one node. I'll cut it back to that. And I'll have that leaf. And now I'm going to be stimulating that really fine. Fine flush of the next series of pieces of ramification. As a result of the way that was pruned. Okay. I'm going to continue. I'm just going to walk you guys through this. Over and over and over again. Until you guys really start to understand. And sort of can predict my actions that I'm going to be taking. Okay. Again this guy was. It looks like it was pinched right here. Stimulated some flushes of growth behind it here. I've got this big thick coarse vertical grower. I'm going to take that out. I've got this nice little guy here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to cut that back. I've got this really strong tip. And this is very, very coarse. Let me just make sure. Yeah. I don't want this. And notice that I have this fine piece. And this fine piece. Okay. I'm not a huge fan of leaving my ramifications. Sort of spread like this. Like a bullhorn. But if it gives me my finer ramification. And it's going to decrease the thickening on the tip. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to select that. As buds back on the interior. Are stimulated to grow in the future as this progresses. I will reduce this to that better piece of ramification. Okay. I'm going to continue on the back side here. Alright. This guy was pinched right at the tip. And consequently we got. One. Two. Three pieces of ramification is stimulated. None of them have more than two branches at any junction. So I'm not going to have to remove any of them. I'm going to be pruning these back. To try and start to refine. The length of those inner nodes. And refine that ramification. I'm going to keep that nice and small. I don't really have any big thick coarse leaves. So I'm not going to have any of the leaves there. Okay. This one growing towards the interior. Notice how big. Notice how big that exterior leaf is. Okay. I've got two flushes. Or I've got two pieces of ramification on the interior. I can keep them both. I'm going to cut it back to two nodes. On each one. And because these leaves are a little bigger. To balance out that energy. And make sure that that second flush is much finer. I'm going to halve that growth. Okay. This just gave me one elongated piece. But the branch got strong. And I noticed that I have buds loaded up on the interior here. I can see a bud at that node. I can see a bud at that node. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to shorten this. I'm going to take off some of these leaves. Down to two at the tip. And I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to halve these guys. Just to give me a nice fine flush of growth on that interior. Okay. Another big thick coarse piece right here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to cut that back. I'm going to reduce that. I'm going to halve that. And I'm going to halve that. To give me that nice fine flush of growth. Okay. So we're starting to thematically understand. The process and the decision making. That we're doing and we're acting upon. To get that second flush. And get the second flush of a fineness and a quality. That we want to be really refining this tree. That we pinched over the course of spring. To shorten the inner node. And push the energy back to the interior. A few folks asked about the wire bite. Are you worried about it? Are you going to remove the wire? Yeah. Yeah. So now that we're doing this work right now. And again. When we're dealing with trees that have a very thick rugged bark that forms. And coast live oak has a prominent bark that will develop on it. The wire biting in only furthers. Well let me just say. The wire biting in will be something that can heal. And the remnant of that will not haunt us. For a prolonged period of time. If this were a Japanese maple. This would already be toast. This branch would no longer be utilizable. Because that scar would never leave the tree. And there's not a thick enough bark. That would ever cover up that damage. We just today unwired the stewardia. That we styled. And I believe. Did we style that stewardia last year? Yeah. I'll look up what the stream name is real quick. Okay. We're going to be shooting it in the studio for you guys. It's in a beautiful pot. We completely unwired it. No wire scars. We pruned it back perfectly. I mean it looks. It looks as good as I could have ever imagined that scope of work would turn out. Deciduous design on August 10th we did that. August 10th of last year. So it's almost. Deciduous design. Almost a full year. And because we had done that so late in the summer time. It wasn't ideal. It didn't grow a lot after that. So we just got one flush of growth this spring on it. And it was to perfection. Again we'll shoot it. You guys will see that coming up in some form of content. But it was a really. It was. It was a pretty. Pretty monumental unwiring. And. Yeah. That was a really good stream. Yeah. It was a good stream. And the product. The product of the theory. The physiology. The technique. Etc. Was. Was really. Really. I'm really proud of it. But the biggest thing is. Is we unwired it prior to those wire scars forming. This tree being an oak. I'm happy to. We will be unwiring it. But I am happy to let the wire stay on just a bit longer. So. So. So. Rafi asks. Do you have a second flush because of this climate in St. Helens is such that you don't have summer dormancy. Does someone dormancy. Factor. Or is that a factor that we ought to have in consideration with respect to application of this technique. So. If you're in a really hot. You know. And. And even if I were in Los Angeles right now. Or Southern California. Or an area where I did have more heat. I wouldn't hesitate to be pruning. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. A. in terms of the ones that we're doing for for this stream and we've been just kind of waiting to do these for the stream is it going to be too late or not i don't think so and i don't have any trepidation about that uh because oaks are geared and do respond very well to heat um if you're at all worried about it and you feel like the second week of july is going to be a little bit too warm or a little bit too dry or a little bit too hot or nearing that dormancy cycle for you where you're at you could push this pruning up two or three weeks hit it at the end of june early july and be totally okay with and and um have a great response from the tree as a result of that timing mechanism so if that feels more comfortable and what you know about your environment is that summer dormancy is in fact a real thing then absolutely go ahead and trust that gut instinct but i know that i'm working on oaks around the country with clients um several of them are pruning their trees right now and i'm going to be doing a lot of pruning and i'm going to be doing a lot of pruning and i'm going to be doing a lot of pruning and i'm going to be doing a lot of pruning and uh and we've been doing so for the past couple years without any sort of ill effect or lack of success based on this timing and in much much warmer areas than st helens oregon okay i'm just going to kind of motor through this blast piece here and show you guys what this is going to look like as a result of sharif asked if this is a good time for good or bad time so that's a great question you know can we work structure at this time is is it a smart time to or a smart thing to work structure at this time if we wanted to work structure at this time we could do i think um i think we could do some minimal structural moves but we probably wouldn't want to be doing big huge structural moves prior to the onset of heat we want to do those prior to bud push in the spring to make those really big decisions um but if we if you wanted to remove a a a big branch or two on a relatively developed tree that's absolutely possible i would save massive reduction for a little bit of a different period of time prior to bud push okay and a lot of that when we start to think about heavy reduction like that a lot of that does come down to movement of water for transpiration to cool the system etc um even reducing this leaf mass as long as we have some leaf mass mass left on the tree we're okay with that but if we want to move a big branch or two on a relatively developed tree okay we actually could fully defoliate but we're getting a little bit late to be fully defoliating which is why we started moving into that partial defoliation method for distributing energy in these trees that are capable of producing more than one flush of ramification in a season if we understand the mechanisms for strength reaccumulation and the timing as you're seeing here the timing and the methodology behind the pruning so larry said um larry has some questions about collecting broadleaf evergreens okay uh since they're in a in their own class in terms of water movement how do you approach collection and root working do you remove the foliage or is it more like other evergreens and it needs all of its foliage to recover so the foliage on broadleaf evergreens um is still a battery that is photosynthesizing and it also because they have that thicker cuticle because they have that firmer leaf etc they're also able to withstand uh a lot of moisture loss so leaving that foliar mass on the tree i think is an important part of the collecting model now when we say that in general our broadleaf evergreens need to be collected earlier in the spring season than say a deciduous tree or even a conifer they do benefit from being collected earlier in the season because most of these when we talk about broadleaf evergreens are typically coming from mediterranean or very dry hot areas not necessarily areas where there's really favorable conditions later on in the season and they start uh metabolizing and they start generating resources and start that root growth a little earlier because of those conditions where they are able to adapt and be able to out compete species around them okay so collecting them a little earlier means you're getting on to the start of the root growth prior to it really becoming a significant setup for the new foliar mass to be produced therefore you take advantage of stored energy to be recreating that root system as they grow out the they Said that this start thinking that there's a little space in between and then you use a little energy to grow to growth after collection a big part of success in collection is energy positive collecting so that you have the energy to generate the year roots and you have the energy to generate the foliar mass okay i'm going to go ahead and rotate this now this tree has literally i'm going to say this tree is literally doubled if not tripled its ramification from the the first time that we handled it and if you guys again refer to that original picture the number of little branchlets that are occurring on all of these sort of stubby branches nice we if we do this like the same sort of action for the next two or three years on this tree build up some of those interiors really allow that strength to expand this tree is going to be an absolute knockout one of the only shohin collected coast live oaks i've ever seen of this caliber and uh troy's been working this tree this is troy's tree he's been doing a great job to this point love it all right okay let's bring up just for just for everyone if you want to if you want to see the video from earlier in april where we worked on this just scroll down in the thumbnails of the related content you can click and watch that that other work that happened earlier in the year such a little such a little treasure goodness gracious i love that dream i love that tree okay speaking of love just oaks on hi hi mm-hmm okay okay okay now this tree had an entirely different motivation right and this is as we move along in mirai and the education with you guys on mirai live one of the things that i've become very aware of is originally we started talking about this is how you prune but then you get into all of those nuances where if you don't start to organize that information based on what you're trying to accomplish you start having exceptions to everything that you teach right guys we have a really rich community and thisqr's mincoll if you want to follow-up with any of this is very important right and for you guys if you're not understanding of whether you're working on developmentally the long- gathering and expanding healing these of the developmental concepts for banshing okay if we're not sure whether we're building secondaries the scaffolding that we're going to be utilizing that growth wiring it out and actually setting the pads that our full-year-and mass and tertiary ramifications is going to be built on thani have a branch and if we don't understand the techniques to redirecting that strength balancing that energy pushing that energy from the tip back into the interior to stimulate that interior growth and build that tertiary ramification then we're never going to reach that highest level of refined bonsai design okay so what you've seen here are two different ways to handle broad-leafed evergreens both of them in the refinement phase okay the eleagnus we didn't pinch it's not a species that we pinch it has tight inner nodes and isn't really a tissue that that lends itself to pinching because it's so firm the oak we did pinch you saw how both of those stimulated small fine interior growth as a result of the way they were handled defoliation on the eleagnus pinching on the coast live oak and now you've seen how we come back and we manage that once they're in an energy positive okay this oak was different because we were saying we have the structure of the oak established but now we're actually instead of trying to refine we didn't have those interior growths we were saying we have the structure of the oak established but now we're we didn't have those interior pieces of growth we didn't have those interior buds we didn't have those interior branchlets so we were pruning some of these but we were also allowing several of them to elongate and harden and we said we would come back and prune to be able to push the energy back into the interior if the elongation process generated interior budding and interior growth okay so now we've got to do a little bit of an investigation here to see how productive that growth over the course of the spring was right so i'm going to dive in here and just take a look at what was generated and what was produced and i have a lot of really strong growth that's coming from the trunk itself that i don't necessarily want to be utilizing for branching because i have structural branches that are already established in these same areas so if i just rotate this josh can you see all of these suckers in here that are kind of see these these little fine pieces of ramification that are in here okay and they're all they're all kind of coming out of the trunk where i've got these structural pieces already set you see those okay i'm just putting my scissor there so you can see okay so this is very very common when we're developing broadleaf evergreens for them to be producing these big elongating strong pieces of growth okay and when we come back in to check this growth we've got to be taking these out before they get too thick before they draw too much strength and because they have the potential to start to contribute to inverse taper inverse swelling and they're never going to be used for finer amounts of growth or ramification now if if we needed branching in this area where those were popping up we very easily could wire those out and start to create branching but actually what we're looking for is what we're seeing on the exterior here okay notice how these have elongated notice how we have the presence of all of these buds that are showing a lot more strength are loaded up with the potential for growth as a result of that elongation now i think this must have gotten munched by like a caterpillar or an insect it doesn't change the behavior now though i want to be pushing the growth and the strength back into these interior shoots to try and stimulate just the same as i did with pinching on the oak and the pruning however that oak already had the strength on the interior to be pinching from the tip back in now we have that strength back in i'm going to be pruning back to two on any branches that i don't want to further elongate but i want to stimulate that beginning of interior secondary ramification or interior secondary development okay i don't want these to further elongate i'm going to be pushing the strength back into those so i'm going to be coming back and pruning right now i'm not just trying to estimate leaf size i'm not necessarily worried about the quantity of fine branches i'm at a point in this tree's development where i'm worried about generating enough strength to stimulate the growth of secondary branching on the interior that allows me to establish the scaffolding upon which my pads are going to be formed okay so any of this pruning out on the tip is simply designed to accumulate as much energy as possible and start to push that energy back into smaller branches on the inside of the wrong area so i can just go ahead and  Wlew one the months interior or stimulate bud growth on the interior. So I have this big long shoot out here at the tip. When I look back into the interior I have swollen buds that several of these nodes back in along this interior. Even this branch that doesn't have a leaf on it still alive when I cut it in green and there's a big swollen bud here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to cut that back to push that growth into the interior and start to create secondary branching. Now notice this fine guy right here. This fine piece I can lay this out as it exists and start to create some of that scaffolding with my secondary ramification. I'm going to be wiring that piece out. Let's take a look over here. This is a piece, look at how strong and thick this piece has gotten and look at all of the buds that are loaded up in the axis. You see these buds in the crotch of these leaves? These are already because of that strength that was accumulated, if I prune this I'm going to be generating these secondary pieces of growth to start that scaffolding upon which I can build this branch. I'm going to prune this back to a desired length where I want to start that ramification and where I have any of these smaller finer elongated pieces I'm going to be wiring these out to start to build that branch pad and that scaffolding and ramification. I've got one that's fine that I can wire out to build that ramification. I had one that's thick that's accumulated the buds on the interior that will generate that potential for that ramification. I prune the thick one to stimulate that ramification. I'm using the thinner one to build that ramification or that secondary structure that creates the pad. That sounds complex doesn't it? Need to simplify that a little bit more. Let me keep working. take a look at that video this is a coast live oak in this area I don't want one singular tip I've gotten a lot of strength this was a very weak area of the tree I so I've gotten a lot of strength I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna push back where there was one I want to generate two where there was one I want to generate two these pieces here notice I've got elongation tip just starting to open I'm gonna go back to two I'm gonna go back to two I'm gonna go back to two notice I've got a big long piece I've got this bud just starting here not super strong and healthy I'm gonna leave all of these pieces alone still in development one of the pieces of development increasing strength and I'm gonna lower this and show you an interior piece notice this piece elongating right here okay I don't have or excuse me I prune back the length on these tips where there was one there will be two this is a developing piece of ramification I'm gonna let that elongate as well I'm not gonna pinch that this feels like the scope of work I needed to complete now so Mark asked if scaffolding scaffolding is another word for secondary yes yes yeah because when we talk secondaries we're talking about creating sort of the framework for the pad right so when we say this fan shaped pad and we always talk about the fan shaped pad is our branch structure right that fan shape is the scaffolding of secondaries now on top of this we create the ramification that builds this shape the body or the density and sort of all of that fine twigging that we value but you have to set this out before we start to construct this on top of it right so that scaffolding of secondaries creates the shape of the pad that we start to build the tertiary ramification upon now while you guys were while you guys were just of the scope of this, I had one of these really strong interior shoots that had started to elongate and was actually growing in the place of a branch that had become quite weak and ended up perishing in the growing season last year. And so I was just redirecting this piece as a structural piece out here to start to get some sunlight and start to be able to develop where I really did want that structural branch that had not existed. Now, in order to be able to make that happen, I've got to be able to shorten and control the growth that's occurring in all of these smaller pieces here, but I want to be laying these out and I want to be very intentional. So I want to show you guys how we go about managing and handling and taking advantage of some of this quote-unquote scaffolding that I continue to refer to. So watch closely with this branch. Now, I've got a really nice, beautiful piece of growth here. I've got sort of the weak center. I've got these two strong pieces here. I know I don't want to leave them that long, but I'm going to wire them out to start to build the shape that I want them to be so I know where to prune them. I've got this great piece of ramification here. I've got this really beautiful strong piece here, and I've got this branch right here. I've got so many pieces coming off of this that are strong. Let's establish some of that scaffolding and lay that out so that we actually form that branch, okay? So I'm going to come in here and I'm going to follow the wire that already exists on it. I'm adding to the existing wire as long as that existing wire is not biting in or biting in too much, okay? Because I know that this pruning and the product of this pruning in the fall season is going to cause thickening that I'll probably have to unwire everything anyways. So I'm going to go ahead and just add this to it and start to form this shape. Okay, now once I start to lay these in and I start to lay this out to increase that photosynthetic efficiency and establish. That pad that I'm going to be building ramification on, I'm going to have a lot cleaner idea of where I want that length to exist. So I can add a little bit of movement to this, being as it's a broadleaf evergreen and we're dealing with an oak, okay? And I'm going to be looking at the shape of this tree. Okay, zoom me out, Hunter. I'm going to be looking at the shape of this tree and trying to decide how long do I actually want this branch in the style or form that it exists. Now, if this is a bonsai, a bonsai form, this is too long. If this is a coast live oak in a coast live oak form, this length may be appropriate. I'm going to lay out a few more of these so that we can see that general shape and then we'll come back and decide. Davis asked if Quercus in general responds well to pinching or is it species to species? Certain varieties of Quercus respond very, very well to pinching, right? But it is species by species. For example, we have a Quercus gyriana, which is the Oregon white oak, a geary oak. Okay? And Quercus gyriana doesn't respond well to anything. It doesn't respond well to pruning, it doesn't respond well to pinching, and it sure doesn't respond well to repotting. So it's a little bit of a challenge, but for the most part, when we're talking about our broad-leafed evergreen Quercus species, pinching when we're trying to push the energy from the tip back into the interior to stimulate that ramification and shorten that internode is an extremely effective technique, extremely effective technique. And it worked. To perfection on that smaller tree this year, I'm really, really, really satisfied with the results of how that tree behaved post-pinching because so many of those buds were just merely potential until they were pinched, and now they're actualized ramification. And when we get growth to actualize into usable pieces of growth, that's a big moment in bonsai. That's a moment that we all kind of strive for, like, ah, I've got back budding, yeah! That's just the first step. Getting that back bud to actually become leaf mass or to become branching or to become needles that are going to give you the ability to further refine the tree, that is a technique in itself. That is a transition from one stage to another of that secondary to tertiary development, and we really made that sort of jump with that pinching process this year. Super, super awesome. Really exciting to see that happen. And this kind of... We use technique to be able to advance the stage of development that a tree exists in. This is something that is still very much sort of evolving. We know the techniques. We've all read the books and magazines. We've all seen the pinching process happen on Japanese maples. So many times we've seen trees pinched. We've seen trees pruned. We've seen trees elongated. What the heck is going on? It's only now that we're starting to quantify, oh, when we're developing... When we're developing a branch to get elongation, thickening, foliar expansion, vascular production, and back-butting, that's one method and one timing and one thought process and one application of fertilizer theory. When we're trying to get secondaries, when we're trying to push the energy from the tip to the interior to build scaffolding, we're going to be moving more towards that moderate. That's another foliar management. That's another timing for pruning. That's another strategy. And then when we're trying to get refinement, we're trying to get those short needles or short, small... Small leaves or short internodes, and we're trying to really hold back the strong areas and really build up the weak areas. That's another one. And usually that last one, that refinement process to build the ramification is the pinching process. Okay? And this is a Quercus agrifolia? This is a Quercus agrifolia that we're building the secondary scaffolding on. Okay? We're working on that secondary scaffolding. We're not to tertiary refinement yet at all. We're just sort of setting that finer branch structure to be able to really execute to perfection. Okay? Linda said, so do you fully defoliate in the spring, even the small leaves? So, no. No. You mean... Linda, are you in development? Are you building secondary scaffolding? Or are you in refinement? That's what will educate how you're doing. Let me know what you're after. And then we can talk about whether we defoliate. I think that question might have been specifically for the tree before. Ah. The small one. So, that tree we did not defoliate. We pinched. Right? We defoliated the tree that we did not pinch. We pinched the tree we did not defoliate. Okay? All right. So, come on in here tight now with me, Josh. Okay? So, just into this area that I've now wired. All right? So, now we've wired this area. We've given structure. We understand how we're going to do this. Now, we want this. I'm going to shorten this a little bit. I want sort of this nice little tuft. I want this billowy nature on this oak. I don't want this to be a bonsai pad. I want this to feel a little more organic. So, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to cut these back. Leaving just a few nodes. I want some length. I want the ramification to be coming from these pieces. That's going to build up this upper piece. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take the terminus out of this. I'm going to leave two junctions there as well. That gives me that nice tight interior. Okay? I'm going to say I don't want this. I want this to be quite this long. So, I'm going to cut this. We've developed this. We've elongated this. This is a secondary branch now. I'm going to cut this to the desired length that I want it to occur at. Not any shorter and then build ramification from there. That's not how we do this. Okay? I'm going to cut this to the length that I want it to be in the current iteration of the shape. So, that I start my ramification building from here. Now, some of you guys are going to say, Well, wait. Wouldn't you want to cut that back farther and build that ramification to get to this? So, that your ramification is at that desired length. Technically, I understand that theory, but here's the problem. You'll never get there. So, we build the length to this point. We cut. We stimulate two, three, four shoots. Now that we've got the scaffolding set, next season we're going to be pinching as those shoots elongate. When we pinch, it's going to stimulate shoots back on the interior. Those are going to start building ramification as well. And every time that we improve this, we come back and we prune it. If it's too long. And we've got better ramification built behind it. We cut back to built ramification. Okay. So, if you can change in your mind that we cut back prior to the length that we want. And build the ramification to the length that we want. And you can start to understand. We grow that shoot to the length we want. We cut. And any ramification that builds behind this that improves the quality of that. We only cut that length back when we've already built the ramification. And that's how you get there. Because the ramification will never build. The way you think it's going to build. And it'll never get to the length you want it to be. I promise. And this is a major shift in the way we handle deciduous and broad-leaved evergreen trees. Okay. So, I'm again going to cut to that desired length. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to adjust some of these branches that exist further on the interior here. Just to pull those into that billowy pad. Okay. I'm going to cut these to the desired length as well. And I'm just going to go ahead and I'm just going to prune these back to try and stimulate where I have one. I will get two as a result of my pruning decision. Keeping those relatively tight. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take some of these interiors back as well. Where there was one, we will get two. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take some of these interiors back as well. Davis asked about how Quercus agrifolia grows in the wild. Grows like this beautiful rolling billowy mass on these grassy rolling hills right near the coast of California. It's one of the most majestic species of trees that exists in the world. A similar species to the species of the western United States. As far as a single stand-alone, sole, iconic species. and that's the image that I'm trying to take to this tree as we build it. Okay. So I'm going to rotate this here. and just kind of show you. Now Josh, if you can zoom in. and just sort of focus on the whole branch and we can see that layout of that scaffolding now. You guys can see the fan shape distribution. Okay. and I'm actually gonna see. Stay right there. Okay. drop that down there you go okay so when i put my hand underneath this now you can start to see that fan shaped layout as it exists notice how the branches are distributed and i've created that full your mass zoom out just a little bit for me yeah perfect thank you okay so now we start to see that layout i have the scaffolding built on my secondaries now to start working on tertiary development this is exactly what we had hoped to accomplish by the way we manage this tree in the spring and now in this fall season coming or excuse me now in this early summer season energy positive hardened off laying all of that scaffolding out and starting to shorten that so we start to shift from that secondary branch building establishing that scaffolding and pushing it into tertiary refinement from this point moving forward that's freaking awesome that was awesome that was amazing moment terry asked why it's such a shallow pot for such a huge trunk um so container aesthetics and dynamics that's a that's a uh that's a very massive conversation terry but this is what i'll say about this tree one of the things that you recognize when you start stylistically trying to push a tree into this lateral growth habit right um or a vertical growth habit is that you're not going to be able to push a tree into this lateral growth habit is that a shallower container allows you to extend and a shallower container allows you to elongate and so this tree being an oak the hope was always to have this billowy wide compressed height this billowy wide nature as you would see quercus agrifolia in the rolling hills outside of san francisco and if you drive up 101 cross the golden gate bridge cruise up 101 towards marin county or through marin county you'll see these coast live oaks just sitting in the middle of the hills just sitting single statuesque uh beautiful trees on the knolls of these hills and that's really where the image for this comes in that's also where the container aesthetic to maximize that comes in as well what does it mean horticulturally to be doing that means that we got to water it a lot but coast live oak also is a species as most of our broadleaf evergreens are that is fairly tolerant to high oxygen content or what we would consider to be a little bit of a dryer environment or a dryer um sort of uh less less water necessitating than some of our other species and so you can get away with that shallow container horticulturally and aesthetically the the shallow container maximizes the aesthetic verne said so at this stage of development would you cut the big leaves or would you reduce them to 50 percent you know um you know i'm i'm not sure i'm sure i'm not sure i'm sure The only reason that I would be cutting leaves at this stage of development would be if I were pushing the branch into refinement. And this branch that I've laid the scaffolding out on, I am pushing into refinement, but the leaves are relatively small on it for where we're at. There aren't any big, like if we just kind of zoom in here, these are big leaves. But when I look at this, this is that shoot that had grown from where I had lost. I lost that structural branch right here, excuse me. And this branch budded back from the very base of that. So when I wire this out, this is now back into development and I'm going to leave these big leaves on to drive development. But where we've established that scaffolding here, if these leaves were massive, I would have them as it stands now. They're not super giant. So I'm going to go ahead and leave them as they are. But you could, you could. I could have these if I wanted to. It would not, it would help. In that transition, it's not yet in refinement. It's not super necessary. So, you know, take it or leave it. And then Vern asked about heat tolerance and need, and the need for sort of cold weather or dormancy with broadleaf evergreens in general. So broadleaf evergreens in general don't have near the necessity for dormancy and tend to be relatively heat tolerant. Now, I think, Vern's probably asking in reference to what would happen if we cultivated these in Texas. And that, Texas is an extreme, right? And so when we look at Texas and we look at that extreme, we know that everything is hypothetical until you start actually attempting to cultivate a broadleaf evergreen in Texas. But I would say that you have a higher chance and a higher likelihood of success with a broadleaf evergreen in Texas than you would with a lot of the deciduous varieties that a lot of people tend to cultivate outside of your Texas natives. And I would also tend to think that there are a lot of native broadleaf evergreens in Texas that nobody is actually using for bonsai. And again, you know, I continue to harp on this species, leucophyllum, leucophyllum, leucophyllum, the Texas sage. But leucophyllum is a broadleaf evergreen species that I'd never seen used in bonsai. I'd never heard anybody talk about. And they use it just in like, I mean, it's like used so much in Israel that it was, you saw it everywhere. And it's a phenomenal bonsai species. That alone is sort of like a, hey, in Texas, you guys have some stuff you need to really dig into. Because that would be a collectible piece of material in Texas for you guys, okay? I'm going to work on some of these lower branches. And I just want to get a little bit of this tree organized. It's not all going to get finished tonight. But I want to organize several of these. You guys can follow the process. We can make some of those pruning decisions together. That should lock in that development of that scaffolding. You've got that pinching and refinement. You've got that defoliation, pruning and refinement. You're getting kind of all of those samples of how to build ramification on our broadleaf evergreen trees. How are we doing for time? We're about an hour and a half in. Oh, cool. Okay. All right. I'm going to rock out here for a minute. Rock out. I almost had like a little bit of stage fright tonight after Todd took over the stream last time. Yeah, it's kind of nice to sit here and chill and watch it happen, isn't it? Yeah. Yeah, it was. It was actually. It's nice to see the chat. You never get to see the chat. I know. I was on the chat. I was getting to say ridiculous things about people not insulting in you. And it was like, it was a good experience, you know? The one thing about working broadly to evergreens at this time of year that is pretty challenging and sort of one of the challenges of broadleaf evergreens I guess at any time of year because they are evergreen is you start to have to watch the foliar mass just like you do on a conifer. Whereas with deciduous, you get those sort of leafless moments and it's like, oh, this is really fantastic. So easy to wire. So easy to manage. And it's, you know, these always have that growth on them. So it's a little bit challenging. Davis asked if coast live oak is known for developing hollows in the trunks or branching. Yeah, definitely. I think oaks in general, Quercus in general is a species that does tend to rot from the inside. Now that's not to say we all know oak to be an extremely hard wood, great firewood, great furniture material depending on how you feel about sort of the what could be considered a mundane sort of grain to the wood. That would be people's criticism of oak. But it is a wonderful, wonderful subject and hardwood for furniture and all kinds of utilitarian purposes. One of the interesting things when we look at it though is that older oaks rot from the core out. And that's very similar to Taxus. Taxus, the U, very, very, very, very, very, very hard wood, wood used to make bows, wood used to build with. And that really, really rigid hardwood rots from the core out. So you do see a lot of hollow oaks. You see a lot of core rot in oaks. And that ultimately is what generally causes the demise of oaks structurally in the landscape is that rotting of the core and that hollowing. And eventually they can't support all of that lateral weight that exists in their branches. We actually have on the drive to Mirai, if you turn off of Highway 30 and you get to take. Bennett Avenue to Mirai, which I would recommend anybody who comes and sees us takes that drive. You'll drive through some of the best Oregon white oaks that exist off of Highway 30 outside of Portland. It's a really magical little section of oaks. And several of them over my time here, just in the eight years I've been here, have had major catastrophic failure in some of their structural pieces because of that rot starting to creep in. And cause some of that structural integrity loss. Moon asked if that wire scarring issue or wire scarring not being an issue, would that also be true for a live oak Quercus virginiana? It depends on, and I have seen Quercus virginiana in the native landscape. But I have never actually worked with it in regards to a bonsai. So it tends to have, I believe from what I understand about Quercus virginiana, its bark tends to be, can be a little bit smooth until it gets very old. And if that's the case, then you probably want to prevent it from scarring as much. Again, you can see, you can see the bark, if you just want to give them a close-up of sort of this rugged bark that exists here. I mean, the bark on Coast Live Oak is very warty, it's very rippled, it's extremely rough, and it covers up wire scars masterfully. Okay? So that's where I have the freedom, and each species is either going to have the flexibility and the capacity to cover those scars, or maybe it's not. And you've got to determine that, and that's going to educate you as to how long you can leave that wire on. Now some people might say, well, why would you leave it on at all if scars could potentially ruin it? And I think that's a valid stance, but here's the other thing. Oaks have a significant amount of memory in their tissue. And so if we wire and take it off before it scars, we're going to be wiring the exact same branches in the exact same way the second time and the third time and the fourth time. And one of the advantages when we have a heavy bark oak species is that we can wire it, we can allow enough tissue to form to hold that position, and because it holds that position the second or the third time that we wire it, we're not forced to wire the same structural branches, and we can just start to focus on some of the lesser ramifications using less wire, starting to get that more organic form building in the tree. That's really what we would ideally be working to accomplish and achieve, is developing some of that less significant wiring strategy and allowing the more organic form of the tree to take over. So it's up to you and the characteristics of the tree how you use that knowledge. But if in doubt, go ahead and unwire. If you know you have a really rough bark tree, then that gives you some freedom to be able to establish structure. It gives me an opportunity to work it out much quicker. I'm actually going to take that off. This is going to be just absolutely magnificent. I actually have been waiting for this moment with this tree for a very long time. This tree has been at Mirai for... What's the moment? What's that? What's the moment that you've been waiting for? Uh, to have the strength in the secondary branches to lay out the scaffolding that I'm getting to lay out tonight. Like this tree came as a stump three, maybe four years ago to Mirai. And obviously the material has just a tremendous amount of potential. But it's always been, it's been hard to build the strength in the tree. It took two years in the collecting container to get enough foliar mass on it to be able to repot. We put it into this. We had a little bit of a mishap where we had some chipmunks basically tear the root system. That we had created apart last year. And so we lost all of last year. And now that it's starting to show this kind of thickness and health and vigor in the secondary branches. It allows us to come back in and really start to work on the shape and form the shape. It's pretty freaking rad to see it at this point now. Because the material is there to be just an absolutely drop dead world class bonsai. I mean this tree is going to be such a wonderful natural representation. Of Quercus agrifolia as sort of in its organic native natural form. But it's just been a long process to get it here. And this is, I'm going to say, you know, I love Eliagnus. I think Eliagnus is a wonderful broad leafed species. Particularly the pungens. But also I think Angustifolia does offer some potential slightly larger leaf. But if you had to, if I had to identify one single broad leaf species that I think is absolutely iconic. And 100% sort of native North American that I can identify with. It's the Coast Live Oak from California. I mean it just, San Francisco, Bay Area, Marin County. That whole region. But even if you go all the way down to San Luis Obispo. And even slightly farther south. Right outside of Santa. Barbara. There's a lot of Coast Live Oak. Vandenberg Air Force Base. There's actually a pygmy grove of these. Right near where I went to school. There was a pygmy forest of these. That had a naturally dwarfed form of Quercus agrifolia. There's just a lot of really unique, interesting, wonderful representations to look at in the native environment. And it's always been one of those trees that for me has spoken to me about the environment I became familiar with. Okay. I'm going to rotate this towards you guys. And you're going to be able to see it. And you're going to be able to start to see some of the organization occurring now. Now even though I'm going towards this sort of informal. Let me do this before. Let me get these out of the way before I do that. Because they're going to really kind of. They're going to kill our style a little bit. Because you're going to be able to see how. Even though we have that informal billowy oak form. When we start to lay out this scaffolding. You're going to see the organization that's going to create definition between the pads. And that's a really. It's a little bit of a deviation from how we would style like a pine branch or a juniper branch. And this is where we get into. This is an oak which is not a pine or a juniper. And doesn't have those flat bottoms. But we still have definition between the foyer masses. In the scaffolding that we're setting. So now that we've got this. Our structure itself has sort of this rolling billowy form. And when we start to lay out the scaffolding. We have a little bit of movement. Even in that fan shape. We're not laying it down like we would a pine or a juniper. And really forming that flat bottom. We want a little bit of undulation in that. To carry forward that sort of organic form. So when we're kind of looking. In this area. I've got this sort of billowy pad here. That's got a lot of contour. Has a lot of movement carrying out to the tip. And sort of showing that Quercus form. I've got this next piece in here. That's starting to move in this direction as well. I'm going to reduce this just a little bit. Because it's on the front of the tree. I've got this wonderful little connected root piece here. That's connected here. Crawls along the ground. Almost forms like a little child trunk. I had to work really hard to get that out of the way. Because it used to stick straight at us. To fit it in the palm. I wasn't sure if it was going to survive. I've let it build. You saw that big branch I cut off of it. All part of the strengthening process. Now that's got it's own form there. But now we're starting to see this happening. And when I look at this. I don't want to create this big bubble. Of a canopy. I want this bubble to boom. Boom. Boom. Boom. I want it to billow. I don't want it to become uniform. I want it to billow. And billowy forms. When we get to these broadleaf. Evergreens. Even when we talk about. Coming back to the Eliagnus. And the way that these branches. The sort of that tufting. And that billowing. Not balls. Not pom-poms. Not topiary. But this rolling form. That shows the division. In the branching. After we lay out that structure. We lay out that scaffolding. And we form that ramification. That soft aesthetic. Is really what we're after. And that's where we're headed with this tree. And this is maybe. When we get right into it. I'm going to shorten this branch here on the front. Maybe when we get right into it. The reason that I've gotten so pumped. And the reason that we've streamed on. Quercus quite a bit. In Mariah Live's sort of young history. As a platform to teach you guys about bone size. Just because. Finding that change in aesthetics. And that sort of billowy nature. To this. Genre of trees. And how they grow. And how they can be represented. Is that it's just another opportunity. To explore aesthetics. And really deviate. From some of those models. That have become really stagnant. Really stale. And that we've duplicated a lot. Yeah we have done a lot of Quercus. Yeah because I freaking love it. I know. I just you know. Between like the gold cup. Which needs to be pruned right now. And is looking ridiculous. And. Yeah they're they're they're really really magical. Cool. Davis asked if you've considered implementing hollows in this tree. You know it already has. Its own amount of hollows. I'm actually working in an area right here. That has some has some pretty serious spooky hollow action going on. I'm going to try to get these branches placed. Because it'll show. A further division. In the foyer masses. So it's it's already got its own. Kind of hollow action going. And you know this tree has enough of its own deadwood. This is a very old old old old tree. I'm going to say that this coast live oak. This is probably. I'm going to say 85 to 100 years old. As a as a collected piece. That's to have a tree this small. With this kind of character. To the trunk. And this kind of age is extremely extremely rare. Extremely rare. Which is why it was so sort of frustrating. And gutting to watch it struggle. And then have the freaking chipmunks. Where was it collected in California? Yeah it was collected in California. Now where in California. I have no idea. The collector would never. Right. Divulge that information. And I you know for me I don't really. I couldn't care less anyway. I just meant like the the general. I yeah definitely. Coastal northern California. Is is as good as I got. And the regions that create these. I don't know. What creates this. But I think it's probably cattle. That has created this. Like munching it. Mm-hmm. I think this is pretty heavily cat cattle. Fed cattle mowed down areas. And. They when it gets really hot and dry. The cattle. Will feed on the the coast live oak. Probably in an attempt to. I don't know. Maybe it doesn't sound very digestible. It doesn't sound very digestible. Doesn't sound very tasty. But there's also a chance that life. In the hotter parts of the coastal range. Is not that awesome. Yeah cow anyways you know. Yeah like when you when you ride through. Picturesque Tillamook Tillamook. It's like that's that's if I were a cow. I would want to be that. Cow. I wouldn't want to be. In Oregon? Tillamook? Yeah. Oh yeah. That's definitely. Well that's where the good. Pastore. That's like. That's where the good dairy is. Oh yeah. Tillamook. I've heard it smells like cow poop. For miles. You can smell the cow poop for miles. I feel. The smell of cheese being made. Yeah that's that's a little bit stinkier too. Nothing compares to Greeley Colorado. Nothing compares to Greeley Colorado not even I five with all the feedlots compares to the bud blood boiling and Greeley Colorado. Wasn't Greeley. Greeley they. There's a lot of slaughterhouses and they take the blood and boil it to make blood meal for fertilizer. Okay. So the the smell the wafting smell of boiling blood across the across the town. Yeah it's it's it's it's intense. That's gross. Everybody. Everybody needs fertilizer right. Yeah. It is. That's where it comes from. Big huge fertilizer. Up the road the paper mill smells terrible. Yeah the paper mill is rough. Paper mill is really rough. That's that's just straight up pulp and chemical though. Longview. Longview. Yeah. And Rainier. Oh dude. Look at that. Look at that definition that that's starting to take on. You get that sort of separation of the. Those pads you start to see that that division now as we get up into the crown we'll start to have more and more of sort of these separations and and divisions to be able to create this negative space and really build this these breaks in the canopy of the tree but I think I think you guys get it and start to understand how that pruning that you saw again and we're refreshed on the video in the spring really really got us this production of secondary. branching elongate hard and they've thickened they've become usable branches we lay that out and now we decide on that length and anything that is produced from this point on on those branches that we feel are really good secondary branches at the right thickness and at the right strength will be pinching to start to build tertiary ramification now. Yeah. Yeah. We got any any further questions. No more questions. But I just remember. We should just mention the covered wagon. Oh. Yeah. Holy smokes. Yeah. That's right. Mariah is going to be rolling hard to the national show in first week of September. We'll be arriving at the national show on that Thursday the 7th I believe. So if you guys need trees transported from anywhere on the West Coast or along our route to the national show. Info. Bonsai Mariah dot com send us an email let us know about your transport needs if you guys need stands if you need pots and we will be having a Web store tree sale in August prior to the covered wagon rolling to the East Coast. Stay tuned reach out to us let us know because we are filling up the wagon relatively quickly and we want to make sure to have space for your goods it will be a refrigerated truck I'll be driving it as per usual. And we'd be stoked to transport anything you guys need. Yeah. And there should be an email going out this week about it and you guys can just sort of respond to that and we have we can we can let you know about pricing and all that. So cool. Good. Thanks for reminding me about that. That's awesome. Other than that that's it. Other than that. OK. So now I'm going to just recap one more time just to be the broken record that I am. You guys have learned how to handle a tree whose growth we really don't have the ability to pinch in the early Agnes because it's too thick and coarse and hard and strong. We defoliated. The evergreen leaves that were on it over the winter time we pruned back to make that original decision it pushed out that that stored energy we got small tight internodes and tight leaves on the interior and then it exploded into massive leaves we came back energy positive when we pruned it the next flush is going to be very fine and we'll be sure to pull that back in to show you guys the product of that we had the coast live oak that as it was elongating in the spring we were pinching because we wanted to direct the energy from the tree. energy from those tips back to those interior branchlets and buds to begin the ramification process and really refine that tree it fully hardened off we came back in we made structural decisions down to 2 and we made length decisions on all of those pieces that were stimulated to grow this tree we just did some minor pruning from 1 to 2 to try and stimulate that interior scaffolding that scaffolding formed as a result of that pruning now we're wiring it out we're making length decisions. And we're actually creating the structure to be building tertiary ramification on top of from this point moving forward after we lay this all out we're going to be pinching to really start to build that ramification now that we've set that scaffolding you guys have learned how to handle these in the spring you know have a very significant idea about how to handle your broadleaf evergreens in the early summer you're well on your way to being able to utilize this massive genre of species to make awesome bonsai couldn't thank you guys enough for joining us today. All right have a great week we'll see you guys next week and look forward to it not mahalo. 
