The horticultural practice of bonsai centers around putting a large tree in a small pot and really utilizing that container to constrict the growth of the roots. But sometimes in the ceramic body we can have an imperfection or sometimes the pressure that those roots can exert on that ceramic body can cause crackage or damage to the ceramic container. And this is where we have to equip ourselves with the way that we re-secure structurally compromised containers or repair a container that's just physically broken but matches the tree perfectly. And we're going to utilize Big Blue as a great example of how we go about container repair. The container that's being repaired is a one-of-a-kind container, antique Japanese, over a hundred years old and really difficult to find this size, scale, and quality of clay in a replacement. So we're going to be using Big Blue and we're going to be using our container. Now Big Blue has existed inside of this container from its inception as a bonsai and it's always been a very compatible match that's bred a beautiful aesthetic. To move away from this container we would only be stepping down in quality and even though the container is fractured we have the techniques to be able to shore up the structure of the ceramic body and make it as clean as concise as possible. Let's walk through the steps of how we go about patching a crack to be able to fix and improve a ceramic vessel. Before we ever get to ceramic repair, we first have to understand that taking the tree out of the container is a very challenging thing to do when you have an established tree and you have a damaged container. Fundamental use and execution of a comma to remove those compacted roots around the edge of the root mass is what allows us to extract it while exerting as minimal amount of force on the container as possible so we don't further damage to the ceramic vessel. This extraction process is imperative that we execute appropriate technique and preserve the integrity of that ceramic vessel slowly work this out okay okay go ahead and proper down and i'm going to rotate this way that is one of the most handsome root systems i have ever seen now while we're doing a ceramic repair and we have a tree that we're going to be putting back into that container we need to be protective and considerate of that tree because this repair is going to take several hours or potentially multiple days we hold off on any repotting technique and we wrap that tree's root system in wet racks we'll want to be checking back multiple times a day to make sure that they stay in place until the container is completely dry stay moist and keep that root system hydrated while that ceramic vessel is repaired. Once you've extracted the tree from the container, we have to assess how bad is the crack? Where does it go? And is there any impediments like debris or soil mass or root mass? As we started to explore Big Blue's pot, we recognized that the roots have actually been growing through that crack, filling with decomposing and broken down soil. And that's pushed the container farther apart. So the first step was to find a solution, clean out that marriage of those two ceramic surfaces so that we don't have any debris blocking the repair of the ceramic body. Now as we mentioned, we need to make sure that both ceramic surfaces are completely clean and for this specific container, we had a crack that didn't go all the way through the container. We tried some creative solutions utilizing floss and utilizing water pressure to try and remove some of that debris and that root mass from between the two ceramics. But in the process of creating the space to clean those surfaces, the whole pot actually fractured into two pieces. When I think about this, this is actually far more favorable because it allows us to truly address each surface and get a beautiful marriage. If you can prevent that fracture, you would, but it happened and it's not necessarily a bad thing. We're going to turn lemons into lemonade. Just made our job easier. Now that we have the container in two pieces, we're going to apply a technique in the corners of the container that are really going to hold the whole structure together. I'm going to take two screws. I'm going to cut the head off of the screws. Doesn't matter if they're zinc or stainless, but they do need to be capable of holding up inside of the ceramic body. And I'm going to align those along the corners of the container that I want to reconnect. Now the corners have a lot of ceramic meat. Which means we can. We can drill into those and we can utilize a two part epoxy with that screw to create a really seamless structure to hold the container together in those really beefy portions of the clay body. This is one of the very best ways to repair a container, but it's only something you can apply if your container has separated into multiple pieces. Now when we're trying to align the screw to hold the corners together, knowing this is such a significant structural piece of container repair. We want to make sure. That screw and those holes line up perfectly. We'll drill the initial hole, trying to keep it level, trying to stay along our chalk lines we made on the rim. But we're going to only penetrate to a depth that's half of that screw's distance. Now this is where it becomes complex. How do you line up the hole on the other half of the container? We're going to go ahead and utilize chalk right around that drilled hole section. And we're going to re-piece the container together to try and leave a little chalk remnant on that second half of the container to formulate our guide for where we drill a piece that's going to accommodate the screw and the two-part epoxy. This will take a little bit of time, a multiple trials and errors, but you will get it. Stick with it. Utilize the chalk as your marker. Every container repair is going to be a little bit differently, but I always like to have some material on hand that I can apply compression to hold that marriage of those two pieces of ceramic together. Now this is where you see. The rope. We didn't actually get the rope to function that well, but it's still worth showing that you should have a plan to be able to hold that ceramic vessel together. The ceramic fit so well we didn't need the rope, but it's good to have on hand and it's good to have as an option. Now that we have the corners firmly anchored via our screw and our two-part epoxy, we have the structure to be able to come back in and create a stability inside of the ceramic vessel on the interior of the container. Where are my glasses? Where are my safety glasses? Pull. We're going to be using a diamond blade to actually form a nice imprint inside of the wall that we can inlay more screws or potential wire patterns to be able to hold that together and cap it with another two-part epoxy. You can use multiple materials to hold both pieces of the ceramic vessel together, but make sure whatever you utilize is durable inside of that wet condition of the containerized environment. For this particular case, and knowing that this container really does have a major separation, I'm going to go ahead and even utilize the diamond saw. The diamond saw on the rim of the container as well just to create two holding points that hold the major structure of the container together. I know this is going to be more visible. I know this is going to be slightly problematic, but it makes sense to have structure and function of our container more than trying to preserve the aesthetic. If you see antique containers repaired, oftentimes it's very obvious they're repaired. There's nothing wrong with a repaired container if it's done well. What we're seeing here is a lot of new details. Really new. Really new. Great. ceramic body, I'm going to now utilize my spade bit to be able to drill holes at each end of the slot that I've cut with the diamond blade. This is going to be the point where I'm going to insert a copper metal staple that inserts into those holes and holds the two pieces of the ceramic body together. I'll then take my two-part epoxy, continue to dye it to get color consistency and make it less visible, and insert it over the copper wire to keep it compressed in that slot and really create a nice hard outer shell that once again holds the two pieces of the ceramic vessel together. This is not complex, but it is time consuming, and doing it correctly so that we don't drill through the container, we don't cause further damage, and we're able to establish that structural hold, this is the whole point behind container repair and the techniques that we're showing. Now that we've repaired Big Blue's container, one of the biggest questions is how long is this going to last? We have trees at Mirai whose containers we repaired in 2010, and now 10 years later they are still bulletproof, they've showed no further separation, and they're still just as beautiful as they were when we did them 10 years ago. This is what bred, over the course of time, the technique that we're teaching you right now. When we start to think about, putting a tree back into that container, we want to give every portion of that two-part epoxy the longest time possible to cure, harden, and give us that structural stability. Finally, when we put the tree back in the container, we are now free to once again treat the container as if it is a singular ceramic vessel that has no damage. I hope this helps. Don't let this be intimidating, and don't be afraid to try and fail. Good luck, enjoy, and happy repairing of all those beloved containers that we thought couldn't function any longer. 
