what's going on everybody back in the house at where i uh hopefully a little bit more chipper than last week anyways super tuesday i'm very happy to be back in the saddle live with everybody and uh a few few really uh important announcements tonight uh some some fairly significant changes happening at mirai um but first we'll just uh say we've got eve on the mic this evening hello everyone uh and we have josh producing the stream from afar and uh jesus on the detail cam in the studio the team is starting to i feel like it's like a band getting back together right like the boys are back in town yeah right right and then uh sam is also on the mic from afar and i think you know it's really it's a very bittersweet evening because uh it's time to announce that sam is officially going uh her own direction and we're super excited for sam to take the next step in her career path and life and it has been an absolute pleasure beyond explanation to work with sam she's been a very pivotal part of mirai uh and all of our including your lives over the uh you know well over a year um so i'm very sad to see you go sam and particularly in the way that we are parting with all of this insanity happening um but eve is going to be our new project manager and she will be now managing all of your lovely compliments and uh and every interaction that we have but um you know welcome eve we're super excited to have you and sam we wouldn't be here without you yeah i i love you guys so much and i'm really excited to be here with you and i'm so much it's been such a fun and wild ride and i've learned more than i ever thought i ever could about bonsai during this experience which you always wanted to know like share with everybody i am you know i'm going to be the most interesting person at parties for the rest of my life but um i uh just so every if anyone's curious i am leaving mirai to go to graduate school i am starting a grad program in speech language pathology this fall so making a career change been on the docket for a long time but eve is going to do such an amazing job and i'm going to be here through next week so i'll be here for the the last couple streams of these next these next uh two weeks yeah i've just had such a great time yeah yeah we have absolutely rocked out it is very it is very bittersweet to say goodbye but uh i'm super proud of you and i wish you all the best um because behind all of sam's efforts at mirai she's also been going to school this entire time just done an absolutely bang up job for us at mirai and project manager position is a a a jack of many trades and um she's held the ship together very well for us so anyways um there you go another change in the mirai team and i also wanted to just circle back and say you know i apologize if anybody tuned in to um the stream last wednesday obviously tuesday we canceled and it just didn't work out for me um i'm safe and taft is safe and um and i'll probably speak more to the situation that uh that has occurred in the future when when things have uh progressed a little bit more because i do consider the mirai community a family and honestly the the amount of thoughts friendship kind wishes support uh this community and i'm very proud of that what you guys did in reaching out honestly pulled me through last week it was huge i couldn't um have imagined that kind of outreach and impact of our community and i i felt um absolutely loved and supported my family felt loved and supported and i just wanted to thank you all from the bottom of my heart for that kind of support because um you never really know what's going to happen when when sort of uh metal grinds against metal and you get down to sort of those points and the mirai community was there for us um so thank you very much and again you know in the future when that when there's more resolution i'll sort of uh speak to sort of the things that we've been dealing with at mirai and and my my family but um for now we are safe and and thank you all very very much because it really did get us through a tough time anyways let's take that and let's just do a sharp off-ramp right we're now headed on to the next one and i'll see you guys next week on a new road through the coastal oaks to the beach sun is shining and summer pruning of redwoods oh i guess i should ask eve do we have any announcements besides all of the announcements we just did well i think i think um sam is still going to do our announcements this is a transitionary period um but yes i will handle the announcements so the first announcement is that our uh mini stream tomorrow aspen fundamental design we are postponing that i will make sure that you guys are apprised of the new date as soon as we have it and then we will be having q a live q a at 10 a.m on thursday and then forum q a we're going to be addressing everybody's questions from last week this week so um we'll get all those filmed and we'll get your answers to you early next week yeah yeah the wheels of mirai are now officially turning again so um anybody that's like i got that question don't worry we'll get there we'll get there i appreciate you being patient letting us catch up all right so we're going to be doing a little bit of a summer pruning of redwoods now i feel like we have continued to it's almost been like this this discussion of summer pruning of redwoods has almost been this discussion of a carrot it's been out there we talk about oh man you've got sort of this later uh period of time in the fall initially i had based that timing around some of the environmental factors that cued the timing for the pruning of taxes right um initial freeze we get into that sort of december january period of time and then we're going to be doing a little bit of time and that's when we prune and what we've recognized as mirai has evolved as we've put that knowledge out there as people have tried it some people had success some people had failure and we tried to come back and really correct course by doing uh an updated sort of late fall pruning of redwoods where we start to really identify the characteristics that key and start to clue us into that pruning timing and what we're saying when we start to talk about pruning when we talk about redwood just to orient where we're at right now and he's up close okay when we get into these areas where we have this elongated growth okay to come in and to fully prune this off you can do this kind of pruning at any period of time where we're actually pruning back to a branch where we're pruning off the growth and fully removing the growth completely to come back in and cleanly prune this is something that we can do at any period of time all right but what we generally tend to talk about and tend to focus on with redwood is if we take this growth, this frond-like piece of growth. And I'm going to go ahead and hold this so Jesus can zoom in here. If we take this piece of growth and we say, okay, that's great. I understand that I can cut this off anytime I want. But what about if I want a bud along this stem? What if I want a bud along this piece? What if I didn't pinch? What if it's elongated too much? What if I needed more growth to gain health? And now I want to regain the shape. And this is really where we start to say, okay, that late fall period of time, when we start to see the adventitious buds along this branch starting to swell, along the base of the trunk starting to make themselves visible, the setup for our full year growth in the spring, that is our indication that we can come back in and we can actually prune. Let me see if I can get that. Yeah. Okay. We can actually prune that branch back as long as we leave some of those needle pieces on that piece of growth. And we can, we can pretty much guarantee that we're going to get a bud right near where we prune that branch. Okay. But we've also said, listen, there's another time in the year where we can make that pruning decision after the first flush of growth hardens off. And where we're at with this redwood, just discussing that timing and discussing that indication, we are starting to enter that phase of that period of time right now in the Pacific Northwest. If you're in California, you've already entered it. If you're in a warmer portion, a more southerly portion of the Pacific Northwest, you've already entered it. If you're in a warmer portion, a more southerly portion of the Pacific Northwest, you've already entered it. If you're in a warmer part of the country, an area that's had a much more, I would say, normal spring, then you're into that period of time. But again, I want to come back to indicators so that we're not trying to base it on some time frame. Okay. And Jesus, can you come way in? Can you get way in here? Get, get super in here because these kinds of indicators are really important to be able to see. Okay. So when we get all the way in here, what we start to see at the base of this, and you can just see that little light green sort of nub in there, that, hey, Zeus is picking up in his camera. Let me go ahead and show you my scissors. And you see that bud right there, right in the crotch of that. This is adventitious budding starting to prepare itself for a second flush. Okay. That means when we start to see these adventitious buds forming along these lengths of growth, forming at the shoulders where we have meristematic tissue that gave rise to these fronds, and we start to see the elongated growth, whether we chose to pinch or whether we've allowed it to elongate, we've allowed it to elongate or we miss pinching, it solidified, we were busy, we had no idea what we were supposed to be doing. When we start to see these adventitious buds mounting up on our tree, and I'm going to go ahead and show you another one. Josh, go wide again. I'm going to rotate and I'm going to give Jesus an even better one. Jesus, I'm going to fold this down. And if you can just come right into that little area right there, because I think we're going to be able to see it better. Okay. Josh, bring me in tight again here. Okay. Now, when I bend this down, you start to see, I've got one here, I've got that one at the top, I've got the terminus of that prune site, but I also have it out here, and you can just barely see all of these tiny little buds. Let me go ahead and wrap my scissor around them. You can just see the tiny little buds between my pair of scissors there. Those are the indicators that we are now in a period of time where if I want to prune, I could come back and I could prune here. This is now so solid. I'm past the point of pinching here. I did an initial round of pinching on the longest pieces. It catalyzed all of these pieces to start to elongate, but they solidified before I got back to pinch them a second time. And now when I start to see those buds showing up, I start to see that adventitious accumulation of the second flush of growth, it means that my tree, with this growth, has reached a post-flush hardened state of energy. I can come back in, I can prune here. I could come back in and I could prune back in here. And because it's now in a state where it's in an energy positive, I will get buds very near that point. I'm going to be able to manage and control the length that I want. Now obviously in this very short, compact area here, where I've got buds at the base of that, I'm not super concerned about shortening all of my growth to be a quarter of an inch long and hoping that I get buds at that site. But when I start to pull in some of these longer pieces, notice how long this is, okay? And I start to say, man, I don't want all of that length. Maybe I want to go ahead and I want to take some of the length out of that shoot. I'm going to take that two off. And then where I get into this, and I've got these two longer pieces here, now I want to shorten, not just beyond where I've grown, although I could prune this and shorten within that distance. Maybe I want to come all the way back in here and I'm going to shorten to there. This is the time of year where you have carte blanche. As long as you have green leaves in the presence of that cut site, the buds will start to orient where you leave off that tip. Take this all the way back into here and cut back into relatively old growth. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take it farther. I could cut all the way back into here and I could actually start to really reduce. I could take this piece all the way back into here. And because I'm seeing that adventitious mounting of buds, I have total carte blanche to be able to reduce as long as I have green needles and as long as I have a green stem. As long as that stem is green, I have the ability to now reduce. This becomes that second major period of time in the year where we can really come back. And again, I could have been pinching. I pinched once. It got away from me because we were dealing with juniper tip blight because of all of the rain, the deciduous trees hardened off early, so partial defoliation. We were kind of working through a really late extended repotting season, which honestly, if I'm just being really clear with you guys, we repotted a tree today. First time in my life. First time in my life. I've repotted a tree in June. Never done that before. Really odd year this year, okay? But coming back at this time with that identifying characteristic of adventitious buds mounting up on the tree, this is the time. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to get rid of a lot of the growth that's coming off of the trunk. I don't want this. Structure on this tree is set. This is a very artistic, very beautiful redwood. It was originally wired by Hugh Grant, who now resides in Australia. He studied at Mirai for a while. Did a beautiful execution of aesthetic on this tree. And it's gotten way too wide. The artistic form of this tree, if we just come back to design, has become way overgrown. We're too long on the left side here. Tree is moving to the right side. And inside of this, the movement and the nuances of the trunk are phenomenal. A redwood like I've never seen before. I want to show that to you. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to start clearing out the very basic growth in the trunk, which again, I could have been doing up to this point. It got away from me. Very good time to come back and go ahead and open this up. And then we're going to start doing. That major reduction to regain that proportion of the growth that exists inside of this. I'm going to open it up to questions while I kind of work through this initial branch and set the tone for the pruning. Okay. So first up, we have a couple of folks that are all asking related questions. So I'm going to merge them all together, Bentley, Jim, and Moon. We're all wondering here, does the scope of work apply to dawn redwood? Does this apply to bald cypress? How much of this is applicable to bald cypress? Yeah. Good question. Dawn redwood and bald cypress are definitively different because they are deciduous conifers. And this is a coastal redwood. This is an evergreen conifer, which means that it never loses its leaves. If you want to find out how do we prune a dawn redwood, how do we prune a bald cypress at this time of year, we've got the feature content on the partial defoliation and pruning of a dawn redwood of a bald cypress. Check that out for dawn redwood. You can follow the same partial defoliation and pruning to enhance ramification that we utilize. In the bald cypress methodology, they identify and behave almost in the exact same way. And that's where I would push you. And again, that content is already there in the library itself. I'm going to pull you in real quick just to walk you through some of the decisions that I'm making here. Now one thing that we see when we look inside this area is we generally do have a very strong, maybe even a long initial course shoot here. And we will start to see more compact growth originating from the crotch of that. That area where we have that elongating piece is a meristematic area. Again, that's where cellular division is taking place, where new shoots are born. Whenever I come back to this, if I'm going to be saving this central stem out here, then I have to be correcting. Shoot selection is a big part of this initial period of pruning after the first flush has hardened off. And I want to really be looking at if I have tight ramified healthy growth that exists on this piece here versus one singular long. Notice how coarse, notice how strong this is. If this ramified growth is showing good solid buds at the tips, notice I have these nice little green kind of marbles at the tips of that, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take off the piece that isn't yet ramified. Because if you think about this, I would have to prune this piece back into this interior. I would have to generate buds that are now going to ramify. And I've already accomplished that in this smaller piece right here where I do have this really beautiful ramification and tight and compact growth. I'm always going to be substituting for compact growth that is already ramified. I have another one right here. Notice this big long shoot. It's a monster here. And I've got this really beautiful nice tight compact highly ramified piece here. If I'm trying to reduce, I'm going to be taking off those pieces and notice how tight and how beautiful that little ramified area is right there. I also like at this point in time to start to clean off some of the older needles along these woodier sections. This is a big part of coastal redwood work. To get them to ramify and start to show that kind of advanced formation of branching structure that really does show maturity in the bonsai process. And I want to be considering orientation. Now notice I get here. I've got one, I've got two coming off the top and I have three, a big strong piece in the back here. I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to take off the strong piece because it's coming out at a 90 degree angle. I don't like that. I've got this piece that's coming up off of the top right here. I'm not super stoked on that. If I take those two out, now I come back to that moment where I say, ooh, I can prune back into green leaves on a green stem and I'm going to get a bud there. Now that fits into that nice tight compact branch formation. That's the kind of pruning that we're doing right now to really set and dictate the strength, guide where the buds push and continue evolving the tree over the rest of this year on a much more controllable amount of strength in our coastal redwoods that allow us to truly compress and refine. That's what we're talking about. Hi. Bentley, Pierre, and Marianne are wondering why the new growth is so pale, if that's okay. Yes. This was a conversation that we were having before we started and Eva's like, is this tree sick? Is there something wrong with it? Redwoods just like junipers, just like a lot of other varieties of trees have a very significant amount of genetic diversity in the natural landscape. What you start to see is the new growth of a lot of redwoods. We've had upwards of 50, 60 redwoods at Mirai at any one time. The new growth on our redwoods can be entirely different, entirely unique, and entirely specific to itself. Now, this one actually has almost like a pink, I would say a pink tint to it. When it originally came out, it was very yellow. Can you zoom into that real quick? Josh, can you bring us in close? It was almost like a yellow color. Now you see that reddish hue. That's the sign of that starting to harden off. That reddish hue is going to give rise to the darker green as this does fully harden off. Now again, I'm not looking at this. This is too firm to pinch now. If I pinch it off, the whole thing comes off and I don't want to pull off all of that new growth. Pinching is supposed to preserve a small portion of that new growth. Once I start to pull and it pulls off the whole shoot, now I start looking for those indications of new buds mounting up. I've got new buds back in the interior here along that. I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to drop this all the way back into the interior, and I'm really going to start to reduce and control that. The color of that is very, very, I would say, unique and specific to each individual redwood. It isn't an indication of anything good, bad, or indifferent. It just is how this redwood's growth occurs. This has been the general coloration. This has been the general behavior of this specific redwood. It goes from the yellow color to that reddish color to that darker green color. Again, redwoods in the garden have all different colors. All different types of new growth. Even different layouts to the way that their needles sit flat and lateral versus some of them start to actually have more of a cylindrical 360-degree orientation. The books, if you read about redwoods, won't tell you that that's what's happening, but this is part of that genetic diversity that occurs in the native landscape. We did have one question that was not quite related to this stream, but Chris would like to know, what kind of tree were you repotting today? We had a Rocky Mountain juniper. I think I've been pretty vocal about the struggles that we've had because it has been extremely cold and has been less than ideal in terms of sun exposure. We've been in a period of 12 or 14 days of uncontrollable rain. We had a Rocky Mountain juniper who's, as we've transitioned out of ... I've talked about this and I don't want this to become a big topic of discussion. I'm not saying all red lava is bad, but we did have a bad batch of red lava wherever it came from, had some things that really impacted the health of the trees that we put into it. We've had other batches of red lava that were great, this batch, and historically the trees that have been in it. We've been trying to get trees out of it. Had a juniper doing well, suddenly just started to absolutely take a nosedive. We started cleaning off the surface as we talk about. Whenever we see a tree starting to decline in health, our first move. Cleaning off the surface as we talk about. Whenever we see a tree starting to decline in health, our first move. Cleaning off the surface as we talk about. Cleaning off the surface as we talk about. Cleaning off the surface as we talk about. Cleaning the surface, tilt it up on an angle, increase balance of water and oxygen. As I was cleaning the surface of this particular tree, following protocol as I would for any tree that I cannot identify what the root issue is, but I have identified that it is a root issue in fact, not a disease or a pest issue in the foyer mass that's causing the problem. As I was cleaning the surface, I could not find a single living root. I'm thinking, wow, this is weird. I moved it out of the rain into the greenhouse, had it up on an angle. Over the course of two weeks in the greenhouse, that downward spiral started to change. It started to produce new buds at the tip, and I started to see the color improve again. And I was saying, okay, red lava, tree has not grown yet, was doing well and started to crater, root-related issue. I don't know if this is the best thing to do right now or not, but if I leave it in the red lava over the course of this year, I have no control over what's continuing to cause issue. So I decided to repot it as an experimental application of technique today. I'll let you know how it goes. It's a fantastic tree. You all know the tree very, very well. Hopefully it recovers. And when it recovers, we'll celebrate that. But we'll see. We'll see how it goes. I'm not recommending repotting in June. I'm not saying that's a good practice. I'm saying this year in the Pacific Northwest, with as cold, as rainy, as dark as it's been, and this tree's health issues and the fact that it had yet to grow, it was the move that I chose to make today. All right, Rafi's wondering if this is applicable to Taxus. He says that Taxus is like his olives are for you. So I would say, yeah, I would say that Taxus right now, this post-flush hardened pruning, right? And when we get right down to it, if we start to try and just quantify what exactly are we doing with this redwood right now, we are post-flush hardened pruning. This is the tail end of that elongation and that initial flush of growth. We understand that we can pinch, but we do have to come back and we do have to check the growth. We do have to guide the strength. We do have to apply technique to manage the aesthetic. This is a post-flush hardened prune on our redwoods. I really wanted to come back in and tap into this because I knew I was going to have to prune this specific redwood very aggressively in terms of pruning back into the interior growth to really shrink down its proportion and regain the scale that I felt like Hugh captured so well when he initially styled this tree and really gave it its initial design. We had talked about it. We had talked about the freedom of the design. And it's really been lost. This tree suffered after the winter after it was initially styled, we've learned over the course of time. We don't typically want to be wiring our redwoods in the fall period of time until we see them starting to put on those buds and become vascularly active. So this tree did show a little bit of wear and tear after that initial styling. It's taken some time to get the health back and you can see it's very, very vigorous now. And with that health returning to it, we now have the ability to go ahead and try and tap into the really legitimate, strong, aggressive growth habit that is redwoods. And I think it's a bigger statement. Yeah. When you look at a tree that is so incredibly strong and you see a tree in a variety that is so strong struggle to some degree, whenever we see that happen, you recognize no tree is bulletproof. No tree is void of the necessity to understand the physiology, the timing, and the execution of technique. As we've learned more and more about redwoods, we've tried to use the live stream as an ability to really communicate how we can handle redwoods, the timing, and more than anything, that timing being based on what are the indicators and the behavior of the tree. And that's what we're trying to do. We're trying to make sure that we're getting the right data. We're trying to get the right information out of the tree that catalyze this. Okay? So when we started, this piece was all the way out here. This is more of the proportion that gives rise to a really beautiful, interesting tree. And just to give you a little bit of information, this tree was pruned very aggressively last year to start to build this interior growth that I'm cutting back to now. And that's really how all of the ramification of... Hey, Zeus, if you just want to kind of blast in here really quickly. It's highly ramified. Little situation that we have in here in terms of this entire layout of pads. You see the interior really thriving. When you see how much I've pruned off of it, and you see all of that structure, notice what's happening here. Notice that quantity of ramification. I pruned off 80% of the foliage, but what I have left is really tight, nice, short, compact, ramified growth. If you just raise your camera just a little bit, stay in tight for me, Josh, you can see all of the little buds on the interior. I'm going to show you the interior here that are going to be contributing to that, and we've regained that scale and proportion. And again, I'm not pruning every tip just for the sake of pruning it. I'm pruning back to the desired length to give me that shape and that control of aesthetic so that I really do have control over the course of this tree's future. With that push in, now I can push everything else in, and I can really start to control it. I'm going to try to narrow the silhouette. I'm going to try to lift and elongate this and show you the interior of that trunk. I'll keep going. You keep talking. Because this will be a spectacular result. Awesome. Next up is Bentley. So Bentley wants to know, what kind of pad formation do you typically shoot for in a coastal redwood? Yeah. And I think the more that I work with elongating species on a really intentional level, and the more that I work with elongating species as its own independent group, its own independent aesthetic, and recognize that they really do kind of have a shape, a design, a growth habit. That makes different aesthetic decisions appropriate compared to a pine or a juniper. I tend to shoot for that more aerodynamic, triangular-shaped pad, because it gives rise to direction. It gives rise to control of design. And I like with elongating species, most of the time, if we're talking coastal or if we're talking alpine, you truly are talking about the execution of an aesthetic that is trying to give directional insinuation to the environment. It's not about the shape or the size, but it's about the shape of the element, the shape of the element that kind of gives the cereal a several different effects. And the than I'm talking about this is does one of these trees have a certain shape or shape? And these trees have some sort of extraordinal design. And there's different environment factors that are influencing it. I still like that triangular form, where I have that real directional kind of taper-down effect. But here's the other thing about redwood that I really do want to mention as much as I possibly can, and that is as much as I can take the shape of the tree, I'm just going to take it and then describe it. So if I take the shape of the tree, and then I'm going to take the shape of the tree, and then the shape of the tree, I'm just going to take the shape of the tree. tell you you can prune at this timing where you see these things happening and you can anticipate to i think a very confident degree that you will get buds somewhere near that cut site there is also the opportunity that the buds go back to the base of that branch this is a high likelihood when we see it forming adventitious buds that it will occur at the cut site now and in that late fall period of time when we see it forming adventitious buds but you don't have 100 percent control and so if we have ramification where it exists even if we're trying to get this really tight control of this triangular layout of a branch formation which does give rise to that greater proportion in the design and directional insinuation i still will vacate or abandon that if i have a bud where i need it and i don't necessarily need to prune that piece of growth i will still preserve for example and let's just come right in here and talk about this right now okay i've got this moment where i have beautiful ramified growth here i have beautiful ramified growth here i've got this big long piece okay now if i want that triangular form i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to take out that dominant central spine right there okay and then i've got to make a a decision of the shoots that i'm going to keep i'm going to keep the tightest of the shoots okay no matter what i do in the pruning of these if i prune off these pieces here i prune off these pieces here i'm never going to get a triangular shape with the current layout i'm going to accept that because i have a lot of time to do that and i'm going to make a decision of the shoots that i'm going to have ramification here that gives rise to ramification in a very tight compact region here so i'm happy to go ahead and shorten one of these as the subordinate to keep one of these long as the dominant and that's my move towards that triangular shape over the course of time but again it's not so definitively defined that i'm going to sacrifice highly ramified growth and roll the dice on whether i will get buds exactly where i want them or not and so there's a little bit of give and take with redwood that we have to do and i'm going to take that and i'm going to we have to accept as a part of their vigorous growth and to a degree a confidently predictable but not 100 predictable behavior and habit in terms of where they do produce those buds upon that pruning action taken all right jeff has a question uh jeff has a small redwood in development that needs some structural wiring to improve the design in addition to post flush pruning work um can he do this sort of structural work now or should he wait until the fall so this type and again fall i would say is not a good time to do this sort of structural work now it's not necessarily our favorable time unless we're getting into the late fall period of time when we see those adventitious shoots showing up i think now is an opportune ideal fantastic time to be doing structural work on your redwoods your tree is back in an energy positive that's what we want to see it's moving into again a second flush of growth and redwoods will will continue to push and push and push and that's really what we're looking for okay let me bring you in tight here just for a minute um to be in a position where we're going to be able to look at some of what we're dealing with here that's perfect jesus okay now what we have here is we have a woody lignified branch right here and when we start to talk about this kind of pruning just coming in and being able to take off the the needles that easily are removed from that okay i'm not pulling i'm not tearing and i'm not seeing any bark coming off with the removal of these needles on this area okay and i'll get to a certain section where all of a sudden i start to pull and i can't remove those they don't come off very easily so i'm going to be able to do this for all of this here right now now as i mentioned before um as i said you'll be able to see this is what i've got so i have my unchained needles that i've got my arched needles that are我要 to remove all of this stuff but while i have my expiring needles that existed in here that i'm taking off they're effortless to remove and i've got my needles that are on the younger tissue in these areas that are really strongly adhered to that branch i'm not going to force the issue i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to i'm going to take those off to really advance the and I'm pruning. We can do this also in the fall. I'm only taking off needle mass that very easily is removed from the shape of that tree. And then I work that pad down into that really sleek, nice aerodynamic. And if I just cover that up, you can see, notice how really nice and streamlined that shape is. That's that orientation. That's that kind of sharp defined aesthetic that we're looking for in redwoods. Okay, Leonard wants to know, will you wire the long green branches? Are you gonna wait until they brown out? I would happily wire them right now and you would see a redwood respond. We have to be careful. We can damage redwoods. We can cause them to potentially not respond well to a wiring. I'm just cleaning out some of the growth that occurs in these big kind of knobs at the very base. It's called epicormic growth. Epicormic growth occurring where the resources get caught up in that transition from the trunk into the primary structure and redwoods are notorious. We're producing epicormic growth. Interestingly enough, if we continue to remove it very cleanly, we don't allow stubs to accumulate, you can very easily get rid of epicormic growth in redwoods and you can train them out of this very quickly but you do have to be diligent. You let them reestablish that tissue again, they will start producing those buds extremely vigorously. Okay, but here for example, I've got a really long dominant branch right here that is definitely capable of contributing because when you start to look at it, it originates back in here along this primary structure. If I drop this down, it's going to enhance and if I take it away, I'm gonna have this big long and let me just rotate, stay there, Josh. If I take that away, I'm gonna have this big long exposed wood right there, okay? But if I bring this in, now I enhance the quality of that. This is a great secondary piece. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna wire that right now. Now the interior needles of this are starting to yellow. You can see some of that yellowing out of those needles. I'll go ahead and get rid of that. Okay. I'm gonna go ahead and get rid of that and they literally just kind of fall off or just take a little bit of a brush to come off of that branch as I'm working out. Now I don't want this big length, okay? So when I start looking at this, I'm gonna start cutting back a branch like this to a very nice tight compact piece and I've got this beautiful little small shoot right here. I'm gonna use that as my next terminus, okay? I've got that nice second little piece right here. This is tertiary ramification and I've got this elongated piece right here. I don't want that elongated piece. So I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna cut that back using this time to get buds right at that cut site. That gives you an idea of how I cut that back. I'm gonna go ahead and put wire on it right now. This is a great time to be wiring. Could I carry it out onto the green? Absolutely. Do I wanna be a little bit gentle when I'm wiring the green growth on redwoods? Absolutely. Would I carry that wire out onto the fresh new growth that occurred this spring? I would not. That would be where I would stop because that growth is still too soft, still too easy, and I don't want that to happen. It's too easily damaged. And if we start to see that growth being damaged in the wiring process, maybe we allow it to harden off a little bit more, give it a few more weeks and then come back so that we're not damaging all that new growth. That's generally when we see redwoods really start to look ratty, start to see a lot of browning needles is when we wire them when they're too soft or when we wire them when they're outside of that ideal season. So if we see that susceptibility to damage, breakage, et cetera, we pull back, we come back in a few weeks. All right. I'm wondering how do you deal with the suckers on the trunk of a coastal redwood? Do you let them run for a couple of years before cutting them or do you take them off as soon as they appear to minimize scarring? Yeah, great question. I try to be very proactive about taking the suckers off because they absolutely suck all of the energy out of the growth that's occurring around them. Those suckers take all of the resources. They're highly water conductive. And if they're at a junction especially, they will take the energy out of ramified branches that you've been building for years. So the more refined that a redwood gets, the more that I'm very, very dedicated to the removal of that sucker-like growth. And if we are dedicated to it, we are able to then enhance and start to really work. Okay, now you're starting to just see the push in here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to start working these back branches and see if we can really get this reduced, the proportion already for this tree. And again, bear in mind, I did this pruning last year. I started to create because it had lost so many branches, it hadn't responded well. We got it back to health. We were able to prune. We were able to pinch. We were able to get that growth into the interior. This is now a second year that we're applying the same concept. We pinched once. The second flush kind of, or the response to that pinch in terms of medium and weaker shoots elongated. Now they're hardened off. Now we're coming back. But we're going to be able to really compress the design of this tree. That's exactly what we were striving for. Okay, so next up we have Mike. Would you say that with coastal redwood, you need to be more mindful of the near term replacement of branches given that it's so strong and in his limited experience, they seem to abandon branches more than most species? I don't know that I consider coastal redwood to abandon branches in terms of it happening rapidly. I think coastal redwoods definitely tend to allocate the resources towards the highest performing pieces on the tree. And that's where I think you do see the necessity to be managing the growth once you've set the design, once you've started the pinching and refinement process. I think that once you commit to being in that kind of training with the coastal redwood, that you've committed to it for the long run. And so when we start to talk about the handling, you have to expect certain responses from a coastal redwood. And the first response, when you do an initial training on a coastal redwood, the first response that you can expect is that the branches that you wire, that you initially train with, are all going to be replaced by higher quality branches that are going to occur much closer to the trunk of a higher caliber, more compact, and more highly ramified. So if you think about this, and you just wanna talk about this in terms of ultimate frustration, I wired the entire redwood forest. You guys got to see that. It's in the library, Forests of Mirai. Wired that whole thing. Now you know, if you understand redwoods, that every single branch that I wired coming off of the trunk has then produced a highly tight, compact branch from the very base of that elongated, long, coarse, thin, whippy thing that is of a far higher quality. The next move, which I'm just getting ready to do as it's entering this state of post-flush-hardened pruning, is to go back in, unwire every single long, crappy branch, cut it off, and now carry that wire onto that tighter, more compact branch. It gives me this kind of caliber and this kind of quality, and that will happen every single time. Once you make that transition from that initial kind of raw, crummy piece of foliar mass to that tighter, more compact, domesticated, ramified growth, you'll never have to do that again, and that is really encouraging. Jesus, can you zoom in right here? Because this is exactly what I'm trying to show you guys, and this is a perfect illustration of it. Okay? I've got this big, long, coarse piece right here. You see that? There's no ramification on it. I pruned it right here last year at this time. As a result of that pruning, I got this singular, elongating shoot. But look at what's happening now. Back in there, right at the point of my scissors, you see that very, very bright green piece of growth. That is a bud. I've got another bud back on this leaf. These are actually my pieces of ramification that allow me to truly compress this growth, because last year's prune gave me this big, elongated piece. Okay? I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to prune this in a woody area, which I would not normally expect to be successful, but I have the green area back here producing adventitious buds, and that allows me to greatly reduce the size of that piece of growth to a proportional piece to the size of the tree that I'm trying to create. That is the kind of malleability, that's the kind of flexibility we have to have in the understanding of redwoods, where we say, listen, I know this is going to give me something, and it did, but it only gave me one, and it was one that was just as long as the other one that I had pruned back before it, but this year I got what I wanted. Just got to be loose, be loose, roll with the punches with the redwood, allow them to kind of dictate their own destiny, interpret what they give you, and make those educated decisions, but this time of year gives us the opportunity to try and give it the best possible chance of success. We have some requests to see the front of the tree. The front of the tree. Yeah, because we, as you've been working around, we've been seeing a bit more of that trunk, because it's revealed, and people are curious as to what the original front was. Oh man, the front of the tree was where we started, which is right there. It's right there. And you still can't see all of the merit of it. So let me keep working. I'm getting, I'm sort of getting this, starting to get this reduced. We will get there. And once we see the front, you're going to be like, wow, that's freaking awesome. All right, Danny Oxnard and Damien are asking about the fertilization of coastal redwoods. Fertilization. I, if I'm trying to get this kind of refinement, and when you start to talk refinement in really aggressive species, that means that you're not playing on the fact that, or you're not trying to extend the strength that they already have present in the tree. I guess if you didn't have like a life, and I say this like jokingly, but I also mean this very seriously. If you didn't have a life, you could fertilize a redwood in the springtime, and you could get it to produce so much growth, but you would have to be pinching it. And I'm not, I'm not joking. You would have to be pinching it on a daily basis to be able to control that growth. That is how vigorous coastal redwoods are, okay? So I don't have that capacity. We've definitively limited and reduced the number of redwoods that we work with at Mirai to be able to give the spectacular ones that we've chosen to give our time to, the kind of attention that they need to be something truly special. If you fertilize, it is very, very difficult to keep up with a coastal redwood. I tend to pull back very heavily on spring fertilization. In fact, oftentimes I don't fertilize at all in the spring. I let them run out their energy. We'll pinch very aggressively. I pinch this one. I let the repercussions of the pinch, because we know when we pinch, we transition from strong to medium, medium to weak. If I kept up on it, we wouldn't have nearly as long of an elongation, but knowing that we can come back in and check that growth at this time of year, I'm okay with that growth elongating. I'm okay with that growth getting away from me a little bit, because I do have the ability to come back and manage that growth. But once I've, I've gotten to this post-flush hardened prune, now I want growth to occur. Now I want to increase the strength of the tree and increase its response to this, and much like partial defoliation on it, deciduous in refinement, I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna start fertilizing from this point forward, moderately or even lightly is enough to really get the maximum amount of bud push to occur. That's gonna give me that nice, fine continuation of growth, allowing me to continue the process and evolution with my redwoods. So I wait until this period of time before I even consider starting the fertilization process. And I've had, I've had absolute tremendous success with that, allowing them to calm down almost the same way we would handle a larch or any other really vigorous elongating species. You have to find some way to exhaust or at least deplete that amount of stored energy that they have over that spring season. And you don't want to continue to fertilize and fertilize and fertilize and drive, drive, drive, because you'll never be able to manage that strength in the tree. Okay, next up is Matt. So Matt did a significant repot of a redwood, putting it into a small container. It's growing strong. It was pinched twice this season. Some branches are too long and need proportional correction. Do you think it's better to wait until late fall to let it gain more strength or would it be okay to prune it now? I think if it's growing incredibly strong, and I think if you're seeing those adventitious buds showing on the interior, like we've been saying, that's your catalyst. If a tree has the ability in terms of, you know, if it has the ability in terms of, you know, in terms of root recovery, to not just sustain what it has, but think about the communication tool of the tree is the physiological response. And if it has the ability to not just sustain what it has, but it has the ability to add more, that's when you know, oh, okay, it has the ability to add. I now have the capacity to go ahead and take this tree a little bit farther. The presence of those adventitious buds is the communication. I have enough to sustain what I have, and I have enough to add a little bit more and that becomes the indicator that we're good to go to go ahead and press on the gas pedal and try to push that tree a little bit farther. If that's what you're seeing, I think you're good to go ahead and heavily prune. Matt wants to know what the best placement in the garden is for redwoods. So that's a great question. I, over the course of time, obviously I live in the Pacific Northwest and you have to take that with a grain of salt because in the Pacific Northwest, we don't typically tend to get the kind of intense sun that you would say see in Southern California, you would see in some of the other regions of North America where people are definitely pursuing redwood at a high level. And so we tend to see full sun being a very appropriate thing for redwoods up until we hit the lower 90s. And that's when I start to put them under shade cloth and give them a little bit more protection. I think if you're in regions of the country where there's a lower relative humidity, I think if you're in regions of the country where you're at a higher elevation, that's gonna have more intense sun in terms of that, that lack of pollution, really dubbing down the intensity of the ultraviolet rays, then you probably are gonna need to provide shade a little bit earlier than we do in the Pacific Northwest. But there is a misconception with redwoods that they do not tolerate intense sun. And redwoods do very much have a very solid leaf mass. They have a very solid surface area. They have a very thick cuticle. And that's where I've found redwoods behaving and responding very well to the forest. And that's where I've found redwoods behaving and responding very well to the forest. I've found redwoods behaving and responding very well to the forest. And that's where I've found redwoods behaving and responding very well to the forest. I get tighter ramifications, I get better bud production, and I get a higher quality tree as a result. And now you're seeing the left side of this tree really start to suck in. I got the back pieces in. It's starting to compress a lot. This is what I wanted. This kind of scale that's starting to cause this to grow vertically. I'm gonna continue moving over into the right part of it. We'll keep trying to reduce these. But this is where I want to start focusing a little bit more. and you can see, Jesus, can you go to the three-quarter and just focus on this trunk for a minute? Okay, because once I come into this, and once Jesus is in here, yeah, right there, that's perfect, beautiful. Go ahead and blast me in, Josh. Okay, when I come in here, watch what happens when I start to get rid of some of this foreground. Look at the negative space. This is a redwood that's been burned. This is a redwood that's gone through a lot of, I would say, traumatic events in its lifetime, okay? And as a result, you get this really artistic, and I think we tend to think of redwoods as a singularly occurring or a very rigid, straight, upright form. But when you start to see all of the products of these trees that are collected that have been through the logging process, that have been through the fires that naturally pass through the redwoods, and when you think about redwoods and their big, thick bark as that adaptive capacity to endure those fires and be able to continue the process of growing, telling that story is a big part of redwood bonsai as well. That abstraction of that ideal form is a very natural part of redwood cultivation, and it's a very inherent characteristic of the species. Okay, as we get out into these areas, we start to hit these ramified pieces. Now, these are a product of having pinched, okay? I have these pieces set up already. They have those buds that are showing adventitiously, and I start to cut back. Look at that really nice, tight, compact growth. I get to cut back to that. This is the reward for having done this work a year prior and really getting to piggyback off of the tree responding well to it by having built up the strength, and now when we come back in and we prune, having that repercussion be a really, really beautifully laid out and developed ramified branch. Okay, so next up we have Karen. Karen wants to know how long is this period during which we have carte blanche to prune in this fashion? Yeah, good question. I would say that this period is going to last until it starts producing the next flush of growth, right? So you're looking at this and you're seeing these buds swell and you're going to see them get bigger and you're going to see them get more mature, and then all of a sudden you're going to see them actually start to push a little floret. And it really does look like a little floret of growth. It's a little tuft that starts to elongate and open up. I think you have until that actually starts to change from the shape of that floret, that little trumpet, until it starts to actually grow. It starts to actually show you that frond shape. You have that period of time. Obviously, the sooner that you prune, the more time the redwood has to turn all of the potential areas and transition all of the hormones that exist in the tree into actual capacity to grow in these more refined areas. And again, as I'm pruning these shoots back, I'm pruning back to these interior pieces. I'm shoot selecting. I'm cutting back to buds. And only when I don't have something, for example, something here, only when I don't have a bud back in, will I just simply prune to the desired length to fit inside of the shape of that tree, clean out those older needles, and now all of a sudden I've regained that aesthetic. But again, if I have a bud to cut back to and it's within the shape that I'm looking for on that tree, I'll go ahead and give myself a guaranteed cut to a bud as opposed to rolling the dice and cutting back to nothing and hoping that it occurs where I want it to occur. Farley wants to know if this tree is more of a bonsai form or are there mature redwoods that look like this twisted? I would say that there are, I would say that this is a very, if we talk about bonsai form, I would say this would be a very abstracted bonsai form, to be sure. And when I start to look at this, if you go visit the redwoods ever and you kind of sit within them, you recognize that the informality of old growth trees, that reference to ancient, is a very, very special form, okay? And so when you start to tap into that and that abstract aspect of ancient, that really becomes a moment and an opportunity. And I think this tree gave rise to a really unique opportunity to be a relatively natural redwood, okay? So next up we have Rafi. So Rafi's wondering, so this post-hardening pruning, we would not perform it on those long initial styling branches should we let those grow wildly to get that interior growth that we will then cut to? Yeah, so if we're, if we're trying to, and this goes back to development, secondary refinement strategy when we start to get into redwoods. If you're looking at all of these big, long, singular, unramified, ratty, coarse, kind of unsightly and what I would consider to be weaker pieces of growth, right? They're not going to be giving you the growth at the tip to be pinching over the spring season. All of that growth is going to come back to the base of the branch. And you're going to rub out some of that growth and you're going to try to kind of keep it clean. And you're going to try to guide that. The redwood, when it is in that state, is going to say, uh-uh, right? It's going to push that growth again and again and again. And what's going to happen is it's going to, a redwood is going to exhaust you as the bonsai practitioner. You cannot exhaust a redwood and a redwood will exhaust you. That's when it finally has the opportunity to be like, dude, I've been trying to tell you, this is a better branch. That one is just what I had to survive, but not what I want. Listen to me, take this, right? And it's going to give you that higher quality piece of ramified growth that's tight and compact. Oh, okay. So once we see that, that big elongated piece is never going to produce a bud at the tip. You've got this bud now that's highly ramified and starting to grow at the base. You will be able to visually identify that. If this big elongated piece is sending growth out from the tip, yeah, you're going to come back in and prune it. And that's how you decipher, am I getting what I want? Do I need to wait? Should I be pruning? Well, if it's growing at the tip and giving you length and strength, cut it back because that's going to give you a bud where you cut. If it's not growing at the tip and you're getting that growth back at the base, let it rock because that's going to be a higher quality piece of growth that's going to replace that branch. All right. David from Reno wants to know, would you approach sequoia gigantum in a similar way? You know, I don't know. I don't know. This is one sequoia dendron giganteum. This is one that I'm unfamiliar with in terms of how would I handle it? What is the best way to go about managing that growth? Because it is a unique one. It doesn't behave like a coastal redwood. It doesn't behave like our standard elongating species. I don't have an answer for that. And I haven't done anything with them yet to really know. But it is something that is on my list and it is something that is a curiosity to me. Okay, coming back to Rafi's question. And just a side note, Rafi, appreciated it, man. Thank you very much. Okay. When we start to talk about this, this is a piece that hasn't grown yet. But I'm not necessarily getting growth back towards the base. Josh, can you, yeah, there we go. Okay. This hasn't grown at all. I'm not getting growth back at the base here. But this is a big coarse needle. Now, I'm starting to get ramified growth. I cut back to some of these interior buds that are pushing. My guess is the growth that's above this, that exists directly above this is a problem and I'm going to come back and prune that. But if I want to try, I can go ahead and just back that wire off here. And cut back into some of the healthier, stronger needles. And I'm fine with rolling the dice and trying to get that to produce buds back in and along this. I'm assuming if I adjust the sunlight exposure above it, I might get something that will give it to me or I will get something back at the base. But if I get that kind of growth in these instances where this is kind of a rare circumstance and the rest of the tree is giving me health, I'm still fine to prune that. And I would say that would be an exception to what I just explained as a much broader applicable, uh, concept to approaching them. Okay. So next up we have David who just, I think David joined a little bit late, but he wanted to ask, is this pruning okay for, um, deciduous redwoods at this time? Um, for deciduous redwoods in terms of Don Redwood. So no, Don Redwood is more bald cypress, deciduous conifer based. And if you want to, uh, understand the timing and the, the theoretical application, the physiological nuances to handling, um, Don Redwood, you would want to watch the bald cypress partial defoliation pruning at this time of year. That'll be your best guide to handling that nuanced species. Uh, Sylvia wants to know if this tree can call, tolerate a windy location. A windy location? Windy. Yes. Hmm, depends on how much you're watering. How's that? Because redwoods can tolerate wind. Redwoods, again, just the same as I said, hey, you don't need to baby a redwood. You don't need to, to, to, to treat a redwood as if it's, as if it's intolerant of conditions that typically, um, you know, most conifers can endure. They're pretty tough. There's limitation to that. And I would say there's a, there's a degree of wind where you probably do need to protect it. But for the most part, they will form a very, very thick cuticle on redwood that is quite tolerant, is quite durable and can resist a lot of excessive transpiration. And when you talk about wind, you would be talking about excessive transpiration or loss of water through the foyer mass. I would say this. If it's in a windy area, you probably are going to have to pay a much closer amount of attention to water because I don't ever let redwoods fully dry out. This is a piece of redwood cultivation that you want to be very, very aware of and you want to be very, very on top of that their balance of water and oxygen. And we talk about this with a majority of our elongating species. Our elongating species balance of water and oxygen that allows them to really strike that balance that gives them ultimate health does demand a higher quantity of water than the balance of water and oxygen that say a pine needs or a balance of water and oxygen that say a juniper needs. Elongating species, spruce, hemlock, fir, redwoods, larches. These are trees that demand a higher quantity of water. Okay. So next up is Gary. Gary wants to know, will the thickness of the apex branch ever thicken enough to have a proportional transition from the old trunk? Yes. Yes. And it is, it is starting to happen. But I would say when we, when we did the initial styling in the, and we did have a, we were ignorant to a degree, right? Still learning because when Hugh studied here that was, gosh, that was four or five years ago now. We were still just breaking into like redwoods. We were, we were, you're talking about a little bit of a Wild West kind of approach. We were gunslinging in terms of timing. And even over the course of the past three years on the live stream, we have refined redwood knowledge based on feedback, success, failure, et cetera. We've refined our redwood knowledge to a very significant degree from where we started this entire process. And so when I start to look at that, you know, we didn't know that you couldn't do that kind of styling in the fall. And the place that took the biggest hit were these small, skinny branches that we wired up as these new apical regions. And they're important, they're pivotal. They're a big part of the design. They will now that we're getting health back throughout the rest of the year, back throughout the rest of the tree we've built it up we've got ramified growth occurring on the inside they will start to catch up and they're already thickening the wire is biting in for the first time in several years and so we're starting to see that transition occur already all right keith kind of has a two-part question so you've mentioned in prior streams that you were experimenting with giant sequoias sequoia dendrum gigantum have you had any luck with them and are there any findings you can share and does some of today's advice about back budding on coastal redwoods apply to the alpine environment yeah um so i would say that everything that we're talking about right now is very specific to coastal redwood and i don't know of another species of tree that behaves like coastal redwood and that's really where this is specialized knowledge in terms of indication in terms of where we can prune and expect a bud in terms of timing of pruning this is all coastal redwood sequoia sempervirens specifically specific information that allows us to have success with this very unique and interesting species i don't have that information on the on the giant sequoia sequoia dendrum gigantium it's something that i am consistently interested in working with need to find a piece that inspires me enough to go through this rigorous process of testing out technique failing and continuing to seek that higher level i don't have it yet and i wouldn't say that any of this is in any way applicable to anything beyond the on a coastal redwood okay uh next up we have jeff uh which pests are redwoods most likely to have problems with um are there special concerns with what types of pesticides you can use to treat those pests yeah um so typically and and this is really the limitation when we talk about bonsai and i've said this anybody who's been tuning into mirai live for a prolonged period of time knows my my stance on bonsai bonsai could solve all of the botanical problems and i'm going to talk about bonsai and i'm going to talk about various other particular health issues Harold has raised the question where are bonsaia dominant when the plants grow over the course of a long period of time so they can potentially billionaire oh as a result of tangled plant structure or evenorganic 謝謝 okay because bonsai has Children'sρ treatments no longer activate them so let me give you a concrete query don't we shoot monsoon me miss obligoril if there was a mohawk least water won't do to the water than if not in pół i know that out making a few more ernsatoes is the outro troops we count redwood reaches south west are heavily19 that impact them and there aren't that impact them well when we put them into bonsai cultivation that does change to a degree i will say right i have not necessarily seen a lot of insects impact redwoods but i do know they can have a susceptibility to red spider mite they can have a susceptibility to aphids although not typical on a weakened redwood you can start to see those insects impact the health of a redwood and i wanted to bring this specific tree and i actually was going to stream on a different tree tonight but i wanted to bring this specific tree in because i wanted to show you the disease it's beginning at least that can impact redwoods and let's go ahead and take this moment to do a little bit of this i'm going to raise these two pieces up here jesus come in as close as you possibly can here okay and it might be a little bit challenging to see you can just start to see it right there that's good okay notice the red tips on those needles right there this is the very beginning of what i would call red spot okay i'd call it red spot because i have no idea what it is okay i'd call it red spot because i have no idea what it is okay i'd call it red spot because i have no idea what it is and no book can give me a reference to it and what I see on the new growth here on the really soft fleshy growth is I just have these little red specks that are occurring on a few needles here and if I look throughout the tree on the new growth I'm seeing these red specks on some of the older needles I'm seeing these brown reddish tips okay this is the beginning of a pathogen and infection on a red on a redwood okay this can happen over the fall predominantly happens over the winter time particularly if they're stored in a greenhouse and can happen over the course of spring if you have a long wet prolonged spring okay and what we see here is we see this red spot start to expand start to cause a death of the tip of these newer needles and we'll start to see this entire new shoot die back from the tip all the way back to the base it'll start spreading down the branch and it will continue moving and knock out a vast majority of this piece of growth okay so when we start to look at that again if you're looking at a tree that's growing and you're looking at a tree that's growing and you're looking at a tree that's growing and you're looking at a physiologically botanically horticulturally you won't find an explanation you won't find a name for the disease you won't find a treatment this is where a broad spectrum fungicide where we have success as mancozeb I've spoken broadly about the fact that mancozeb is now out of production is no longer going to be available so when we talk about juniper tip blight when we talk about rhizosphera and Swiss needle cast on our spruce and when we talk about red spot on our redwoods we are gonna have to find a different fungicide in bonsai cultivation red spot on our redwoods we are going to have to find different fungicide in bonsai cultivation red spider mites, aphids, and red spot as a pathogen are kind of the three issues that we see when we constrict this root environment into a containerized form. We do see susceptibility to these things increase, and with a really damp, wet condition, redwoods will see that pathogen spread through the foliar mass. Mancozeb literally stops it in its tracks, okay? So we'll continue to find a solution for that and give you guys more information as we find a replacement. We will be going into experimentation very soon with redwoods to try and find that replacement that can control that pathogen. Okay, and then we had a kind of comment slash question from Joe, kind of more of a discussion. So he says that you always talk about making trees that inspire strong emotions, that you don't want people to see a tree and say, meh. The skinny trunk angle front for this tree is sensational in that way, breaks so many bonsai rules, but is really captivating. How do you feel that this tree, like particularly the front, relates to that philosophy of evoking strong emotions? Yeah, yeah. I mean, this was, and I appreciate the fact that you've listened to that stance that we take with our work, because I do feel very sincere and strong about trying to create something that is, that somebody can say, I hate it, or I love it, but they can't say, it's fine, you know? And I think this is another one of those. When this was initially styled, and now that we can kind of see this, I'll just give you a because you can kind of get a much fuller view of the trunk now. The front that I've proposed is right here. I love the negative space between those two sections there. I love the fact that there isn't a significant degree of inverse taper as it comes up and rotates, but that you do get this nuance of this, of this fragment, of this greater tree, and I'm talking greater tree, like this tree used to be massive, and this is just maybe a fifth of the trunk, maybe even less, maybe a tenth of the trunk. This is an interesting story to me. This is the discussion, when you talk about asymmetry, when you talk about bonsai being a representation of age, when you talk about these apical regions continuing to try and climb upwards, despite the fact that the trees have fallen over and nine tenths of its trunk is gone, oh, now we're talking about age on that farther degree, and I think it does really captivate to see a tree that's barely clinging to life at the farthest degree of that representation of ancient. This is a very special piece of material. I said it when we started Redwood, like I've never seen before, okay, and when I, when I continue to rotate, you can find areas in this tree that definitely do form a little bit more of a standard bonsai approach in terms of the change of taper and the display of the trunk line and all of the things that we fundamentally can, let me just show you that, like back in here you see a more powerful trunk, you see a wider base, but, but it's it doesn't have the same clinging to life far degree of age that I think, I hope, our designs possess, and that was really that boundary where Hugh and I worked very closely aesthetically to work with this tree. This was right up Hugh's alley. If you don't follow Hugh or know who I'm talking about, his Instagram profile is tree makers, tree makers, and he's working with Australian species in a very artistic way that's very, very inspirational. So I feel like this is right up Hugh's alley. So I feel like this is right up Hugh's alley. So I feel like this is right up Hugh's alley. right along that exact discussion, because I feel like somebody could come along and be like, well, that's a better, this is a better base and a much stronger, and there's no inverse taper. Okay. But it doesn't really convey the same kind of quality as the other areas of the tree do. And just on the topic of this, could you find and turn the tree to the skinniest front, just so that we can see that, please? The skinniest front? Yeah, we had a request. The skinniest front. Yeah, hang on just one second. Let me see if I can. Yeah, okay, here we go. Right there, right there. Let me turn it to Jesus in close. Go ahead and give that zoom in, Josh. Yeah, that's, that's the skinniest front. I can rotate and get a little more negative space out of that. But I mean, you're talking, there's my finger for proportion there. It's literally one knuckle wide, up to that first knuckle of my finger. It's pretty interesting tree. It's a super captivating tree. This tree was collected by Zach, but Bob Scheiman had a redwood for a long time that was absolutely iconic. It was this delicate kind of piece, almost like this, but just really unique, really artistic, really avant-garde in terms of bonsai design. And that tree had always been very inspirational to me. So when I saw this piece, it was like, that's my chance, that's my opportunity to get into this kind of redwood aesthetic in a way that I had been inspired. And that was really the tree, Bob's tree, was really the tree that motivated me to start digging into redwoods on a much grander scale and trying to work out the nuances of this. And I think, too, when you think about it, in 2012, I drove across the country to the national show. First. The first time that I had gone from Portland to New York, I'd driven to Florida, I'd driven to Tennessee, I'd never driven all the way to the eastern coast of North America. And during that trip, I started thinking, as I was seeing the landscape passing me by, what kind of species, what tree really embodies the spirit of this big, grand, diverse continent? And although if you're in Florida, you might say it's a bald cypress. Or in the southeastern United States, or if you're in the northeastern United States, you might say it's, you know, some maple or deciduous native species, right? There's a place that, there's a tree that represents every place. When I thought about America as a whole and the United States as a whole, the redwood seemed like this very unique, singular species that was the largest, or excuse me, the tallest species of tree in the world. And kind of encompassed. And kind of encompassed all of that grandeur of the North American continent. And that was a catalyzing moment, driving across this massive landmass and seeing this diversity and then recognizing that I felt a connection to this particular species as it represented the spirit of North America. That's when I fell in love with redwoods entirely. It was just like, that was the catalyzing moment that bred the idea of the redwood forest on that kind of landscape. On a grand scale, that was kind of the moment where I recognized the bald cypress was going to be a very pivotal, that was the national show that I saw, the flat top form of bald cypress executed in bonsai, and I saw it scoffed at by a Japanese judge. That trip, that 2012 trip, changed my entire career as a bonsai practitioner. All right, Keith wants to know, how do you promote back budding on lignified areas with redwoods, like the one, sorry, like with the branch on the upper right? Yeah, up in this area here. So, same way that we promote, when we start to talk about and we speak to the generation of adventitious budding along these areas here where we have these big, long apical runs, okay? We need to build health, we need to build strength in the branch first, which you notice, I've allowed these upper pieces to really kind of expand the whole tree. It has been pinched. It wasn't through a total unintentional neglect. That. I allowed it to really accumulate the kind of foyer mass that it has. I got the ramification that I wanted via the pruning methodology last year. I'm continuing to expand on it this year. I pinched it once. Could I have come back and pinched it again? I could have. I definitely could have. And it wouldn't have hurt the tree. Would pinching it have slowed down or decreased the response that the tree's going to have to this kind of pruning in terms of potentially getting some adventitious growth along woodier pieces of tissue? It would have. And so, I would say, if you... If you really wanted to try and increase bud content on lignified branching, don't pinch that spring flush of growth. Allow the tree to build up a large storage of energy. Come back and perform this pruning at this timing where you're seeing those adventitious buds occur. And that's probably your best capacity to induce budding along lignified pieces where you don't necessarily have the vegetative presence that you're looking for. That would be a maximum movement of energy. That would be a maximum movement of energy. Expansion of foliar mass, accumulation back, and boom. Hormonal change, reduction of sugar starch productivity, back budding is going to be presented as a result of that. Okay. Next up, we have Bill. Bill says, it looks like the wire on the branch leading to the apex is starting to bite in. Can you let the wire bite in before removal? Yeah. So, with redwoods, I tend to let the wire bite in a little bit. I do not promote wire biting in aggressively on a redwood because it can significantly... ...decrease their water transport, and it can significantly decrease the vigor of that branch. But I've also found that if you start to see wire biting in on a redwood, you generally have probably six to eight months before it gets to a point where it could potentially compromise the health of the tree. And I assume that I'm going to have to come back. Again, redwood are very responsive, very vigorous. We've got the motor of this redwood turning. We rebuilt the energy. After it had that unfortunate setback in that understanding and that discovery of timing on the species. And so, I think I'll probably have to come back in the late fall, early winter, as I typically do with all my redwoods, and check their growth and kind of dictate the layout of their branching. And probably have to correct it once I start seeing those adventitious buds forming at that point in time in the year. Currently, I'm not concerned that it's going to do any sort of damage. Because, again, they tend to grow long. They tend to grow thick. And they tend to try and grow towards the outer canopy of the foliar mass before they start to grow thick. And that's really what I'm going to be banking on and kind of observing over the course of this year. All right. Dylan says that he wants a pair of scissors that can cut wire, too. Which brand are yours? So, these are Joshua Roth. And these are the Joshua Roth branch shears. I wouldn't necessarily say that I would recommend the Joshua Roth branch. I would recommend the Joshua Roth branch shears to be cutting wire as well as branches. The generic ones that I utilize here, and let me just show you the difference between these, okay? The Joshua Roth, these guys here, these are branch shears. And you can see because you can get your hand into the shear and get a lot more torque, and they've got that straight, rigid, thick, the blade is wide so that it's durable, okay? These are an older pair. The tip is broke because I've dropped them. I have a newer pair that I use for much finer cuttings. These are my generics. And these are Kikua. Kikua doesn't manufacture these anymore. They were literally $20 shears. They're just, they're really a low-quality shear. But the metal happens to be so freaking strong that I can cut up to 10-gauge wire with these. They don't sell them anymore. I don't know where to tell you to get them. But if you do have an older pair of shears that have gone through sort of the paces of being a finer, more refined shear, definitely a more rigid shear. A straight, wider blade is going to give you a more durable capacity to cut that wire and to come back and be able to cut branches. It's just not going to be as clean. On a deciduous tree, that's a deal-breaker. On a conifer where we're not necessarily limited, we don't have dieback as a result of poor prunes, et cetera, it can lead to more efficient work. But even then, you want to be a little careful. When you need a concise cut, you need to shift your shears. And we had another scissor question from Max. What are the advantages or disadvantages of having a space between the legs of the scissors when they close? Yeah. So basically, when you have that space, okay, so if you come back in tight here. Okay, so I've got this space here so they can bypass each other. What it allows is there is going to be some flex in this shaft, particularly when I cut big, thick wire. And what it allows me to do is if there's flex here, I can continue to push until the point where it cuts. And ultimately, you're not really looking to have that bypass. Because it reduces the safety factor. Like if I put my finger in here, it's not going to stop when it contacts. It can just keep going, and going, and going, and going, and going, and going, and going, and going, okay? Not ideal. But when you have a rivet that loose, it allows you to control the way the blades cut, and it gives you the elasticity of that metal. You just have more dictatorial control. All right. Chuck has a two-part question. Is the unknown redwood blight you mentioned the reason that these trees don't do well? Yes. Or is it some other fungus? Yes. No, that's the reason. Okay. And ultimately, you can cultivate redwoods in Florida, but you're going to be swimming against the current so much that it takes all the joy. It's like trying to cultivate a buttonwood in the Pacific Northwest. I'm going to spend nine out of the 12 months of the year trying to keep it warm enough just to produce some foyer growth that I'm never going to experience the strength of a buttonwood in the way that allows me to style it and work with it and actually accomplish something spectacular with it. And that's where Zone MB can really be a difficult lesson to learn because you do have... Oh, and here's a beautiful... Jesus, can you zoom into this one? Because this is showing the progression of that disease. Come on in really nice and tight. Okay. So what we have forming here is you can see that red spot is now turning into a full dieback. You can see that starting to die back, and all these new needles are shriveling up right here. So that disease is progressing rapidly right here. And this was in a denser part of the foyer mass, okay? So you're seeing a red spot turn into actual disease and dieback right there that's killing that new growth. And as I rotate it, you just see how it's blackening all of that. That would take out that entire shoot. I will need to treat this after I'm done with the stream. And the second part on Chuck's question is, what do you think of Heritage Azoxystrobin? I think I'm saying that right? Yeah, I mean, Heritage is okay, I think. I haven't invested. I have Heritage. I haven't invested a lot of time in whether it could take out some of these broader unknown fungal issues. And obviously, I've been bit enough by phytotoxicity. I've experienced significant setbacks. I've killed trees by using chemicals that were registered for use. And in the bonsai cultivation, the susceptibilities that occur inside of this diminished environment do change the way that a tree responds to the treatment of chemicals. And so Heritage has always been one that scared me just a little bit. But it may be a great solution. I haven't done any experimentation with it. We have Atlantan. Atlantan's wondering, is that a glazed container and who made it? This is not a glazed container. This is actually a Tokoname container. I don't know who the maker of this would be. Oh no, this is a Korean pot. I'm sorry. This is Korean. Not a Tokoname pot. So I couldn't tell you who the maker is. But I don't like the color combination. I don't like the fact that the trunk is very black and the container is very black. It takes away. It's almost too analogous in terms of the darkness and the ruggedness of this trunk is such a beautiful, magical, kind of nuanced aspect of this particular redwood. It's not showing you the quote-unquote redwood that we typically see. The bark is not red. There's no callus formation that's red or orange. You have black. The bark is black. The deadwood is black. It's been through a lot of fire. And I have it in a virtual black container. I would love to see this container give a little bit more lightness, a little more delicacy, a little bit more of the elegance that we're accomplishing via the pruning decisions that we're making. You're now starting to see that length. You're starting to see that reach. You're starting to see the airiness. This is what this tree was trying to accomplish in the beginning. And we're starting to get back to it. And it's really exciting. I'm going to say I was super pumped for this stream because this tree was such a wonderful exploration. Again, an execution. It's a collaboration between Hugh and I because he is a very proficient breeder. He's a bonsai practitioner. He didn't need me to tell him what to do. So it was an aesthetic exploration and a collaboration. And to see it kind of reinvigorated and coming back is pretty cool. And it's been a long build. You're talking about four years to get back to a point where we could really get it into a position that it could shine again. All right. Well, now that we're on the apex, Rafi wants to know if we could discuss the apex. He feels a bit that it was competing and obscuring the power of the top gin. Yeah. I think that when you start to talk about redwoods, one of those characteristics of redwoods that does feel to me to be very significant to continue to represent is the power of that apical region, the verticality of that apical region, and the height. Okay. So I'm not interested in the top gin. I'm not interested in compressing this design because we've chosen. And again, this is where your design concepts have to align over the course of each decision. We went with a front that didn't necessarily show the most powerful, consistent concept of design. Okay. We recognize this is more powerful. Trunk is thicker. Base is bigger. Okay. So when we go with that more elegant, more spacious, we see the negative space. We divide up. We reduce the strength of that base. You're elongating that design. The elongation of that is what's compatible with that negative space. The height of that being higher than the gin is what really works with the consistency of that design decision. Do I think these lines can be tweaked a little bit here? Yeah. This is where we really can fine-tune. And I think a redwood to have a diagonal apex is a little bit weird. They do definitely tend to create that straight, rigid, upright form. And this is where this piece, number one, it broke when it was initially styled. And number two, it lost a majority of the branches. Getting to come back and really revamp this area of the tree at this point in time, this is a big part of pulling this tree back together and showing it. For all of it, it's kind of brilliance that it has to offer. And I think this tree and the initial design of this tree, I believe it's present on the Mirai website if you want to take a look at it after Hugh and I kind of worked it the first time. But getting it not back there, because whenever we think about, oh, I had a tree. I loved it. Something happened. I got to get it back to that point. There is no returning to a former point or a prior shape or design. When we start to talk about bonsai. There is only the movement forward. There is only the evolution. There is only the progression. There is only the next step and the next shape. And I think that's really where we are. So trying to elevate that, straightening out that trunk and gaining some more of that nuance that I think reflects back on the redwood positively as a growth habit and as a generalized behavior. And then taking the production of all of these branches, shoot selecting, coming back and cleaning up that design, really giving shape to all of it. All of these pieces. And I'm just going to put a few pieces of wire on this so that we get to see this kind of in its full finished and finalized form. There's a few pieces down here that I think I probably also need to guide and direct a little bit. But this is really pretty cool to get to do this with you guys. Yeah, we do have Hugh in the chat tonight as well. So he's been adding some thoughts too. So that's been cool. There he is. Well, so I'm glad he's here because last time I was in Australia, we were talking, Hugh and David and I were talking and they're like, hey, yeah, that redwood that I wired, whatever happened to that? And I was, you know, it's always a bummer to be like, oh, I don't know, you know, like three quarters of that tree died. Just based on sort of the unknowns of redwood and the species nuances and timing. And what I've found is, and students have found this at Mirai too, when we're dealing with our elongating species classes in the fall, there are redwoods that are ready to be worked in September. And there are redwoods that if you work them in September, you will have catastrophic failure. And the delineating factor, is it in a full year production phase of growth or not? Because if it's not in a full year production phase of growth and you choose to go ahead and work that redwood, you are going to have catastrophic failure. It will die back almost entirely. It'll come back. It'll push from the base. It'll regenerate growth. But you've set that tree back a very long ways. And this is something that when you initially start working with a species of tree, you're still trying to figure out how do I wire those branches? What the heck happened? Is this an anomaly? Did we wire it too hard? But after you see a consistency, and I think this is really where Mirai has been able to break new ground, because when you start to have 50 or 60 redwoods, and you've wired redwoods, you know, 30 or 40 times over the course of four or five years, and you start to see this consistency where no matter who wires it at this time of year, if we do it and it's not showing the right indicators, then we're going to have problems. That's where you start to understand species nuances. You start to find the physiology that gives rise to the explanation of why. And once you understand the physiology and why, it starts informing when you do what you do, why you do it, how you do it, how the tree is behaving, when it's entering phases of growth, dormancy, foliar, vascular, that's when we really start to crack the code. To think on that level is to be dissecting bonsai on an entirely new capacity to bring about greater potential in the species that we're working with. And that's been a wonderful period and process of discovery that, and I said it when I was in Melbourne at the Natives exhibition in Australia, you know, Australia is really entering a period of time where it's like, hey, congratulations and enjoy the ride because people have the technique, have the artistic vision, there is some history, but there's a whole history yet to be painted and Australia is going to go like this. Right? With Hugh, with David, with these young practitioners piggybacking on Quinton and a lot of these established practitioners. The National Collection is behind you. It's a very special time for Australian bonsai because you're starting to amass the same kind of information. It's very, very cool. Awesome. Thomas wants to know, do you have this in 100% Akadama? This is in 100% Akadama, yeah. And I have found 100% Akadama to be absolutely necessary if you want redwoods to ramify. So many people try to cultivate redwoods in a much drier soil environment with pumice, with lava, with all of these other soil components. And you simply will not get the scalability in the roots to give you the kind of fine, when you see the size of it, the size of the ramified growth that's being produced in this piece right here. And this is a result of, this is a byproduct of the fact that the roots are giving me that scaled, ramified growth from that Akadama component that we've been utilizing. And really when we get into high water mobility species, even though we say, hey listen, Akadama is not necessarily the most dominant water holding component in our soils, over the course of time as the roots actively break down, the Akadama and scale that Akadama to a finer and finer root system, what we do see is that that increased surface area and decreased oxygen space does lead to a higher water retention in the soil that will usurp the water holding capacity of pumice over the course of time as it is scaled. And that's where you have to understand that physiological change. It's not black and white, it's an evolving system in the bonsai container as that tree continues to enhance and dictate control its own environment. Right. And Thomas wants to know, going back to the fungus, if copper side will work on that. You know, I haven't had copper give me the control of the pathogens in redwoods that we have typically dealt with. And so I would venture to say no, but I can't totally confirm that. And this is where you say, maybe I didn't hit it at the right time, maybe copper only controls a singular moment in the disease cycle of this particular pathogen that is impacting redwoods. There could be a moment where if you're preventatively treating with copper it works, maybe it only works at a certain time of year, maybe it only works under a certain temperature or condition. It could be potentially effective, but in the instances that I've utilized it, which again, I don't typically tend to proactively spray for pathogens. I do tend to react. I don't like to be applying chemicals unless I absolutely need to. And from that perspective, reacting with copper has not allowed me to gain control of the pathogen once it really starts to become established in the tree. So I haven't seen it be effective from that perspective. Again, it's not to say it couldn't be at a different phase of the pathogen cycle in the tree's existence in life. Okay. And then Gary had a clarification question, just clarifying about the Mirai videos on Bald Cypress. Is there anything that will not apply or would be different for Dawn Redwood? So from... It's not quite on topic for tonight, but... No, that's fine. I'm totally fine with this. My experience with Dawn Redwood is that it's almost a one-to-one. Would there be... And when you start... Like, I would hate to say, no, no, no. Hey, Gary, trust me. Dawn Redwood, Bald Cypress, totally simpatico. I'm sure there's a nuance, and I would guess that that nuance probably applies to when they become a lot more refined, and there's a little bit more aesthetic nuance. There's some responses that change in the highest levels of ramification, etc. Currently, I haven't seen Dawn Redwood ever carried to a state of refinement where it has not responded in the way that we would predict and in a way that is also similar and consistent with the way that a Bald Cypress would respond. And again, if you get into a highly ramified Dawn Redwood, that would be the moment where I could see there being some tweaks needing to be made. That would then start to become specialized and specific to the Dawn Redwood. Well, we're all caught up on questions for the time being, so... Killer. I'm just going to finish. And what I'm doing up here at the apex is just really making some final, very fine selective cuts, okay? And I'm just taking the finest new growth here. You see I'm dealing with that pink, kind of salmon-colored growth. I'm just taking that. Now, it's too firm now to be pinched, but in cutting there, I know that I'm going to save those lengths and I'm going to be able to utilize those aesthetically. I love that control. I love that control of the timing for the pruning at this time of year. I love that control to be able to really reduce the size of the apex. And when we start to look at this, you know, and you start to look at how we can shrink down those apical regions, now we're back in that proportion. Now we're back in that elegant, small, reduced size, extended. We've reduced the width. We see some of that flow. You get that negative space. It really does start to become a very beautiful execution of this elongated, abstracted form of this very special piece of material. And all of this hinges around and has hinged around the correct timing for the execution that gave me the ramification, that gave me the interior growth, that gave me the control, and allowed me to manipulate the aesthetic of this tree. So coming full circle and bringing this not back to where it was, but to a level that is representative of the ideas that I think Hugh and I started with with this tree. Pretty exciting, pretty cool that Hugh's on tonight. It's good to have you on, man. Thomas is wondering how is the pathogen entering? Through the leaf, the roots, or the bark? Entering through the leaf, yeah. Because definitely when we have that new growth being produced and elongating, there is no cuticle or waxy covering that is protecting that. And we think about the cuticle as a waxy covering to reduce transpiration or the loss of water. But that cuticle is also a barrier. It's a very good barrier. It's a very sound barrier. When a spore lands on that new soft tissue and the correct moisture conditions, typically high relative humidity, high rainfall, prolonged wetness, meaning if it's overly dense, there's a lack of air flow, all of these things facilitate germination of a spore. And when you look at a spore under a microscope that's germinating, it looks like mold forming. It's very funky. It takes it a while or it takes the correct nuances for a spore to really germinate and become active. But there's nothing stopping it from sending its hyphae, which are basically a root-like structure that a spore produces, into the tissue that is loaded with sugars and starches because cellular division is taking place. That is what's giving the spore that's giving rise to that production of tissue. That's the food source for that pathogen to feed on it and go through its reproductive cycle to now start to spread its infection through the rest of the tree. So that lack of cuticle and entry through the foliar mass is exactly what's happening with this particular red spot. Because we see it in the foliage, we know that that's where it's originating. And then Bentley wants to know will the bar branches right under the apex eventually need to be addressed? Definitely. Definitely. And so this is one of those instances where we say, okay, we've got this big long woody section here that hasn't necessarily produced adventitious growth. As we continue to cultivate, lay out, enhance ramification, drive more movement of sugars and starches through there, would we expect adventitious growth in that region? I would expect it to happen. I'm not worried that it's not going to happen. And when it does happen, I would assume that this back piece will be the piece that goes. If we take it off now, we lose all sense of depth and there is nothing up here to take its place because redwoods don't aggressively swell. And even if you look at this, go ahead and come back to that close up, Josh. Jesus is already in there. Okay, when you look at this, the thicker wire is on the inside of that bend which is what makes that look thick. But honestly, there is no inverse swelling as it occurs at that point right now. And this has been like this for four or five years now. Okay, three, four years, four or five years, I don't know. So it's been quite a while. So when I look at that, I'm looking at that and I'm saying, okay, no structural flaws immediately forming. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to leave it. Until it becomes an immediate issue where there is an inverse swelling beginning to form that I need to cut out, I'm going to leave it. Because it's going to up my chances of adventitious budding occurring that's going to give me that branching that I want. And Douglas is wondering for our last question, will you use wood hardener on the deadwood? Definitely redwood. As much as we say, redwood, rot resistant, really durable. Hey, this deadwood goes away. If you're not careful with it, it goes away. What I like to do with redwood is when I start to get in redwood, the exterior wood gets very, very pithy. So what I like to do is I like to come back in with a nylon brush, whether it's by hand or whether I put a nylon brush with some sand embedded into it on the Fordham. And I'll come back in and I'll just lightly touch it. I don't want to remove the shape, but I want to remove the pithy, soft surface wood. And I'll come back in and I'll go over it lightly with that nylon brush just to get that really soft water retentive wood off of it. And then I'll come back in and I'll treat it with wood hardener. And literally, you can do that once every four or five years on a redwood. And it will preserve the wood very, very well. It just needs a slight boost. The tannic content that exists that makes redwood redwood, that is what preserves that wood. When you get into these older trees, particularly trees that have been through fires, they are very rot-resistant. But in bonsai cultivation where we water a lot, we do have a lot of consistent wet-dry, which is what stimulates the rot to expand and really form. Just a boost of some wood hardener to preserve it and handling of that surface will allow you to preserve that wood very, very easily. Redwoods are, I would say, an effortless preservation species. Alright, and I believe we have a before photo. Josh, bring the thunder. Bring the thunder, Josh. Yeah. Yeah, nice. I'm glad you captured the smile. Yeah. So you see the apex. The funny thing about it is the lower portion of the tree is like, oh man, I'm ready to party. And the apex is like, I don't know, I'm kind of like somebody that goes home at night and reads a book. But then, like, I wanted the whole tree to be somebody that read a book. So getting that back to that elegant form and really reducing the width and density to have that even foyer distribution, now we get to see all of the nuances of that very special trunk and that abstracted form. Anyways, we did it. I didn't cry. No. You can cry tears of joy of how beautiful this redwood is. We welcomed Eve into the project manager position and we say goodbye to Sam, although she'll be with us. Sam, will you be here next week? I definitely will. We just wanted to give everybody some warning. So it wasn't, you know, today's my last day. Preparing everybody. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Times are changing. We'll continue to try and stay on the up and up and see if Bonsai can't carry us through all of this insanity. But I hope everybody is well. Give your loved ones a hug. And we will see you, if not on the live Q&A, next week on the stream. Wednesday streams are not gone. This week I've got some personal matters to tend to tomorrow, which is why we're postponing the Aspen stream. But we will come back to that Aspen. It's waiting. It's ready. And it wants us. I'm going to need you guys' help on that collaboration. But until then, stay well, stay happy, and thank you guys so much for the support. It meant a lot. Okay. Love you. 
