What's going on everybody? Wednesday mini-stream. Hey, hey, hey. This moment in time, post-flush hardening back in an energy positive. The nuances to being able to get to this moment of post-flush hardened pruning are a significant piece of information to understand physiologically and then to understand on each species our limitations, our desired goals and outcomes, and how we go about this process. Big body of knowledge. This has taken me, of all of the pruning times, of all of the timing mechanisms over the course of the year, over the past 10 years of Mirai, this being the 11th, right? This has been the biggest chunk of work to understand for the refinement of our native species, for the mentality and the physiological signs and indicators and anticipated responses. And perhaps no species has been more desired in terms of understanding, maximizing this period of time. In the year than the Redwood, then the coastal Redwood Sequoia Sempervirens. Now I want to be clear from the beginning. I'm going to give you a rotation of this tree. This is a tree that if you saw the advertising for the Artisans Cup back in 2015, graced the posters of the Artisans Cup as one of the first real multiple apacy forms where we started to understand what happens when the central apex is knocked out of a tree and how all of these other apical regions kind of reach to the sky and try to reestablish that capacity to be a big tree, to be an oxen driven, dominant skyscraper of an image. And when we talk about the coastal Redwood, we've focused historically on Mirai Live, talking about the coastal Redwood in that really pivotal period of time, which is their amassing of vascular tissue and allocation of sugars and starches in the bud formation of the late fall, early winter period of time. Pruning time and pruning mechanism indicated at that moment by the amassing of the buds on the shoulders, as well as along the growth that occurs on that tree. But we always have spoken to this post flush hardened period of time coming back at a moment where we've been pinching and maintaining. Because again, when we think post flush hardened pruning, we can, at this point in time, prune developmental pieces that have achieved their developmental goals of elongation, of thickening, of root recovery, of healing, and of further foliar expansion. We can definitely, if we achieve those developmental goals, come back now, sugar starch load has been evacuated, growth has been produced, energy positive, we can prune, transitioning the strength from the tip to the interior. Secondary, we've gotten secondary scaffolding set up. It's thick, it's established, it's now capable of being wired. We can prune at this point in time. But where we also have the ability at this point in time with coastal Redwood is to, in the refinement process, be pruning. And so we have to understand each of these scenarios to be able to dissect what we do at this point in time. And so we have to understand each of these scenarios to be able to dissect what we do at this point in time. To maximize the formation of ramification, enhance and improve the structure of our tree, and have the ability, here's the big one, have the ability to adjust the length of the growth that has occurred and plan on a bud occurring in the anticipated location, right? This is this is the mechanism that we all really need to know in coastal Redwood because with Sequoia Sempervivans, we recognize, and let's just kind of get into this here, right? We recognize that if I prune a a coastal Redwood, I prune a Sequoia Sempervivans, here is my tip. This tip has been pinched. If you're in development or secondary, you wouldn't have pinched this tip, but this tip has been pinched because this is a tree in refinement, right? And we recognize, hey, if I prune this frond right here, if I prune that piece of growth, let me get my hand out of the way, if I prune that piece of growth right there, there is a strong chance that I am not going to get a bud at that cut site for a majority of the year if I prune there. It'll come back to the base of this, if we really mishandle it and miss the timing, it'll go all the way back to the base of this elongated piece, back in this shoulder, okay? But we talk about that late fall, early winter, November, December, sometimes January, depending on when that tree, that specific tree, shows the formation of those small little green buds mounting in anticipation of spring growth. We say that sign and indication is a moment where you can cut the growth back to where you want that length to be, and you can largely agree or have confidence that you will get a bud near that cut site, okay? And then we always say the other time that we can do this, that might be the very best time, and I agree, that is the moment where we have the greatest flexibility. But there's also this time post-flush harden, where we have a similar capacity to make that decision and make that cut. And again, we can do that because as we look along the branches that have been pinched, and I was just looking at one that had such a beautiful, beautiful display of interior buds, let me see if I can find it because it was the greatest illustration. Ah, here it is. Okay, and I'm going to roll this forward, and then I'm just going to ask Philip to zoom all the way in to this piece here because you see, at this point in time, yes, yes. Now look at this. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to make sure, to the best of my ability, I'm going to illustrate that. Let me see if I can get the light in there. Yeah, you can just see at the tip of my scissor, you can just see a green bud right there, right? Just a nice, juicy green bud. There's another one back here that I'm going to try to show you. Let me rotate. There it is. You see that little BB, that green gem? Okay, now these are pinch tips. Stay in tight here with me, Josh. These are pinch tips. These tips still have viability. These tips are producing usable growth. After we pinch, we get buds at the cut sites, or at the pinch sites, or at least somewhere along these runs of new growth, and they are amassing right now. Here is another small little bud that turned into an actual foyer production piece. Okay, but we see these buds starting to amass as this gets into a post-flush hardened state. We recognize, okay, I can cut this piece back here. I can cut this piece back to one of these small tertiaries here. I can cut these pieces back to these buds here, but here's the other thing that these buds tell us we have the capacity to do, is I can cut this back into here. I can cut this back into a stem where I have leaf mass in existence, where it's not dying, it's not falling off, it's still green, it's still healthy, and it's still occupied. And I can, to a large degree, predict that where I prune back into this growth, I will get a bud at that site or close to that site somewhere in this foyer production, or this foyer existent location of the tree. Okay, and that is the biggie. That's the biggie. Now, can I predict and have as high of a success rate as I could if I'm thinking about cutting back into that region of the tree in that late fall, early winter? No, that is the number one time on my head would, to be doing the kind of pruning where we reductively dictate length of that piece, cut it back, and expect to have a bud at the cut site, right? But this is another time, back in an energy positive, still in a foyer production period of the year, where the presentation of those back buds from the pinching process, we pinch, pinch, pinch, and we see the amassing of those little green BBs saying, hey, I've got another round in me. I've got more energy to give. If you want, you can cut it back. You can cut it back. You can cut it back. You can cut it back. So, that's the advantage of it. That indication is spelling the exact same opportunity. That's not necessarily the goal of this moment in time though, right? The goal of this moment in time, the finer and finer the growth gets on a redwood, the less and less that we want to be making those reductive prunes to elongated growth. So, if we come back in here and we talk about our goal at this time, here is a tip where we have three different pieces, none of them in a triad of this. Three pieces that form a nice, tight, compact branch. And we look over here and we see this one piece that although pinched, only ever had one growth tip, has really nice healthy. Notice the size of these needles here. Notice the small size of the needles of the previous year's growth. Last year's growth gave us a really robust amount of needle mass. This year's growth, fine again. It was repotted, gave us a little bit more finesse. Why does this one only have one single elongation? And this one is actually, a ramified piece of growth that we've pinched, right? Why? Why is that? I don't know. I have no idea. I don't know what happens and I don't know why that happens, right? But I do know that I want to have some control over this length to both reduce it in terms of the overall scale of the tree, as well as to predict where the bud is going to occur. And I don't want to lose that piece of ramification. This is where I come back in and I prune to the desired length of that shoot, and I will get a piece of growth here. Now, I don't want to prune this piece back. I have ramified growth. I have bifurcation that occurs relatively close in on the length of that branch. I have smaller pieces occurring at junctions independent of this bifurcated location. Everything that I want to establish a highly ramified branch is happening right here. This prune was a prune that was simply designed to give myself the opportunity to maintain that piece of ramification on an otherwise healthy branch, the length, get it back into the proportion and expect that I have a higher likelihood than not that a bud will form as a result of that based on the timing and the indications that I'm seeing. That is one type of pruning. That is the reductive pruning of singular non-ramified or overly elongated pieces of growth on a coastal redwood. Okay. Let's go into the next type of pruning. Okay. Next type of pruning is to say, listen, I've been pinching and in pinching, I've created, stimulated and generated a tremendous amount of growth potential and pieces that are in fact contributing to the health of the tree. And what that means, right? When we start to look at this is I have a lot of pieces that are creating kind of this conglomeration of growth at the end of my branch. Notice that I've got four or five branchlets that are all emerging from a very, very close proximity out on the tip of this branch. Now, some of us might be encouraged or desire pruning back into this piece right here. But if you're looking for a branch that's going to be able to prune back into this piece right here, but if you're looking for a branch that's going to be able to prune back into this piece right here, the tip of your branch is ramifying to this degree. It is very, very difficult to cut back into the interior of a coastal redwood and have this produce buds back in this region. This is more or less the redwood saying, Hey, this is where my buds have a mass. This is where I have the capacity to cellularly divide. Yes, you could cut back in here. I'm probably not going to give you a bud in that region. Okay. The singular frond, the singular long, strong frond. Yeah, that'll give you buds back in that region if we cut back. But this ramified piece, we have to work within the ramified piece. This is where we start to shoot select as a manner and mechanism of pruning. I'm going to save the two tightest, shortest interior and most compact pieces of growth, right? I'm going to bifurcate that branch. I'm going to take off the world of five down to two. And in doing so, I will encourage in that action, I will encourage a stronger piece of growth. That's more compact and highly, ramified just with the reduction of that cellular division at the tip. I will encourage a shoot to occur from the base of this, of this piece of growth. That shoot that will occur from the base of this piece of growth is going to be stronger. It's going to be more compact and it's going to be more highly ramified, right? So when we have a piece that we've been pinching, when we have ramification at the tip, very difficult to cut that piece back and get a bud at that site. When you have the single long linear front, it's effortless. We knock off the cut to the desired length. We can anticipate a bud at that site. When we have ramification, when we have a highly pinched piece that has actually given us bifurcation, very difficult. We shoot select at the tip of that branch. If nothing else, we have a bifurcation at the tip, but beyond that, typically we can focus and plan on a really strong shoot coming from the point of origin of that piece. And that is actually the usable form. Now, let me show you what that looks like. Phillip, come on back in here. Okay. Here's a piece when we look at this, this was a frond. This was a frond that was pinched last year. Okay. Pinched to control the growth because it was pinched, right? As a singular piece, it did not have necessarily the buds amassed on the length of this stem to give me any usable form of growth. But look at what appeared at the base of that, a very, very vigorous. And you'll notice that the stock of this is green. The stock of this is incredibly strong and vigorous. And this, this piece is actually far more compact and far more highly ramified than the piece below it. This is what we expect to take over and replace these long leggy pieces like this one here. And this is exactly what we want. Now I'm going to show you how we handle this. This is how we enhance the quality of redwood instead of always trying to prune to get buds back. These buds at the base that most people say, take those off, take those off, take those off. These are actually the tighter, more compact, stronger growing pieces. Now, this is what we're going to replace. I'm going to replace that long leggy weak piece that didn't give me the kind of growth I wanted. And I'm going to utilize a transition of my wire to be able to guide and manage the strength of this stronger shoot that shot out vertically off of the top of that branch. I'm going to bend this down into that lateral place now. And now I come back into this piece and I shoot select, right? I shoot select to take any threes and fours areas of twos. I shoot select to take any long coarse pieces and save the finer pieces that exist around it. I shoot select to potentially take out that central elongating stem so that I get a distribution of energy, a distribution of foliar mass, and I set myself up for a more highly ramified branch. Notice how taking that piece that was growing vertically off, removing the weaker piece who's pinching or pruning, stimulated the growth of that shoot, pinching that shoot as it's emerging and elongating over the spring season to keep it compact, and then replacing it. A big part of enhancing the quality of your redwoods, post-flush hardened pruning to actualize a much higher quality tree. And we can see this occur in much bigger locations. And I'm gonna kind of jump up the tree here because it's such a visually busy tree. And it's a visually busy tree that got much bigger. We cut it back and we wired it last year, and this is the fruit of a post-flush hardened prune one year later, really breaking down all of the different opportunities. And we're gonna focus just right here, okay? Because when we look at this area now, with the laying out of this piece here, notice how leggy these branches are right here. You see how long and leggy that one is? You see how long and leggy that one is? No ramification. Are they strong? Yeah, they're strong, right? We have some weaker interior shoots here, but notice what's happening at the base of this. Look at how strong this piece is. Look at how beautifully ramified that piece is. This piece has been pinched. This piece has multiple pieces of ramification. None of them are occurring from the same site. I don't even have to thin any of these out. I have a wonderful branch here that is 10 times the quality of the branch that we wired. Okay? I have some weaker pieces that are existing from the same junction. I'm gonna take these pieces out. I'm gonna shoot select along this region and make sure that I'm picking the very best branch to occur from the actual tree. I'm gonna take this branch out of the trunk of the tree to contribute to the design. And again, now I'm gonna come back. I'm gonna unwire that piece that I had wire on, that structural piece. And it is woody and it is lignified, and we are sacrificing some degree of maturity, but I'm gonna take that piece off, and I'm gonna come back to this notion of, now we go about the process of transitioning that wire onto this piece, reusing. I'm not rewiring the tree. I'm just reusing it. I'm just re reapplying it, okay? Working those shoots inside that wire. And now check this out. I have a much, much improved, much improved and guess what? Much more compact, much more compact branch to replace that long leggy piece. Let me just show you again, the quality of that piece was non-existent, right? Here's the quality of the piece that we just replaced, right? No ramification, no bugs on the interior. Now you might be asking yourself, well, couldn't you prune this back and get buds? Yeah, I could prune this back, and again, we have a high likelihood at this time of year to prune this back as those singular shoots and potentially get buds on the interior. But if I already have a branch that has highly ramified growth, that is tight, that is compact, that is strong, that comes from a great place of origination, that I can go ahead and replace a leggy piece with and already have what the pruning back of that leggy piece could potentially give me, but I can't 100% guarantee it, I'm gonna take the piece that I already have accomplished, what I would be trying to accomplish through the pruning back and the gamble that would be a part of that pruning decision, right? So as I look at this area, I have these mixtures of these scenarios that occur on redwood. Here's another one. Here's another really beautiful illustration. Okay, I have this long tip here, long leggy piece, right? Notice this long leggy piece. Now there are buds right here at the tip. We pruned this back last year. It did not grow, but it created buds. I don't know why it didn't grow over the spring. It doesn't matter because look at what I got at the base of this. I got this piece of growth, highly ramified piece of growth. Look at that, beautiful, strong, soft, supple green, right? I'm gonna prune back this elongated piece here. This is a piece, notice this is growing over it, single frond right here. I don't want that. I don't wanna lose the ramification, but I don't want that piece up in my mix here. Okay, so I'm gonna prune that back. I'm gonna take this piece, after having generated, after having laid it out, wired, styled, pruned, and gotten this byproduct of this stronger piece, I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna take this piece out and I'm gonna transition that wire, okay? And what ends up happening, when we start to work with redwood the first time, when we start to work with redwood from collected stock after it's recovered, the first pieces of growth that redwood produces after the collection process, after it's recovering, are long, pressed out spindly pieces of growth, okay? They're not stellar, fantastic, tight, compact pieces of growth. It's trying to survive. It doesn't have the root system reestablished. It doesn't have necessarily the abundant energy to produce ramifiable growth. A lot of our experiences with redwoods, we wire out that green, soft, fleshy tissue. It doesn't behave well. Maybe we wired it at the wrong time. Don't touch them in the fall. Maybe we wired it prior to the tree having recuperated the energy, right? Maybe we wired it before the root system had established. One of the big pieces of any collected piece of material is making sure that it has reaccumulated its resources, reestablished its root system, and that it's ready for that work. That is a big part of the process, making sure a tree is ready, okay? But independent of that, we recognize that no matter how ready a redwood is, the first time we wire it, those pieces are gonna be long, leggy, singular fronds. How do we handle that process, right? Laying them out, yes. Cutting them back if we're talking about one of the two times a year, late fall, early winter at the sign of buds, post-flush harden state, absolutely. Great time to make that initial prune. Now, again, late fall, early winter, we should get buds near the cut site, number one time, okay? If the tree is strong, if the tree is healthy, if we fertilized and built it to it, if we have it laid out, again, you have to have styled and wired your redwood for this to work. Hormones here, auxin, we cut back. We don't get buds there, right? Next one comes out to replace it. You lay it down. Now the tree says, ooh, cytokinin. I cut here, cytokinin comes in. Auxin's gone, laid out, auxin's suppressed. Cytokinin triggers lateral bud growth, late fall, early winter, or post-flush harden, pruning energy, positive right now, okay? But the product of any prune that we make at that time, whether we get a bud there or whether it pushes back to the base is going to be a high-quality, tight, compact piece, okay? That piece starts to elongate, we immediately start pinching. We're pinching those pieces that are strong and vigorous and tight and compact. And this is contrary to common bonsai knowledge, as it's usually taught. Typically, take away crotch growth, take away crotch growth, take away crotch growth. That becomes such a constant, incessant, hammered-in concept for how we manage trees' growth. But what if that crotch growth is of a higher quality? This is what you're seeing, right? So, much like we talked about, we're going to do this. We talk about a juniper or a pine. We wire it, we style, we do the initial pruning selection, et cetera, and we let the tree grow to, quote-unquote, recover, replenish its photosynthetic mass. When we are talking about redwood, after we do that initial styling and we do some of those initial prunes and we make those initial moves and we change that initial hormonal layout, we allow the tree to, quote-unquote, recover by, yes, expanding its photosynthetic mass, but more than anything, we allow that tree to grow with a tremendous amount of vigor so that we get this kind of highly ramifiable growth in the tree, right? And that becomes one of the paramount actions and activities that allows us to really start to compress, to really start to refine, and to really start to produce the highest-level tree. For me, when we dive into and we start to dissect redwood as a subject matter for Boneside, this has been an evolution of knowledge that has come with a tremendous amount of feedback from the Mirai community. Because some people said, hey, you said this would work and it didn't work. You said this was the indicator and we're not seeing this happen. And that has been incredibly fruitful towards being able to really customize this knowledge and have this knowledge be functional, right? I'm going to continue to walk you through this because I really want to, we're not going to do the whole tree today, obviously, but I want to walk you through the thought process and just show you how much we can improve and compress a region of the tree, okay? Come with me here, right? Because I've got this big, beautiful, ramified tree. This ramified piece right here. And I have, again, another one of these laggier, kind of older, laid out pieces. Now, let me give you the narrative arc of this tree. This tree was really on a tremendous, was on a tremendous trajectory from the first time it was created. It matured tremendously on the initial iteration. It sold to a student. The timing of the work the second time around was done in the fall. Now, if you know anything about redwoods, wiring redwoods in the fall, no matter how talented you are, there is a mechanism that occurs. I'm suspecting it is a state of some degree of dormancy, most likely driven by the proximity of Sequoia sempervirens to Mediterranean regions and a lack of summer rainfall, right? There is a mechanism that I do believe is dormancy. That means in the fall period of time where most trees are putting on vascular growth, the redwood is shut down. It is not actively amassing vascular tissue. In fact, it's almost completely dormant. And if we take that period of time and we mishandle that period of time or we're irresponsible with that period of time and we wire at that period of time, the tree does not have the capacity to compartmentalize any of the damage that we might do through wiring at that period of time. And we typically see the tree suffer, loses a lot of needles, has a tremendous setback in terms of the health, and we see a lot of the branches die. And that's what happened to this tree. So for two years after that big styling, we had to allow the foyer mass of the tree to recover. We lost some branches. And it was a real kind of embattled redwood, right? We got the tree back into health. And last year with that health, overgrown, tremendous in size, right? It was a complete mop to get it back to a state where we could even think to wire it. We cut back the branches to interior pieces, some of these big long fronds that existed, and we wired it back out and changed that auxin again. We got to that post-flush hardened state. We pruned some of those pieces and we went hands off. We pinched it over the course of this spring as all of the growth, interior and exterior were growing. And now we're in that post-flush hardened state again. That is the narrative arc that takes us here. So in many ways, this is a second working of an initial styling, if you will, if you consider that initial styling a rebuild of the canopy, okay? So coming back in and doing this replacement work is very, very similar and in line with what we would be doing if this were styled originally. Okay, here's another moment. I've got these highly ramified pieces here. Now I've compressed the areas around them. But I've got these highly ramified pieces here. I've got a tighter piece on the interior. I've got a much longer piece here. This branch, when we start to talk about redwood, we're creating a vertical proportion, which means when we go vertically with the tree, we have to narrow the silhouette in terms of a left to right distance, okay? Now I have a highly ramified branch here, which means if I cut back into this central stem, there's a small likelihood, and I would say even almost impossible likelihood that I will get a bud here because all the ramifications, that the growth is focused out on the tip. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna replace this. My goal is to replace with tight, compact interior growth so that I can reduce the horizontal proportions of this tree. That's my aesthetic desire, and that is what is informing how I make these decisions. Okay? And once I replace that with this tight, compact interior piece, now I have to come back in and I have to shoot select. This has been pinched. This is a very, very vigorous piece. Okay, I'm gonna go ahead. I'm gonna take off the coarsest piece of growth. I'm gonna leave that highly ramified portion of growth below it, and now that piece that was three or four inches longer has been compressed, and let me just show you that where you can see, has been compressed to a nice, tight, compact piece. Let me rotate sideways. You can see how I took the length out of that, right? Notice how short and nice and tight and compact that is. So we've reduced here and we've tightened up that growth. We've reduced here and we've tightened up that growth. Just through the process, of taking the vigorous interior pieces, and let's go ahead and stay right here. Taking these vigorous interior pieces, we are rapidly increasing the quality of our redwood. Now this kind of selection process has to happen, and stay in tight for me, Josh. I'm just gonna rotate here. It has to happen on so many levels, because as I work through this, I have this big, long piece here. Notice the length of this here. Notice how long that branch is. Maybe that proportionally fits into the tree. Maybe we pull this up, and we pull that into that pad. That's great. But I also, on the interior, let me get these out of the way. I have some tight, compact pieces that I could see taking over that big, long run. If that's the case, do I cut back to those now? I certainly could. Do I wanna rebuild that woody, lignified tissue? I really don't. Do I wanna continue to cultivate these longer, these tighter interior pieces with the notion that I might replace this longer, leggier branch? Yes. This is a part of, when we think about coniferous bonsai styling, always building interior pieces that have the opportunity to allow us to reduce. So I'm here. I've got this big, long length. My aesthetic is in, if I narrow here, I extend the aesthetic there. So I cultivate this piece. This gets longer, longer, longer. I'm pinching, pinching, pinching. Pretty soon, this gets here, this gets here. Too long, boom, I pull back. And now I've shortened the length of that branch, and I've decreased the width of the silhouette. That's the move. That's the move right here, right? So I'm gonna pick one of these two vigorous pieces that's growing in there. And although it's growing in the crotch, I'm going to continue to foster the compressed growth that occurs there so that hopefully when I need it, when I need to compress this branch over the course of time, I have that interior piece that's going to lead to that higher quality of growth, all right? And here's another one. And this is just going to be this continual repetition of process. I have these tight interior pieces. I have this longer leg year branch here. It is woody, it is lignified, it is proportional, right? These are valuable things. It's woody, it's lignified, it's proportional. Do I want to replace it with a lesser developed, green fleshy piece of growth? On this branch, I have several pieces. I have several pieces of ramification. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna say, you know what, on this one, I don't need to replace that piece. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna take that crotch growth off and I'm gonna utilize the more developed, more mature, very tertiary woody structure, okay? I have this longer leg year piece. Singular fronds along this piece. Can I prune the singular frond back? Can I prune the singular frond back? Yes or no? Yes, I can. Singular fronds are where we get buds at the cut site. Boom. I'm gonna choose the length that that frond needs to be to exist inside of that pad. And that is what allows me to make that a functional component of my tree and this portion and period of growth, okay? Big, long, leggy, singular pieces here. Notice these two long, leggy guys. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna prune these back. This is the moment and the time where we can adjust the length of that. I'm even gonna adjust the length of that back behind where I even had the wire and shorten my wire, okay? I'm gonna take this piece, I'm gonna adjust the length of that. I plan on, I can almost depend on, a bud popping right where that cut site occurred. And now suddenly we've pushed this branch back in and really reestablished our hierarchy over the course and the length of the branch to fit in proportionally to the tree. So let's go ahead and just go to the wide shot, Josh, yeah, excellent. And now you can see, although it's still a little bit challenging within the mass of the tree, where you see all of this chaos and then you see this really reconciled area right here. And I'm looking past the camera if it looks like I'm like staring off into oblivion. I'm just looking at what that looks like so that you see how clean and defined that is, but also how short we've made that. And if you take that out, this is giving us one of our out, right? Then we go back in and then we come back out again, that aspect of creating interest in the lines of a vertical tree, but we've super compressed, we've cleaned up and we've reconciled that area so that we have a much more proportionally accurate length to the branch that gives us that impression of verticality we're seeking in the design of the tree. Let's keep going. I wanna keep going, okay? Cause there's bigger discussions and decisions to be made. Let's hop into this upper piece here. Now this branch, this big branch, that we're talking about has some interior ramification that's occurring up here on the inside, on the inside of all of this. And this is where we really say, listen, if we want to always be fostering the ability to reduce the length of branching, we always have to be kind of cutting back and giving priority to these interior pieces. So I'm just gonna prune back any of the fronds that are up in that area. I'm gonna take off any growth coming from the shoulder that I can't use to start to clarify some of these pieces. I'm gonna come in here, I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna take off any of the growth that's growing over any of the branching that I do wanna keep. I'm gonna take out some of these really vigorous crotch growing pieces that are competing with multiple pieces of growth coming from the same location, taking threes and fours down to twos, threes and fours down to twos. But here again, we get into this moment. Notice how long this is. Very, very long, I started pinching here on the tip. Look at this shoot that's existing underneath here, okay? So many of us would have just cut this off. So many of us would have cut this off. Now look at the length here, look at the length here. Look at the ramification or lack thereof here. Look at the presence of ramification here. I mean, we're talking about a monster discrepancy. Now I'm gonna lose the woody lignified branch that's creating a structure to support this length. But what I'm gonna replace it with is I'm gonna replace it with that really strong, vigorous green shoot. Watch this transition right here. Watch what happens, okay? I'm gonna go boop. And now I am here, boop, okay? So I literally, let me show you that again, okay? I was here. Look at how long that is. Now I'm there. And what I have is a tight, compact, ramified interior branch that I'm cutting back to. Just by letting it grow, just by pinching those pieces as they are originating from the crotch and not immediately taking them off, right? Recognizing how do I get a tight, compact redwood? So many of us think so kind of black and white about this process with redwood. We really have to understand that those pieces of growth, those shoots coming from the interior, those are your usable forms. Those are the best friend that you have to be able to compress a redwood and have that redwood become a tree of the very highest quality, right? And I'm gonna do this over and over and over again, right? Where? I'm not going to be compressing is when I have a really beautiful, structural, thick, nice, lignified, woody branch that I need to have proportional hierarchy in the design. Right? I don't want the objective or the takeaway from this stream to be, okay, so on redwood, we prune back all the long branches, we save all the soft, fleshy interiors, and we just change the wiring. No, no, that's not what I'm saying. But I'm saying if we need to compress, if we are dealing with a first styling, if we are dealing with a revampment of the growth habit, of redwood, of the size and structure and shape of the redwood, this is how we go about that process. It is a two to three year process to get tight, compact branching. We must be combining pinching in accompaniment of the aggressive growth. So we're managing it, we're keeping it tight and compact. We're not letting it turn into an uncontrolled, herculeic sort of presentation of foyer productivity. But this is how we manage redwood to create the highest quality, the best quality tree that we possibly can in the bonsai process, right? Okay, here I have a relatively tight, ramified piece growing kind of over the top of this. And I've got to make a decision. Do I want that to continue growing over the top of that piece? Or do I want this to be a little bit tighter, a little bit more compact? Currently, it's got a big, thick piece of wire out here. I've got two smaller, weaker fronts. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna say, I don't want this growing over the top of this. I want these pieces to ramify. I want this branch to stand alone. I want to shrink down the pad of the redwood so that I have a much smaller proportion that starts to show that giant tree in miniature. This is how we create the notion, the believability in the height of this design. This is also how we create the believability in terms of the size of the pads, okay? I'm gonna take that piece out. I'm gonna take that piece out. And now I'm gonna leave behind what I would consider to be relatively weak shoots, okay? But again, this is that time of year where we say, hey, weaker shoots are safe. They're singular, elongated pieces. Let's go ahead. Let's get rid of those really compact component or those really elongated components. Let's take it down to that singular shoot and watch closely. I take that singular shoot. I cut that back into that green area and I give myself the opportunity for success. Now you may be saying, what happens if that doesn't produce a bud? Well, look at what I have here. I have another tight little compact piece in that crotch. I have something as a backup that can take over. That hierarchy of that branch should it not behave or do what we think it's gonna do. And Redwood gives you so many different choices, so many different opportunities, so many different ways in which we can manipulate the system to get that compaction. When I first started doing Bonesai, or let me say this, when I first came back to the United States, not even when I finished my apprenticeship, but when I was still studying as an apprentice, Mr. Carmorea, brought me a SID. to Sacramento in 2006 to do the Golden State Bonsai Convention. And at that event, Bob Scheinman had one of his highly refined redwoods on display. And Mr. Kimura said, you know, Bob Scheinman, this guy, he's the best with redwoods. He understands redwoods. But Mr. Kimura also said, there has to be a higher level that you can achieve with redwoods. And he kind of challenged me. He said, can you, you know, when you come back, this is a piece of material that you should really focus your efforts on. I mean, I would have anyways because I love redwood. But there was a little bit of a statement of, you know, this is something that you need to devote some attention to. And I said, cool. I love that. I love that idea. Because when we think about how do you take this material that hasn't been maximized in terms of its potential and how do you work with it to develop? The highest quality bonsai. It really does come down to how do you create anticipatable, predictable behaviors in the tree so that you can perform actions that alter the aesthetic of the tree, right? And this has been the journey over 10 years. Started out very, very first group of trees that I bought when I came back from Japan was a set of redwoods from Bob Scheinman and a set of Sierra junipers. Most of them I still have at Mirai of those trees. They've been the time capsule to show the evolution of both aesthetic and technique, right? And now we're here. Now we're here understanding how to create and not just create. Bear in mind, in bonsai, we have to understand how to recover. In bonsai, we have to understand how to handle a tree that's gotten too large because they continue to grow. Year after year after year after year, bonsai will continue to grow. How do you manage? How do you think about the process? How do you manage? How do you replace? How do you refine? How do you continue to build a practice in the bonsai process that allows you to keep health in the tree and not try to overly constrict it so that it can become something truly fruitful, right? And that is where we are at, okay? Here's another perfect example. I'm going to show you this branch right here, and then I'm just going to rock out on a few more pieces to create some visibility in this region of the tree, and then we can go ahead and let you go. You will have what you need, and I will carry on my merry way of continuing to prune this redwood. Okay, big elongated piece here. Way, way, way too long down here, right? We would ideally like this to be nice and short. Now, even on these pieces, in the crotches of these pieces, I have little buds forming. I know that this is going to give me more growth. Right now, this is not ideal growth. This is really kind of an embattled growth. Okay, ramified piece here. There's no way that I can prune this ramified piece back. We see ramification on the tip. It's been pinched. There's no way I can prune this back into here. All of the division and cellular division is out here on the tip. But I have these singular fronts. I have these singular fronts. I have these singular fronts. Now, I can cut back to those singular fronts. Depends on how long I want this piece to be. And I'm going to say, as far as I'm concerned, in regards to this piece, I'll go ahead and I'll cut back to these tight interior pieces, at least the smallest pieces that are possible. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take this piece off of the bottom and reduce it. I'm going to reduce that. Okay, and now I'm going to perform that action. Again, I'm going to cut back to the desired length on these singular fronts. Boom, boom. Okay. Now, I do have a high likelihood, high likelihood that I will get buds at that cut site, right? But I also recognize and I already see I have buds in this crotch. I have buds in this crotch. I have buds at the crotch of this. I have buds that are occurring in these fronts right here along the run of this stem that is already wired. So I know that. No matter what happens, I am going to get a tight push out of compact growth occurring from these regions and I can depend on that contributing from the tree. But here's what else I'm going to do, okay? I'm going to come back to this interior piece. Look at this, right? Go ahead and zoom out just a little bit, Phillip. Notice this piece at the base right here. I'm going to take off the pieces that are coming from that shoulder that don't contribute and I'm going to wire this piece out, okay, because if this, if in worst case scenario, this does not behave for me, look at what I have, nice, tight, compact interior piece. Let me get a little piece of wire on that. Let me bring that out into the, bring that out into the world of this redwood, okay? Now when we're wiring redwood with this lateral frond layout, watch closely how I handle this, right? Okay. I'm going to be pinching the wire to the branch, but I'm going to be pinching with my fingers in the plane of, right, thumb over the top, index over the bottom, so that I don't crush or break those needles. And then I can just sort of fish my tip of wire through all of those pieces, wrap it up, I support the shoulder, which is where the damage occurs, and I have not done any damage. I should not see a single brown needle on that piece of growth. Right now is a great time to wire, great time to wire redwood. As long as we are very careful about the tip and we don't overly damage the tip, we should not see any browning on it. Okay. But what we've set ourselves up for is we've set ourselves up for a replacement branch. We have this branch brought back into proportion. We've pruned it to a desired length knowing that we will at least get buds somewhere, but potentially even at that cut site and have exactly what we wanted based on the timing and execution of that mechanism. And suddenly this really nice sharp line here, nice and short, nice and compact in terms of the apex, a little bit more length and definition here. Once I start getting in and I start bracing, I'm going to be able to do things like this. start pulling these pieces apart you're going to see the negative space between these pads expand exponentially you're going to see the differentiation of this length with the pushing back of weak interiors the utilization of more tight compact pieces as replacement you're going to watch this tree get back to a state of glory that not only will show the tree's proportion vertical with a narrowing of the silhouette but will also have another flush of growth that we will be able to pinch this year to get a tighter more compact degree of ramification based on this plethora of understanding of situations we can handle in the post flush hardened state and what the product will be at the tail end of this year is going to be a redwood that will be splendid absolutely amazing beautiful well-formed and revamped right and if we were thinking about this as a redwood we're designing for the first time a great initial concept and execution of refinement technique replacement concepts and compression of design that maximizes the value of the material this is post flush hardened pruning big chunk of knowledge in how we sort of work our way through the design and make the decisions based on the state of growth and how it exists something we all should very much recognize will contribute to utilizing sequoia sempervirens as a fantastic and fundamental species in the creation of bonsai all right oh i'm so excited let me just take a look at this because i've i've been looking at this tree kind of over yeah no this is going to be really this is going to be really quite powerful even and this is kind of the angle when you see from that distant notice the cleanliness of that line notice that pushed in notice the cleanliness when you start to see a redwood worked out with compre compact branching and this kind of definition at this scale it is one of the great species for bonsai creation it is one of the great species for bonsai creation now i obviously have pride in redwood it's It's one of the great species for North American bonsai. It's one of the most iconic trees in the world. I think redwood to a large degree really carries and embodies the culture that tends to quantify the Western United States and maybe the mentality of abundance and unlimited opportunity that I think really sort of carried with it the American dream, right? And that's going fairly deep, but as I've driven across the country multiple times, the redwood continues to be the species that I feel maybe carries the American spirit in the purest form. And so it's a species we continue to work on. And this tree is one that Mariah is super excited about and very proud to have. Anyways, I hope that was worth it. Hope that clarified some things. Any questions that you have, 10 a.m. tomorrow morning, live Q&A, forum Q&A. There's probably no more spots available, but if there aren't, get on the next one, right? We're here to answer, to help, and to evolve your knowledge, continue to drive your bonsai process forward. But for now, happy redwood pruning. We are in the wheelhouse for it right now. It will last until those buds start to push with a second flush. Once you get that second flush, you're out of the window. So be quick, be accurate, go about your process with a greater degree of knowledge and capacity to refine a redwood as bonsai. Until then, we'll be finishing up this work, probably shoot this tree so that we have some photo documentation of it. And you'll probably see that on our social channels at some point in the future. But we love you guys. We look forward to seeing you on the Q&A, if not next week on the live stream. We'll be there, or be square. Love you, thanks. 
