Hi there, I'm Eve. You probably know me from Mirai Live. Today I'm going to be teaching some feature content on color theory, and I find that the best way to do that is actually to teach you by using paint. I'm not going to teach you how to paint, I'm just going to teach you how to understand color by using paint. And then we're going to go out in the garden and we're going to get a general understanding of how we recognize and identify color within our bonsai. The idea of a primary color, every color that we can see with our human eye can be created with these three colors, simply with a mixture. So our primary colors are yellow, red, and blue, and you'll notice that all of these actually say primary on them. If you are using paints, sometimes these colors come pre-mixed to be a little bit toned or something, to be a little bit off of the exact color, but today I want to be working with just the primaries. Laying out my colors. In the breakdown of my color wheel, I'm going to go ahead and start by just putting in these three colors. I'm going to put my blue at the top, go red over here, and my yellow over here. When I mix the colors yellow and blue together, I'm going to get green. But because blue is a stronger color, I'm going to need more yellow in the mixture than blue in order to make that perfect green color. The next color that I'm going to go ahead and make is purple. Purple is a pretty even distribution between red and blue because these are my two darker colors, although I think it is a tiny bit more red because I think this blue is going to come out a little bit stronger. So I'm going to take a chunk of both, start mixing them in. Next color that we're going to make is orange. Our yellow is pretty weak, so I'm going to want a good amount of that, and our red is pretty strong, so I'm just going to take a little bit, and I'm going to start mixing that up. Now that I've got my primaries and my secondaries laid out on the color wheel, I'm going to quickly show us what the tertiary colors look like. Now you'll notice that if I go ahead and look at the colors that are across from each other, the blue and the orange, those are complementary colors because they're on opposite sides of the color wheel. And then I've got my red and green, which are on my opposite sides, and then I've got purple and yellow. I am going to go ahead and start here with my yellow and orange. I'm going to add a lot more yellow, and I'm just going to take a little bit of that, and I'm going to mix these. And I basically want to find my halfway point between my orange and my yellow. That feels like a pretty even middle ground for me. Now I'm going to do a mixture between the red and orange and kind of get a reddish orange going on here. Next I'm going to go for a reddish purple. Next I'm going to make my bluish violet here. I'll take a little bit of that. All right, next we're going to make a blue green, which is probably a fairly common color in bonsai when we're talking about foliage colors. Get a nice foresty kind of green. All right, and our last color is going to be kind of a limey yellow. That nice color that we get of the first spring flush typically. Kind of like that very bright, almost neon color that a larch might have. So now I've got all of my tertiary colors down, and what you'll notice is that while we have our primaries and secondaries that are opposite from each other, we also now have our more advanced color mixes. So for example, you can see that a reddish purple might go really well with a yellowish orange, or a reddish orange might go really well with a bluish green. So your idea of complementary colors still works as a cross. Another important concept to understand is analogous colors. And what that means is that those colors are close to each other on the color wheel, meaning that they relate. In which case, they typically have a same color base. So a couple of greens might all have a mixture of yellow and blue within them, which makes them analogous. Next I'm going to go over some simple vocabulary words that are more common in bonsai, and that are more common in plants and plants. So I'm going to go over a couple of words that are more common in plants and plants. So I'm going important to know when we're talking about color. The word hue means color in the way that we understand it. Basically each one of these is considered a hue. They are each their own unique color. The next word is tint. Tint means adding white to a color. If I add white to any one of these colors, it is still this color. However, it has been lightened with white, making the color of this particular plant. We can see that it's still a weird color. To me, there's a lot of little bit less pure. And the next word is shade. Shade means adding black to a color. So that means that the color is still its inherent hue, however you've darkened it by adding black to it. The next concept I'm going to talk about is neutralizing color, which is one of the most important concepts to understand in color theory. All of these colors are pure colors, which means they don't frequently occur in our natural world. Thus, in order to create the colors that we see throughout the world with our eye, we have to be able to understand how to bring down the purity of these colors by mixing them with our complementary color. I'm also going to teach you how to make a couple of grays by using equal part mixtures of complementary colors to create different types of neutral fields. So I'm going to go ahead and start making my grays. First I'm going to take my pure blue and I'm going to mix that with its opposite orange, which is this one. Now you'll see this is looking a little bit greenish, which means that I have too much blue in here and I'm going to need more orange. So I'm going to go ahead and just take the rest of this chunk here, mix that in. Now you can see it's looking a little bit green, which means that my mixture requires a little bit more red. I'm basically trying to make an extremely muddy color. Now I'm going to take a little bit of purple and a good hefty chunk of yellow and mix those together. As you can see, the three of them look a little bit brown, which is typically what happens when you mix pure colors. Now in order to create a more nuanced color, I'm going to add white to each one of these grays so that I can see the neutrality a bit more. So here's my reddish green. This is my yellow and purple and then my last one, which is my blue orange. By mixing complementary or opposing colors, you're able to tone down any color in order to make it look more natural and far less vibrant. Thus, if something looks a little bit too green, add a little bit of red. If something looks a little bit too yellow, add a little bit of purple. So on and so forth. So now we are out in the garden and we're going to identify some colors in nature. And I'm wearing a sweater from Ira and Darlene Sis and Thanks. Very appropriate. So right here is a bald cypress and we're in fall color. So you can see that we have a very gentle orange right now. This color is almost a pure orange with a little bit of white added to it to kind of get that lighter tint. What's important about this composition is that we have really, really bold complementary colors and they're almost hardly toned at all. You could say that this green is very close to a pure neon bright green and this red is really coming in right now. So between the leaves and the topsoil on this composition, there's a ton of contrast in the fall, especially with this very, very light colored dynamic in comparison to a dark, dark top and dark leaves in the fall. So quickly, I want to talk about how you can identify a color just in nature generally in the landscape. So obviously this is a super, super bright red. This is almost primary because of how bold it is. Now, if I look at something like this, which is essentially just a little bit of bark, mulch, that sort of thing, there is definitely red content within here. However, it's a lot lighter. It's a little bit on the orange side as well as it's toned. This is not screaming at you orange. This is giving you a very neutral orange color, meaning that there's blue in here as well, which seems confusing because how could there be blue in here? Well, it's a mixture. That's what makes it tone down. I want to show these mossy areas here, which give us a really good variety of greens. You can tell that this green here is kind of a light green and this green here is kind of a light green. I want to show these mossy areas here, which give us a really good variety of greens. You can tell that this green here is kind of a light green. I want to show these mossy areas here, which give us a really good variety of greens. You can tell that this green here is kind of a light green. I want to show these mossy areas here, which give us a really good variety of greens. You can tell that this green here is kind of a light green. It's the same lime-ish yellow green that has a ton of white added to it to make it a really light tint. This green back here is also a yellowy green. However, it has a lot of black added to it, making it a shade, as well as it's pretty toned as well, meaning that it's not super vivid. Basically, color is everywhere in our lives and it's really important to how we see things. Having colors that really oppose each other can make things look very contrasting. Whereas, colors that are very similar can create an analogous color scheme. It's really important to think about these when you're designing your garden, designing your tree compositions, or just anything in life. It's all a part of art. I hope that you'll be able to use these tools of basic color understanding to go forward with your repotting season or perhaps even your bonsai displays and overall compositions. Good luck! 
