What's up, guys? Welcome to Mirai Studios for another Super Tuesday. Boy, you know, you just never know what life's going to throw at you. It's been a crazy day at Mirai. I think we're all feeling some degree of weight from the day, and so it's kind of a relief to be in the studio with you guys tonight. For all our Tier 1 members, welcome, you guys. We're super stoked that you're joining us live. We hope you appreciate the work that we're doing and continue to do, and we've got something really interesting for you tonight. For all of our Tier 2 members, super stoked to have you guys here, and also really grateful for all the feedback we're getting about the archive videos. There have been some tremendous emails with feedback, a lot of positivity. You guys have been pushing a lot of positivity our way. And we've definitely appreciated that. It keeps us going, keeps us motivated to keep improving. And then all our Tier 3 members, you innovators out there, you guys are seriously the battery that's continuing to drive our attempts to delivering tertiary content and showing up for those Q&As and keeping you guys growing. Welcome to all new members. All new members, yeah, guys. It's a super stream joining us. Yes, yes. Kendall on the mic this evening in the chat. Hello, everyone. Mr. Arthur on the switcher. We've got Lime on the audio, as always, this time of the day. Suit that Tuesday. And we've got Ricardo on the detail cam. And then, you know, again, just to bring some focus to Ricardo and the work that he's doing, I hope you guys were able to check out the three videos that we released from Arthur and I's time in Japan. Ricardo put a lot of time to that. Arthur put a tremendous amount of time into filming during that event. A lot of behind the scenes, a lot of stuff that not many people get to capture. So I hope you guys enjoyed that. And then the tertiary content, obviously, we've got some supplemental videos tonight with the stream. And then we have some videos for you, Tier 3 members, that go on and expand on this concept of Deadwood. Do we have anything that we need to discuss? Just it'd probably be good to talk about parameters of the chat. Ah, ah. Lay it down. Let's keep questions on topic. I'm going to prioritize questions that are related to exactly what we're talking about. And if... And I'm going to prioritize questions that relate generally to the topic, not very, very specific questions that should be at the live Q&A. Cool. Yep. Live Q&A. Thursday. Thursday. Thursday. Let's do a live Q&A Thursday. We said we'd be doing them weekly. We'll do a live Q&A at 5. We did 10 last week. We'll do 5 this coming week. If you guys want to be a part of the live Q&A and we are not doing them at a time that works for you, regardless of where you are in the world, make a request. We will do our very best to accommodate that because we recognize there's people from over 20 countries tuning into this stream now. And it makes a lot of sense. We value you tuning in. It makes a lot of sense. We'll go out of our way to accommodate you guys. So let us know if there's something that you need that you're not getting. Yeah, and you can let us know via the contact form on the Mirai Live website. So just fill out the contact form. That'll send us an email and we can get back to you. There you go. And we've also been doing a lot of one-on-one consults and tuning in via video chat with a lot of our members out there. If you're a Tier 3 member, you get a discount on your one-on-one consult. It's a very flexible system. If you guys have independent issues, problems, trees you want us to look at and offer design suggestions, diseases, development, pruning, pinching, repotting, container selection, you name it, across the board, we've had a number of different subjects that we've approached and I think tackled. With a lot of hopefully helpful guidance for you guys. By all means, take advantage of that. It's something that we enjoy doing and it's an opportunity. If you're a Tier 3 member, you get a discount. If you're a Tier 1, Tier 2, or not even a member of Mirai Live, then you still can engage with us in a one-on-one consult. Info at bonetimemirai.com. Let us know. We can schedule it. Colton will make sure that you're taken care of very well. What are we doing tonight? Ooh, Deadwood. So this stream, this stream is actually kind of like a part two to the living vein that we did two weeks ago. And we had that really interesting little shimpaku juniper. You guys will be seeing the time lapse of that probably coming out next week. I have fallen a little bit behind. Guilty as charged with all the work that we have on our plate. But we've got the oak time lapse from the spring or the growth perpetuation BSOP stream coming out. We've got the little shimpaku from the live vein reduction and we'll also have the black pine. From last week's stream. Finished candle pruning, needle plucking, and also being wired. And that'll all be out next week. Deadwood this evening. And I just want to start out this stream to kind of set the tone for the way that we think about Deadwood at Mirai. And, you know, Deadwood a lot of times is thought of as Deadwood is Deadwood is Deadwood. And in fact, we think very differently about that. So take a look at this tertiary clip. This should prime the pump for you guys. And when you come back, we're going to dive into how we utilize the creation of Deadwood to increase the value and enhance the appearance of age in this tree. So we'll catch you on the other side. So when we're talking about Deadwood, one of the biggest misconceptions about Deadwood, Deadwood is Deadwood is Deadwood. And this could not be farther from the truth. In fact, that assumption and that approach is actually significantly diminishing the ability for that Deadwood to tell that species tale as well as to tell that environmental tale. And these are some of the things that we've got to start tapping into. And utilizing as tools to continue to moving bonsai forward as an art form, because that Deadwood formation is very specific to every species. Even inside of junipers, a Rocky Mountain juniper is going to have significantly different Deadwood than a Sierra Juniper, than a California Juniper, than a Utah Juniper, than a Shimpa Juniper. All of those different Deadwoods are what makes a Rocky Mountain Juniper, a Rocky Mountain Juniper or a Sierra Juniper, a Sierra Juniper. If we look at pines, the way that pine Deadwood is created versus the way that juniper Deadwood is created, or the way that a limber pine experiences Deadwood versus a ponderosa pine experiences Deadwood, are all extremely different in terms of the characteristics that they give that tree and the formation that that Deadwood takes on. So when we start looking at bonsai and we start pursuing bonsai with that greater depth, we've got to be looking at these fine nuances and details that give us that best insight into what that species is and how that vascular system that's created and contributed to that Deadwood is constructed as well as how it deteriorates. Now here we're taking a look at a Sierra Juniper, and one of the most fundamental aspects of Sierra Juniper Deadwood is the fact that the core of a Sierra Juniper tends to rot while the exterior tends to stay very strongly intact. Now this is a very significant discussion about the fact that in the core of the Sierra Juniper, Sierras don't usually load all of their sap into the core the way a Rocky Mountain Juniper would. A Rocky Mountain Juniper would deteriorate from the outside in and that core would stay solid, which is what you've seen in some of the more ancient examples that we've provided in these tertiary clips. So when you look at this, and this is artificially created Deadwood now, I've created a lot of really intense insets and hollows in this trunk to pull on that characteristic of the Sierra Junipers. The natural insight that led me to create this, this initial hollow that was already present starting to expand into the rest of this trunk that I extended and played off of to thematically create a continuation of the Deadwood that gave the tree a greater appearance of age. So these are the pieces that are going to help you guys do better Deadwood work that's more representative and tells a greater tale for that tree, the tree that you're creating and trying to represent the environment with. Okay, so I hope that gives you guys a little bit more insight into how we approach Deadwood. And the main piece of Deadwood for me is staying true to the species because it's very tempting to lump all kinds of Deadwood into, okay, I'm going to strip the bark, I'm going to expand it, I'm going to expose some grain, I'm going to break that tip and that's my Deadwood. Cool, except for the fact that Deadwood is one of the biggest parts of the story in particular when we look at Junipers, but it also applies to pines, deciduous trees, if you're into that aesthetic and other species, it helps tell that story. And so being accurate about that, insinuating in terms of that species, true nature and character, advancing that narrative is a big part of Deadwood. So tonight we've got a Rocky Mountain Juniper, obviously one of the most favorite species that exists in the world of bonsai for us to work on here at Mirai, and a very special Rocky Mountain Juniper at that. This tree was styled back in 2013. It was put into this Horst Heinzelrider pot in 2014 and this was the first Horst Heinzelrider pot that we ever used on a Juniper to really explore the aesthetic of kind of this wider color with this wider Deadwood and it has a totally different aesthetic than anything we've established or worked with to date. Now, as with any tree, that we start working with, you get to this point where you evolve this crown and this foliage mass and it starts to become so large that the Deadwood, the trunk, and every aspect of design is dwarfed by this really big, lush, green, healthy mass. And this tree could very much benefit from another round of design now that we've gotten to this point where we take this tree another step down, sort of that scale of maturity. And a big part of advancing a Juniper and several other species of trees along that sort of timeline of maturity and its representation of young to ancient on that scale is pulling away some of that positive space that's created by that foliage mass and leaving behind the remnants of what was there as a piece of Deadwood in that negative space. And so, I'm going to come join you guys just for a minute, kind of talk about this. Now, notice how we've got this kind of canopy here and the apex of this canopy is kind of leaning back this way. You see this flow here, but you've got that kind of all of that growth protruding out to that right side. And we've got to reestablish the flow, but we're also covering up a significant amount of interest right in this area here. And so, as we start to talk about branch elimination and reduction, we want to be opening up those areas of interest. And so, I'm going to go in and we're just going to kind of break this down as a group. I've looked at what I want to do with this tree, but I haven't looked at what I want to do with this tree. So, we're going to be doing this together and I'm just going to kind of crack the seal with one branch that I know we definitively don't need. And that branch is this one right here that's kind of creating the static line on the left side of the foliar mass. Now, we know we don't want to open up this major space right in here in the trunk too much. So, this positive piece of growth right here is probably going to stay. This one feels excessive because we've also got this one here to hold your eye on the design. So, I'm just going to come in and I'm just going to very quickly and swiftly and I'm going to leave as much of the living tissue in terms of non-green growth but living tissue in reference to the branching on as I possibly can because this is all going to give me sort of the length to be able to start working on the deadwood and reducing that deadwood. So, already you can see how that kind of gives you a line of sight through the foliar mass. That already starts to expand on that edge. So, let's see let's build from here. So, I'm going to rotate and Ricardo, if you can kind of zoom out but hang over my shoulder here we can start to look at some of these other pieces that are going to give us and present interesting opportunities. Now, if I take this piece out we start to kind of create a little bit of a lack of continuity. This is obviously gotten weak and struggling. Okay, if we take this out then that kind of loses or we lose the continuity between these other branches and this lower defining branch. But I'm wondering can we kind of decrease the visual weight of this branch that's defining that movement right here and then maybe if we do that we do lose this. I don't know. Yeah, let's go for it. Let's create interesting, huh? So, we had a Todd Schlafer, John Eaton Todd Schlafer, John Eaton Creighton Bostrom and come on now. Don't let me down. Bill Cadman. Bill Cadman here. And we were doing this play and then John Eaton, Todd Schlafer David Kutchin and Steve Solisian were here and we were doing this play and we were doing this again where we were taking these trees that had overgrown their proportions and we were coming back in and we were starting to open up and reduce some of these things that felt super unnecessary and a little bit sort of overly zealous and it was really interesting to see the way that those trees transitioned because you start to go from this super kind of young juvenile ball like piece you open up these pieces of negative space and all of a sudden you're just like oh, that's what that tree looks like as a more ancient subject. So I'm just going to rotate this and I'm going to be coming back to you guys quite a bit tonight because it helps me to step back and look. But man, just by that just having that flow moving to the right right there you take out that big lump here that's already changing the aesthetic of this tree like in a very, very dramatic way. Now we'll have to come back we'll have to create deadwood we'll run down deadwood down some of those branches to break up that really young looking tip on those lines. We'll have to reform those pads prune, tweak, etc. But let's get through all of the canopy and really open up that negative space first. Okay, so the next area that's really feeling super heavy and could benefit from some negative space is right here. And the interesting thing about this is there's actually quite a bit of detail and interest that's stuck behind that. Now when I first started designing this tree and again I'm going to rotate so we can transition to Ricardo. To be able to see what we're doing here. But when I first started designing this tree the goal was to use everything that I had at my disposal because I didn't really know what was going to thrive and survive once we got into the real nitty-gritty of design. And this tree just absolutely exploded and became way more robust and interesting than I ever could have thought. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take this big branch that's existing in this region out. Now as far as this kind of foliar reduction waiting until the new growth has pushed, hardened and we get back in that energy positive is imperative or else we're going to see this tree go to almost full juvenile growth. And that's the last thing that we want after having accomplished such a beautiful mature canopy and starting to see this tree's development and evolution really shine. I don't want to set this back. So being conscious of that and cognizant of that is really important. Feels aggressive, huh? It takes some of this visual weight out of that apex as well. That was a good move. Serendipitously good move. I didn't realize that was what I was cutting but it worked out for us. Okay, now notice how all of this weight right here in that positive mass above this defining branch kind of stops that movement where we come up, we go out, in and back out. Where we want to go in and back out, we've got these pieces that are really blocking that inward movement. This is also an awesome opportunity when we start talking about design and we pull in here. If we've got something in the back that kind of closes that negative space but has that reduction of length, that's how we expand the depth of our design. I'm going to rotate here. Hang with my G, Ricardo. Let's go ahead and go full bore on this. Oh, that was a good move too. I've actually been looking at this tree for a considerable amount of time thinking, I got to do something about that. It's too good of a tree to not be realizing its full potential. How long has this tree been at Mirai? This tree's been at Mirai since, I guess I got this piece of material 2011, 2012. Then it was designed in 2013. It was potted in 2014. Okay, so now we're here. Let me sneak over in front of the camera. I know I'm not supposed to do that, but I did it. I feel like this area here now, let me just kind of square up these feet. I feel like this area here now is also kind of impeding our movement through the canopy. I'm going to create some deadwood here as well. Did Randy Knight collect this? This is a Randy McMandy tree. Of course, who else? One of his magical pieces of work. The angle is so interesting. Isn't it? Isn't it interesting? Yeah, I would say it definitely went out on a limb with the way that we chose to handle the foliage mass on this and handle the design, but I am a big, big fan of what became of it. It always gave me that impression of kind of like a monster creeping around like a corner or has like a very mischievous character to the tree, and I love it. I love it. So in terms of the kind of big cuts and pruning you're doing right now, is this an okay time for our folks on the livestream to be doing this work? Yes, yes. So what I'm saying is now where we're at in the Pacific Northwest, we're getting past that point where the tree's in an energy negative and it's reaccumulating to get back into that energy positive. This is an ideal time to be doing this work because we can now make this cut. The tree has the energy to now respond to this work very, very well. So what are some signs that it's in an energy positive? Sure. So that first flush, that was super-duper soft, and when you touched it, it would just kind of pluck off or you could break it very easily by touching it. Now when we touch it, it's got some cuticle to it. It's a little bit harder. It's firmer. It doesn't pluck off as easily. It's not as easily removed from the tree. This is telling us that that really raw, soft, elongating piece of growth is accumulated cuticle. Once it's accumulated cuticle, now the tree is starting to get to a point where it's energy positive, cuticles form, not losing as much water, not demanding as many roots, not wasting resources. So it's photosynthesizing. It's accumulating, and this perpetual growth that's being continued by that accumulation of resources is what we're now trying to take advantage of and capture. So when we do this work, we should see this tree respond with a lot of vigor from the reduction because we've changed a lot of the hormonal allocation. We've removed a lot of auxin. We've started to reduce a lot of the stronger areas and push that growth and that energy into the weaker areas, and that's how we get a juniper to refine. Because notice how long and strong these tips are here. I mean, that's extremely, extremely aggressive growth being put into one elongating piece. So when we see that, and when we're dealing with this, the way that we distribute this energy and the way we calm a juniper down is by pruning this back to these smaller secondary pieces and distributing that energy across more and more growing tips. The more that we do that over the course of several workings, the less and less we get those bolting elongating tips and the more we get this tight, compact, mounding growth. And this is how we transition a rocky from elongating to mounding in terms of its growth habit. Folks on the chat are curious about how much foliage is okay to remove. Always, right? Always. So really when we start talking about that, what you guys have to be asking yourselves is not how much is okay to remove, but what are the repercussions of removing the amount that you're removing, right? And so for this piece of work, and what I'm going to be doing now in answering your guys' questions, is I'm going to come in and I'm going to start just removing this wire and I'm going to start creating deadwood. So each branch that's got wire on it, I'm going to be taking that wire off and then I'm going to be stripping the bark and then you and I, together, we're going to be deciding how long, how much, how short, more grain, less grain, etc. So I'm just going to continue to kind of work as you guys are talking to me and we'll change all of these pieces that we've cut off. Let's turn these into functional aspects of enhanced age in the design. But when we're talking about how much is too much, well, when we take this much foliage mass off, obviously our water utilization in the tree is going to decrease significantly because we don't have as much of that photosynthetic mass, transpiring water, which is really kind of the driving mechanism for drying out in the container, right? So the big thing to understand when we reduce or remove a heavy amount of foliage is that we've got to compensate by not watering as much, as per the tree tells us. And that, for us, you could cut off 90% of the foliage on a juniper and if you could water correctly, it wouldn't skip a beat. I wouldn't recommend doing that. So I generally would say a 50% reduction is very safe. I would say any time you go over 50%, you now have to be really tuning up your skills and being more and more aware. 70% would need a lot of aftercare, any more than that, and I would say you're really pushing the boundaries of survivability once you go past 70%. So that just gives you guys kind of a little more of a black and white than I really want to give you about it, but it gives you enough to be able to focus on a quantity that is safe, right? And that's that 50% line. We'll always kind of refer to 50%. That allows you to maintain a balance in the container with the foliage. So as you're doing this, are you identifying branches that you want to be deadwood on the interior? So as I'm doing this, and this is the thing that I wanted you guys to key into, I wasn't looking at branches that I wanted to be deadwood. I was looking at branches that I wanted negative space where there was positive space, right? And so I'm going to bring this, I'm going to rotate this back to you guys because this decision-making process, this is cumulative, right? So the first time that I did it, the first branch that I removed was that middle one. I first removed this one, right? And that gave me space between here and here. Now I need to save this branch because if I take that branch out, I open up this gigantic negative space against the trunk. And all of a sudden, if I open up that gigantic negative space, that trunk is going to shrink and feel like it's literally a toothpick on this big mass that it's holding. So I don't want to do that, okay? After I did that, this big branch here felt very, very heavy. So then I came in and I just removed the tip of this branch to create a pad here and a pad here. And one of the most interesting things about deadwood on junipers is when you kind of have this interaction of live and dead where I've still got a living branch. I'm going to have a dead tip and I'm going to run that dead up this living branch so that I carry that through the foliage mass. That's really what starts to insinuate significant age because then you get a little bit of dead, a little bit of live. You get a live vein. You get interacting with deadwood all the way out to the tips. These are the kind of interpretations of deadwood adding and telling that story that we were talking about in the video. Now as I'm doing this and as I'm kind of opening this up, before I create the deadwood, I want to take you guys to a clip that talks a lot about how we get this kind of ribbon-like development of the deadwood, how that growth happens and really what's the transition of old to intermediate to very young deadwood. So why don't you guys take a look at this clip. I'm going to keep removing some of this wire. When we come back, we'll answer more of your questions and we'll continue forward with the work. Okay, check this out. So coming back to junipers where that deadwood and that contrast of living and dead really form the value and that indicator of age. We have this kind of natural movement of the living tissue across deadwood which gives us that transition of highly weathered, slightly less weathered and fairly newly exposed deadwood. Now if we look at this tree in particular and contrast this or actually use this to educate us about the live stream two weeks ago when we were focused on the living vein, we see the creation of this very slender, almost ribbon-like deadwood moving into the body of the living vein. Now what's actually happened here, if we notice the transition of grain across this piece of deadwood, we've got the most aged and desiccated deadwood on the farthest point from that living tissue and it gets less and less aged and less and less checked and less and less grain exposed as you move towards that living vein. Now what's happening is this living vein is continuing to die back on these exterior areas that are losing water flow through them and this living vein is continuing to thicken in this direction, which is what's causing that ribbon-like formation to be created. And following that desiccation of that deadwood, we're able to follow where the original tree was versus now where that singular living vein is existing in that tree and track that progression of desiccation and age in the tree as it continued to realize this ribbon-like shape in the mountains or the harsh environment that it came from. All right. So that particular Rocky Mountain juniper that you guys were looking at there, that ribbon-like formation, in my mind, when you look at junipers in Japan that are highly prized as valuable and important masterpiece examples of junipers and then when you look at our native junipers, you know, the number of ribbon deadwood junipers that we have is actually, it's hard to find that and that's a significant aspect of age because you have to have either the continued expansion of the live vein or the gross weathering and reduction of deadwood. So either way, it's really telling you super, super old tree. And that transition of that old, really weathered, really checkered, really flecked deadwood moving into sort of that slightly grain-exposed to almost smooth is showing you the transition of that living vein as it's moved across that tree's wood. That vascular system has established itself, and that live vein has receded. And that story, that's really what we're interested in. Or the fact that this used to be a massive branch and half of it died off, or this chunk died off, and that piece of deadwood, that's what's telling you what was there and is no longer there. So I think you guys have some questions. I'm going to stop talking for a minute, just focusing on work and answering what you guys are asking to Kendall. So Kendall, lay it on me. Tanya's curious if you ever have a bad move. Like you cut a branch and you're like, oh, whoops. Yeah, so... You're like, I don't make mistakes. That's the wrong question to be asking right now, Tanya. No. When I was an apprentice, I'll never forget, my spot was right next to Mr. Camara's in the workshop. So I sat right next to him. And he used to kind of look over, just look over his shoulder. I was literally right here. He used to tell me the reason that he changed my position was because he said I was too hot. Like he could feel the heat radiating off of my like skin as we were working because I was so freaking nervous because he was like that close to me. But I remember sitting next to him one day and he was pruning branches and stuff and he pruned a branch and he just went, just like that. And it was like, oh. And he actually was like, I made a very big mistake. And I thought, oh, wait, you're human? What? And yeah, that happens, right? It happens. Now here's the thing. Mr. Camara ended up making that an even better tree based on that mistake. And that was kind of his motto. Like if you break a branch or if you make a mistake, you just have to, you just have the challenge of making an even better tree. And so that's how he chose to handle it. That was probably one of the more significant lessons that I learned as his apprentice was how to make, you know, more or less lemons into lemonade. And here's the thing. You guys know how to design, right? And if you're a student of Mirai, you understand what I'm talking about when we talk about design. But if you know how to intelligently look at the shape of a tree and start to analyze what is and isn't necessary and how we do or don't compensate for something being present or not present, right, all of those variables change the way that we look at the tree, then losing something, cutting something off on accident, et cetera, becomes a far less traumatic event than if we don't understand design and we're just trying to preserve what is or was already there, right? And so mistakes happen, yes, all the time. Could they happen tonight? Probably now that you asked that question, they will. But, you know, ultimately, if you can take that mistake and make it look like it was intentional, that to me is the sign of a true professional. Eric's wondering, just following up on your talking about watering, being important after this kind of work, how much was this tree being watered before today and then how will that change? Yeah, let me just show you guys what I'm thinking about and then I will get back to that because that is an intense question. So notice how much negative space we've opened up through the canopy, very easy, very big cuts. Now we're up into the apical region here and I'm just kind of looking at this and I'm feeling like, man, there is an awful lot of space opened up in the bottom of the canopy and then you've got this big, gigantic, dome that we've got here and I started playing with this little patch here and thinking, boy, if I remove that, that's going to really slim down that apex and open up some negative space. That felt really good to me. And so I think I'm going to... I think I'm going to go with that. Let's do that. Let's give it a try. Let's give it a whirl. Okay, so come back to that question, Kendall. What was that with Eric? How much... How much water were we watering it? Yeah, watering before and then how is that going to change? So we were watering this tree roughly twice a day because it's in a very small pot for this expansive amount of foliage that has accumulated on this tree and I'm assuming that moving forward, although I can't totally predict how much water it's going to be using, I'm assuming that it will absolutely drop down to once a day and I could even see after this initial scope of work, I could even see us going every other day on it while we're in, you know, mild temperatures like we're in right now until the tree starts to regenerate some of that foliage mass that we've removed with all of that stored energy that it's got in its system. So that gives you a little bit of an idea of how much it's going to downsize the quantity of water that this tree is using. And we'll just wait and see because there are also other trees that literally, when we remove this kind of foliage mass... Let me pull this around here so we can get in on this one, Ricardo, because this is nice and in here. There are other trees that when we remove this foliage mass, they don't stop. They really don't slow down their growth. But nine times out of ten, this is going to be a big game changer in terms of how much this tree is using water. And if you don't make that adaptation, what ends up happening is you can get into a serious situation of kind of routine watering. This tree loves water no matter what I do to it. And when you start taking advantage or taking for granted water utilization, that's when you start getting into situations where you get an imbalance and start to lose that health. So this year in particular for us, we are fighting Phytophthora, which is a root rot pathogen that does have to have an access point in the root system. And usually that access point is damage of some sort, whether it's from the repotting process or whether it's damage from an insect feeding on your root system, which we have had to deal with. And so we're trying to learn how to manage Phytophthora as best as we can this year. And the major indicator for Phytophthora is you start... you start shedding all of its old foliage, not like routine shedding, like goes beyond routine. And that is a major indicator of Phytophthora, dropping of too much older growth and just preservation of the very tip of the branch. And you can identify Phytophthora root rot if you go in and you find black roots and you pull them off and you squeeze them and water comes out. Or if you pull them off and you separate them and the stem stays intact but the sheath of the root comes off. That is definitively Phytophthora, which is something new to me. And I'm finding a phenomenal susceptibility to Phytophthora with Sierra Juniper and Western Juniper. Juniper is Occidentalis. Seems like the roots are kind of candy for Phytophthora, which is, you know, unfortunate. But lo and behold, we've been dealing with it for seven years and I didn't know what it was until this year. So there you go. Another notch on my battle... whatever, battle baton. I was thinking Gangs of New York, you know, the cop with the, you know, the baton. Yeah, that's tight. Battle baton. The wire you're removing right now, when was this put on? So this was put on in... Gosh, I guess this was... So it's been wired twice. Initially styled 2013. It's been rewired once since then. So this was probably put on in 2015. So it makes sense that it's coming off now. And actually, you know, if you guys have followed me on Facebook at all in the duration of my bonsai career, this tree, this was one of those rare and sparse but significant posts that I made long ago. I feel like, I feel like this tree was wired right around the same time that Taft was born. Yeah, so 2013. Some wild stuff. Jonathan's wondering if you could go back and go a little bit more into the reasoning that you're going, working through as you're removing branches and keeping some. Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. I mean, let me, let me kind of, kind of get this wire off and get us ready to start creating deadwood. And then we'll come back to that, that reasoning and design and kind of go back through that. Because, you know, when we, this, it's like this. When we talk about wiring in the Western world, we're literally talking about the physical application of wire. When you talk about wiring in Japan, you're talking about the physical application of wire to style and the styling that goes hand in hand with the wiring. So one of the things I wanted to kind of reset our expectation of on with this stream with deadwood is we think of deadwood and we say, oh, okay, Ryan's going to carve. Now, no, that's not necessarily it because deadwood isn't just carving. Deadwood to a large degree is the interaction of that negative space that's created by the reduction of the positive foliage mass and how that takes your design of your tree to another level of age insinuation and further expands the story. And that's really what I want to focus on with this stream tonight is enhancing that dialogue and then creating deadwood that is true to form for Rocky. Okay. So let me come back here. And Arthur, you don't happen to have that initial photograph, do you? Okay. So we, maybe if we could see that, that would help us understand a little bit. Yeah. Yeah, cool. So if you guys notice now, you've got a tremendous amount of negative space up in the canopy, right? So we've got that big crown right here and we cut that hole into that crown. We took out this middle section right here to open up that space. Now notice how I haven't created consistent gaps, how they are definitely inconsistent in the spacing. There's a big space here. There's not as much space there. A big space opened up there. Large space there. Still close here. Still close here. Kept those relatively close. We don't want to create, boom, boom, boom, these evenly spaced consistent branches with the same size, same shape, et cetera. And we've talked about this before with the pruning of the Rocky Mountain Juniper back in the late winter, early spring. Pruning practices. Pruning practices. Archived video. If you guys want to hear that discussion, refer to that. Okay. But now we've left a lot of that deadwood and notice the character of the deadwood on the trunk of this tree. Very sinewy. And this is actually an interesting feature that I haven't quite worked out how to take advantage of. But this piece here has always been just adhering right up here. And there's opportunity to play on this negative space. Right? Cool, right? How are you going to bring that out? Probably just an insert, insertion of a really small piece of deadwood up here as a prop would be cool. I don't have anything in there right now. That's scary. Yeah. Yeah, but it's really well attached up here. So it's not as scary as you would think. But this kind of character as well as these features here and if Ricardo, you can come in close, we can kind of focus on the features in here. We've got these real small kind of sinuous features. That works very well with what we're trying to carry into the branch. So pulling on that tree's characteristics, if this were just big bulky deadwood, then it would be very hard to create a bunch of fine pieces of deadwood in the canopy and have that carry true. But we've got this beautiful, fine sinuous pieces of deadwood. We're going to carry that into the canopy as well. So let's go ahead and kind of dive into that. Let's get into this here. And then we'll kind of finalize this as we get some of this more exposed. So as you guys know, we've got a tremendous amount of water still moving through the vascular system of junipers. But I will be really honest with you guys. It is starting to solidify for us. Okay? So it's not by any means re-adhering, but it is not as, definitely not as available to being peeled on this particular tree as it was when we did the live vein reduction deadwood expansion stream with the small shimpaku a few weeks ago. And notice how I'm coming in, again, you know, kind of driving home the points that I made in that stream. Coming in and opening these, these branches up from the tip and then pulling that back gives me that really wonderful, nice kind of transition so that I don't just have this lump cut that I'm taking off. Okay? And we'll see if we can kind of open up some of this deadwood on the interior. Eric's curious if you ever keep any of your cuttings and propagate. Ah. You know, there are definitely cultivars of Rocky Mountain junipers that have superior foliage that it would make sense to be propagating them. We've got so much going at Mirai that I've never had the time to actually propagate, but we are starting to have the team that would allow us and enable us to do that. And this would be one. This is, this Rocky Mountain juniper extremely emerald green, very, very tight and compact mounding in nature in terms of its characteristics and behavior. This could definitely be a wonderful candidate for propagation and the continued expansion, mainly to be used as a potential graft for other Rocky Mountain junipers. So is this juniper fully hardened off? This juniper is not fully hardened off because fully hardened off would mean that the living tissue is really clinging to the core, the heartwood of the xylem. And this still has quite a bit of flexibility in this vascular system and this vascular tissue, which is what's allowing me to do this work as effortlessly as I'm able to do it. But over the course of time, over the course I would say with this tree, because it is starting to re-adhere over the course of the next two weeks, we're probably going to see this really start to re-adhere. So we're getting very, very close. And as long as we're in an energy positive, and again that is signified by that first flush taking on the cuticle, becoming much less sensitive, much firmer, much darker green, and not having the same fragility of breaking when we handle it, that is a direct indicator that that cuticle is forming and we're getting back into that energy positive. And what we'll get as a result is we'll get a significant opportunity to create some very, very beautiful growth as a result of this reduction of foliage mass. So if Linda's in Florida and it's rainy season down there, would this not be a good time to do it if you were in a place where it was rainy? I don't necessarily know that it would be bad, Linda, but maybe what you would want to do because you are going to be decreasing the amount of water being used in the canopy, is either angle your container, right, so that you're improving the amount of gravity that's acting on your soil column working to pull that water out. Either tip your container up or what you could do is just simply pull it out of the rain and use, you know, obviously the conditions and the tree's utilization of water as a gauge for when you'd want to be applying it. And that could offset the monsoon season because think about this, you know, the monsoon season in Japan is June, July, and this is really the time, you know, if you're going to be creating deadwood and expanding deadwood on the tree, this is the time to be doing it because of this characteristic. So we had to be very careful and buffer how much of the juniper's living tissue we were removing and the water that was being utilized after that event there as well, okay? So there's a few pieces of knowledge that you can use to offset potential problems that could result. I have a photo for you whenever you'd like it. Okay. So let me get this piece stripped and then we're going to come back to that photo. And I want you guys to kind of see from the beginning again, we'll remind you of what this did look like and you can kind of see where we've taken it. And this is going to be the best discussion of branch removal theory. Chris has an interesting question. Do you ever wire the branches that you're going to make into deadwood and then let them dry in a certain way? Yes. So that's a really good question. I've never had a lot of success with wiring a gin into position and having it quote unquote dry in that position. Mainly because when we're dealing with junipers and in particular a very old juniper like this. And the reason I may not have had success is because I typically deal with collected stock that has, you know, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 500 years of memory in these branches. If I wire it, that's a very superficial hold with a loss of moisture compared to the resin memory that exists in the core of the branch. And so ultimately if I wanted to impact a shift in the shape of the deadwood of a tree of this age, I would need to be using heat to liquefy the resin in the core or steam to liquefy the resin in the core or I would need to wire it, let it grow into that shape and then, gin it after the new tissue has, you know, formed some resin base to overwrite that initial memory. Yeah. Do you ever create deadwood by the freezing and heating method? I have never created it by the freezing and heating method to get that pop and that expansion of grain. But that's an interesting method to me that I'd like to look more into. I have used steaming to bend, very effective to bend with steam. It almost turns big pieces of deadwood into spaghetti if you do it right, but you can torch your tree, foliage, mass, live vein, etc. And I've also used fire. I almost burned down my apartment in Japan trying to get into that fire style. And so I'm very cautious with fire, but it was an interesting and humbling experience. I ended up throwing the tree out the window of my second story apartment because it just, the whole thing went ablaze. I've got like wood ceilings, like wood on the wall. I mean, it was like properly bad. That was definitely not my best moment. But you got to do it sometime, you know? Okay, so Arthur, show me that picture again of how this started. Okay, and now show them, there we go, there we go. So you guys starting to see, if you notice, now you can start to see the flow that's happening in that branch. You see this negative space here. You get up into the canopy there and you've got that negative space. You start to see that beautiful motion and movement through this. You're regaining the age of this tree. Notice how much bigger the trunk looks now that we've reduced that foliage mass. It's no longer dwarfed by that massive canopy. And I think we have room for a few more pieces of deadwood that could really add. One of them that's really kind of pointing at me right now is this back branch right here. Now we've got this back branch above it to be able to stop the eye from leaving the design. We've got this closing this area since we don't have a back branch back here that could close this if we remove this on the foreground. I feel like this is something that definitely could come off and leave a really nice remnant of what was and no longer exists. Okay, so let me take this off real quick. And the one thing that you guys have to be really, really careful of, you know, when we experience this, anytime you get into really high level bushes, into really high level bone side design, this is going to become a natural tendency. When you start cutting and you say, boy, that looks good and so I'm going to cut more and that looks good and I'm going to cut more and that looks good and I'm going to cut more. All of a sudden you get into that mode of cutting, cutting, cutting, cutting. I'm making it better. I'm making it better. I'm making it better. You've got to buffer that tendency because you can get ahead of yourself and all of a sudden come back to Tanya's question of have you ever made a bad cut? That momentum that, I call it the runaway car, is exactly what you need to avoid in order to prevent yourself from making those bad decisions and that is constantly, this is why I'm constantly stepping back with you guys, looking at it, looking at it, looking at it, being sure and always being a little conservative. I could remove more. Maybe now is not the time, right? I could remove more. Let me let it develop and make sure that I want that to go over the next six months. I could remove more. Maybe I'm getting a little bit too ahead of myself in terms of wanting to go farther than this tree can facilitate at this time, right? And now when we start to talk about that threshold, how much can this tree facilitate at this time? That is a definitive discussion of at what point in the phase of this tree's life cycle from young and juvenile to ancient is this design falling into? Where did it start? Where's the next step? Where's the step after this that you've got to be designing with? And at the end of this, I'm going to lay all of that out for you. Where it came from, where it is, and where it's going in my mind. And that's the only way we can do this effectively. William commented on the long escaping tips on the crown and kind of around. Is this the time to remove those? So we're getting there, right? We're getting up to that point in time where we can start pruning our junipers. Now, ultimately, if you guys start looking at sort of your cycle of development and your schedule of work being done, if you've got a really vigorous juniper that still has all of the energy being pumped into a very minimal number of tips, then you may need to be doing this right now just to preserve the integrity of the interior branching. And this tree has not had really any major prunings. It's been wired twice. The first time it had some dieback when it was wired, and the second time post repotting it offset it for a year to put it into this small pot. This is the first time it's really gotten this ragingly healthy, so that's why there's so much energy and so few tips instead of that energy being distributed. We have junipers in the garden that definitely have a lot better energy distribution where there's several tips growing but none of them taking on this kind of length because the energy is so much more evenly spread out from the pruning process. But if you have a tree that is so vigorous right now and it's still in the primary mode of growth in terms of its focusing on those very major shoots and not the reallocation to smaller shoots, this would be a time with that energy positive reestablished that we could get back into it. But I'm going to say that and then I'm going to come back to you and I'm going to tell you but ultimately right now you guys probably should be focused on your multi-flush pines if you have them. If you don't have your multi-flush pines or don't have any multi-flush pines or you're done with the candle pruning needle plucking process that we showed you last week, you're probably going to be cleaning up some of your single flush pines which we hinted at in the stream last week and we're going to be doing here in another couple weeks. But if you're trying to create deadwood, not just the pruning but you're trying to create deadwood for junipers, your window is starting to run out and that's why this was a really appropriate stream for right now because we are back in the energy positive to remove this kind of foliage on a tree that's still putting a lot of its energy into primary growth tips and then beyond that, this tree still has a very flexible living vein in order for us to be creating this kind of deadwood. How about there? How are you going to handle that like clean cut knob coming down the bottom? This one? Yeah. So yeah, good question. So when this tree was originally in its growing container post-collection, it had a lot of instability in the root system and so anytime a tree is unstable and it starts to be moving or jiggling around a lot, I don't typically do a lot of deadwood work at that point in time and this tree has had instability for most of its life. Now at this point in time, it's pretty rock solid in the container mainly because of this foliage mass that we've cultivated on it, mirror reflection, you're seeing the roots are growing like this as well and that's a really good sign. So it's solidified a lot. So actually tonight is when I'm going to be coming back and I'm going to be doing that work on it and that's kind of the major thematic thing that I want to be working on is creating a really important piece of deadwood at that stump cut that's representative of a Rocky Mountain juniper using these finer pieces of growth to remove some of that positive space, open up that negative space and enhance the story of this tree and then using the further foliage mass that we leave to accentuate that design. So I'm almost there. I'm getting through these finer branches one at a time. And when we're dealing with these really fine branches you guys will notice that I'm shortening almost every single one of them. You know, one of the tendencies is to leave these really spindly pieces of deadwood on these things but that's young deadwood, right? So if I were to leave, you know, Ricardo being where he's at, if I were to leave these real spindly pieces on here those are the first things that are going to go on an old, old tree, right? Because those will have broken off and deteriorated long, long ago. So if we're trying to reinforce that, if we're trying to reinforce the concept of age, even though we're keeping these finer branches because that thematically exists in the canopy, we need to be reducing some of the stuff that really doesn't carry any indicator or symptom of age with it. And so I'm kind of trying to cross that threshold of having that fine deadwood that's characteristic of the canopy but not so young that I ruin the age effect of the work that we're doing. It's an interesting juxtaposition to be constantly balancing. Vern has a question that relates to that. Vern's wondering if you have a really long branch, could you gin a part of it and keep the other part of it alive? Oh, yeah. And that interaction of the live and dead on that branch, Vern, is a true indication of age, which is, again, I'm going to come back to this. You know, we cut the tip of this branch off. I'm sure Ricardo can show you guys this. We cut the tip of this branch off, kept a portion of it alive. Now, this is a very minor example of what you're talking about, Vern, but we could expand this concept, remove a much greater amount of tissue, keep a much smaller amount of living, growth, and have that proportion flip-flop, where we have a lot less living and a lot more dead. Right here we have a lot more living and a lot less dead, but still the same thematic practice. Just seeing that before and after, Arthur, was kind of powerful. That was really cool. Kind of powerful. Yeah, it's pretty interesting how quickly things can change. Isn't it? Isn't it? But, you know, to sit down and just start whacking off branches and being like, yeah, all right, we're going to make this thing great, like, boy, that's, this is, I would have to say, and I've told you guys this before on the stream, and I'm going to tell it to you again because it rings so true for me. Mr. Kimura's shining capacity to design had nothing to do with bending, right? It had nothing to do with bending, which bending and carving are the two things that everybody wants to learn most from Mr. Kimura. And the thing that Mr. Kimura did that nobody else could do, and there are some very, very old Kimbone articles I used to collect, not antique because I don't know if there is such thing as antique Kimbone, but I would say 1980s Kimbone articles when Mr. Kimura was just starting as a professional and had a lot of, a lot of credibility to generate after the way his apprenticeship ended and his reputation in the bonsai world. And he has an upright white pine. There's an article about an upright white pine. I'll see if I can find it for you guys because in my mind, it was the single most significant branch reduction and showing branch selection as a pinnacle of design. And that was when I was like, wow, that's actually what I'm here to learn, not bending, not rock planting, not any of that superficial stuff. I'm here to learn how to prune because this guy knows how to prune. And pruning was the last thing that he would teach us. He did not let us prune the trees. He always pruned the trees for branch selection and design and then would give them to us to wire. And I think that's interesting. That's a true statement of how significant the pruning process is and how opening up these negative spaces that tell the story, how those are achieved and executed. So Chris is curious if you're going to remove all the wire now. No, no, no. And in all actuality, Chris, as I'm going up through the canopy, there's very little of this wire that's biting in, which makes me feel a lot better because it means I can get this work done in a very timely manner instead of coming back and rewiring the whole thing. And so anytime I'm cutting, I'm looking at where the structural wire that's attached to that branch, I'm looking at where that goes and I'm leaving myself enough of a tail to resecure it or I'm cutting it at a point where I can wire it in tandem. And that's a big part of being able to do this work and maximize your time on bonsai is to not dive into this without having thought about how you can perpetuate the functionality of the current wire on the tree because we know that wire is expensive, it takes time to apply, all of those things can be damaging depending on how proficient we are at it. So I'm trying to make all of the choices that I'm making in this as intelligent as I possibly can. And then in terms of timing, could you wire juniper right now? Wiring right now would be something that I would encourage everybody to avoid. It is not necessarily the right time to be wiring juniper. And in fact, this is when we can do the most, very most significant damage. So I would say hold off on wiring. If your skills in wiring are super savvy and developed, then you can get away with anything based on application of quality technique. You could repot in the middle of August if you were good at repotting and you had impeccable aftercare. I would never tell you to do that, but I've seen it done. Mr. Camara's repotted spruce in the middle of August. I would never in a million years do that. He did it. His choice. It worked out for him. He was even slightly surprised that it worked, which should be an indicator of why you shouldn't do that, but nevertheless it happened. It's about flexibility. Michael's curious if these techniques can be applied to smaller, less dramatic junipers. Absolutely. This concept of, and this is the whole point of this stream tonight, in the stream two weeks ago with the little juniper. It's not to be like, wow, you have to have a juniper that looks like this to do this work. This is how you give the impression of age in a bonsai, period. This juniper was passed, if you guys remember the blue spruce. We had to take it past to pull it back to ancient. This juniper we had to take it past intermediate to a juvenile form to pull it back beyond intermediate into an older version of itself. By no means is this going to look like an ancient juniper. When we get done with this and I start to talk with you about what ancient will be compared to what it is now, you guys will start to understand that theory in my head of where I want to take this, because it won't exist in the final product of this tree. That's going to be a pretty painful move to make to remove that apical region when we do it, but that's where it's headed. I've got to build up a lot of other stuff first in order to be able to pull off that design. Todd just sent us a picture of this tree from 2013. Arthur, I just emailed it to you. Nice. I'm excited. Todd, my man. We can see the full evolution Yeah. If any of you guys aren't following Todd on Instagram or social media, you should be. First Branch Bonsai. Todd Schlafer, shout out. Lots of love to Todd Schlafer. He is experiencing the world of American Bonsai right now. I saw he just posted I really enjoyed your post with David Niddle, the great stand maker. David's been doing magic for people for so many years. Good to see you giving him some love, Todd. If you're ever watching this, we really appreciate your efforts and work in Bonsai in the United States. You've single handedly raised the level of display and exhibitions with your work. But also seeing you give a lot of love to Rodney Clemons at Brussels. Very cool. It's just really neat to see the community evolving and see the mutual brotherly and sisterly love that's being spread. Because we are all kind of striving for the same thing which is a higher level of Bonsai to benefit from and enjoy and be pushed to raise our level as a result of it. Wonderful to see Todd. It's also nice to see Bjorn back in the United States. I see Bjorn working his way across the country and I hope you guys are all giving him a lot of support because getting your feet kind of underneath you coming back from Japan that's a rough go. That kid has a lot of talent. He's going to contribute a lot to our community. So be sure that you give Bjorn a lot of support as he's going and getting started. I don't think he's going to have any trouble it doesn't appear but it never hurts. Okay now notice that I notice how I utilized a little bit of the pulling back of this onto the trunk. This goes back to the discussion of the juniper two weeks ago where we said listen we're going to pull on that juniper from the bottom up to create that deadwood near the base. So here we're not trying to create any more deadwood at the base. To pull from the branch down feels a lot more appropriate from this tree. But we also want to be respectful of where the living tissue is coming from that's supporting some of these branches. So Ricardo being where he is you guys can see this vein that's supporting this major drop branch. I'm assuming we're going to be able to integrate some deadwood into this branch but because we've reduced so much foliage mass we won't be doing it tonight. This kind of gets us up to the top of the tree and if you guys just from where Ricardo is kind of looking here you can see how much space that we've opened up and how much of the guts of the tree we've kind of exposed. This is age in a juniper bonsai right here. We are accomplishing age in a juniper bonsai very rapidly. I'm sure there's a worthy Instagram post here with foliage and bark from what we've removed from this tree and it's only going to expand as we continue to work. We got that photo queued up from 2013. Hang on let me take it back. Let's see. Let me take it back. Come on back there. Let me come out there. Oh my word. We've taken her down. Yeah I'm ready for it. I'm ready for it. What do we got? Come on back to that. Wait is that live? Yeah. That is so sweet. We're going to take it a step farther tonight. That was from two, three, four? Three years ago. Boy that's interesting. We're almost taking it back to the same position. We're almost taking it back to the same aesthetic but we're taking away the branches that were superficially created to generate that density back then. That's fun. That is really fun. Sometimes you have a good day. Okay. Alright so let's tackle this thing. This is a massive kind of chunky knot here. Now I've got a very major guy wire on this that I'm assuming I'm probably going to have to replace but for the time being I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to undo it just to make sure that I don't cause any kind of huh. Felt pretty good. Didn't pop back at all. Maybe we won't need to redo it. I'm assuming that that is going to pop back. Okay so Ricardo I just I'm curious if you can kind of zoom in here and see if you can see any of the fibers and the natural grain of that stump cut. Is that something that you can capture there? Okay so notice how the grain of this deadwood is working. Now we talked about in the video we talked about the fact that you know that deadwood is telling a tale. Well it's telling a tale in terms of its aging and its continued sort of advancement of desiccation. It's also telling a tale when we start seeing the grain of how we insert our tool into this deadwood to be able to get rid of the deadwood, et cetera and maximize the natural feel. Now on the front side of this which is going to be hard for me to show you guys because it's still hidden by foliage. I have this beautiful piece of deadwood with detail here and I've got a really already a pretty aged face to this piece of deadwood. So the last thing that I want to do when I start creating this deadwood is starting on the point where I've got the most age that exists in it. Now when we come around to the back here this is freshly created deadwood from when we cleaned off the bark when we initially styled it. So I'm going to come back here where I don't have any kind of indicators of age or any kind of desiccation and start the cutting tearing and pulling from here. And notice too if we can see here notice how this is going to rotate. This cut, this fissure is rotating like this across that. So we can plan as we start to tear we can plan on this rotating around and starting to integrate some of those grains into the front of the tree. Generally when we start this kind of deadwood work I'm always using root cutters, right? And our root cutters allow us to get into the grain of that tree without leaving too significant of a tool mark because I'm going to bite in along that linear pattern here. Okay, so if you can come in close here, Ricardo. Wherever I've got kind of that gap I'm going to be putting my cutting surface right in there and I'm going to be biting off as big of a chunk as I possibly can. Might have gotten a little overzealous there. Okay, so I'm going to close that. Take it back a notch. Easy. Pull back, babe. Pull back. Okay, so I get into that. Now watch how I use my tool here. I'm going to flex. Once I've got that cutting surface in I'm going to flex and you can see that start to expand that split right there. Now I can go both directions. I'm going to bite in a little bit more now that I've opened up that cut. Okay, and now you can start to see that tearing there. Now watch closely as I flex. So notice how I'm not pulling or applying leverage to the base of this and that really for me is a big part of why I haven't approached this to this point. But I can use my tool and the flexing of those two jaws rotating them like this to apply a lot of leverage to the tree. So once I open that up I can actually come back in here. I can just bite this a little bit and watch how I'm going to use the leverage of my tool and I'm going to roll against that grain and just kind of start to cut and split and tear and peel that deadwood away. Okay, so if I want more I can always bite in flex again go a little bit farther flex again Okay, and I can just keep doing this I'm going to try to save that little detail piece of gin there if I possibly can because that is a cool piece. Sometimes it works out, sometimes it doesn't. Alright. Okay. I like that, I like that. So I'm going to keep on working up because I want to maintain the integrity of this face and we'll continue to rotate but this is where deadwood gets so fun because you can come in here and you can just play in terms of how far in you take this, how much you choose to sculpt this. You know, there was a time working with Mr. Kimura where I did for five and a half of the six years that I was with him I did all of his clean up carving. There was a time where I did a majority of his chainsaw carving in the back and one thing that I recognized and became extremely aware of myself is that I had no desire to be really carving with power tools in my own operation. Now that's not to say that I don't because there are a lot of operations outside of carving that we need power tools for and there are times where the only way that you're going to get this wood off the tree is with a chainsaw, okay? But for the most part, this hand tool approach working with the grain is one of the best very best ways to get the most natural looking deadwood and I feel like everybody is always talking about how do you get the most natural looking deadwood? Hand tools and the use of cutting, splitting, tearing and a knowledge of the grain is absolutely paramount to get that natural look. So what are you looking for when you're going in to take your bite? Grain. I'm looking for grain. So I'm finding those fissures. I'm finding the linear nature of that grain. I'm biting in as much as I can because a lot of times what you see people do is they kind of chew like a beaver. They kind of chew at it and they gnaw and they gnaw and they whittle down this perfect looking pencil tip or this kind of odd looking piece of deadwood. That's not what we want, right? We're going to try to open that up. Open up as big of a chunk of a wood as you possibly can and then you're going to use your tool to continue to expand that pole of those grains. So I'm going to come onto this front side. So now this piece that we carried over from that back side is coming onto this front side and look at that. You see that grain that's being exposed there? Can you see that Ricardo? Now I want to be careful because I am diving a little bit into the living tissue here. So I've got to be careful. I've got to be cautious of what I'm doing. And sometimes we've got to cut that movement short because we're getting into the xylem and the vascular tissue that's feeding the living vein. But if you can see let me rotate there. That gives you some shadow on that. Notice the depth that it just gave that grain of wood just by cutting and splitting and tearing. Now I'm going to perpetuate that a little bit. I'm going to come in here split along that linearly and then I'm going to bite. I'm not going to squeeze. I'm just going to use that friction between my two cutting surfaces to apply that tension. Be real careful with that deadwood. And notice how I'm just able to roll that. You see how that grain is exposed right there? Now notice that and then notice the grain here in this older section. You're adding exponential amounts of age by handling the deadwood in this way as opposed to coming in with a carving tool and trying to carve this natural looking grain in. That just simply is not possible. It's not possible to duplicate what the vascular system of the tree can already give you. And say for example I get into a tight spot like this. I can just kind of inch along here just as I pull that wood up. Just kind of grabbing a little bit more, a little bit more, a little bit more and I'm not pulling against the tree. I'm just using the round head of my tool. Do you guys notice that? I'm using that as leverage and I'm just lightly gripping and then see how I'm using that tool as leverage and notice that grain and notice the depth. Notice the shadow play just with the light that you guys are looking at in that detail camera. Just the shadow and how much interest that gives that deadwood. This is how we really start to explore and use deadwood as a design tool. Notice how I'm just going real slow, small increments. I want to respect this very delicate piece of deadwood. Bit a little bit too hard there. This is the thing, this is one of the areas that I feel like people try to rush through the most. I feel like people, you're in workshops or when you're working on trees and people say, I'll create the deadwood later. Obviously I'm as guilty as you guys are because this didn't get created. Until just now. I very much respect that position and understand that feeling. I do feel like we should be creating the deadwood first and creating the foliage mass second. If possible, if there is no limitation. I think my mom and dad are watching tonight. Big shout out to mom and dad. Love you guys. My dad used to sit and watch me work on trees in college. Even in Japan, my dad and my mom both came to Japan. They came to California, Sacramento 2006, Golden State when I was translating and assisting for Kimura. I remember my dad looking out into the audience and seeing him cringing as we were cutting and splitting and tearing the deadwood. He was kind of wincing and he was saying, do you really got to do that? Does it really need that? I'm wincing and cringing over here. Are you? The sounds are really... Isn't it wonderful? I'm just like... This is years and years of life. You're saying, no. You're saying, I think so. I think so. Lean into that. Lean into it. This is your lean in moment. It's amazing how pink the tissue is. We've talked about this a lot in the stream. We've talked about the reason that juniper wood is rot resistant, the reason that it's hard. We've talked about the reason that juniper has become vein specific. For the first time, we're really diving into a core amount of deadwood that's going to show us and give us that story. This is that redwood. That redwood is that sap injected filled wood that becomes extremely rot resistant because of that sap injection. It's a wonderful thing because... Arthur, have we shown the final... We still have one more clip to show you guys, don't we? We do. We have it queued up, ready to go. Oh, man. Let's dive into that because you guys will see some things about this that we can come back to and it'll make a lot more sense. This is deadwood as an indicator of age. This will transition perfectly into this resin filled wood. Take a look at this. I'm going to keep beavering my way through this and then when you guys come back, we'll have a discussion. One of the things that's not very commonly discussed with deadwood is using the deadwood to estimate the age of the tree. A lot of times people develop these big, large broad statements about trees in this area grow a millimeter a year because of the lack of rainfall. But there's no possible way to actually say in this area every single tree grows a millimeter a year because a lot of that water delivery is based on how much soil is in the pocket that these trees are growing in in the Rockies, how much water is being fed to them via the contours of the rock, how much shelter they have from intense exposure in the sun and the wind and the elements that would be removing moisture from them. And so, as opposed to using that rainfall as a guesstimate, which gives us a very superficial and I would say often times false concept of age, the best thing that I've found to estimate age and the most accurate thing that I've found to estimate age is the actual physical deterioration of the deadwood itself. Now, we call this tree baby kraken. It's been a very highly prized tree at Mirai ever since it was brought here. And this tree, to my estimation is easily one of the top three oldest trees in the garden, if not the singular oldest tree that we have here to date. And the reason that I say that is because you're seeing more deterioration, more desiccation, more exposure of the grains, and you're seeing a more core remnant of the original vascular tissue that represented the full-sized tree than almost any other tree in the garden. Now, when I talk about that core remnant, the original tree was probably somewhere around this big around. And when we start to get into the very interior tissue, you're seeing a very small amount of vascular system here and a very fine grain that isn't nearly as fine in other portions of the tree. What this is showing you is this is showing you those very first years of life where this tree was initially starting in that small little rock pocket where a little bit of dirt accumulated and a seed germinated and the conditions were just hospitable enough to allow life to exist but not thrive. And so when we say this was the core, I'm assuming that the original trunk for this tree was actually somewhere over here. I'm assuming that the original apex and continuation of the trunk went out this way. And I'm assuming that this is actually probably more like a branch or an offshoot of that original trunk that's still left and existing. So when we see this and we start to identify all of these pieces, here again is another branch or some form of existing tissue from this original core. You can see how that vascular system is very, very small, very fine, very fine grained. That shows that beginning of life as well. This is an extremely, extremely old tree. And the size is not representative of the age. That desiccation and that remnant, that origin of that life is the best indicator on junipers to start to guesstimate. If I had to make a safe assumption, I'm going to estimate this tree at over a thousand years old, at least eight hundred years old, possibly maxing out at somewhere between twelve and fifteen hundred years old. And I don't know that you could develop an estimate any closer to that because the original tissue that forms the core and the exterior is no longer present on this tree. Getting there. I was supposed to be farther along before you guys came back. Okay. But something interesting is starting to happen here. I mean there's lots of interesting things happening. But Ricardo, if you can kind of bring me in close and I want you to give me this so that you can see these edges here through this older deadwood and then you can start to see these edges here through this newly created deadwood. Okay. So inevitably when we're creating deadwood, there comes a point where the behavior of the wood is something that you have no more dictatorial control over. And it's exactly what we're seeing here. And this is very similar to the way that we handled the Utah juniper that we did the two-part stream on in the very beginning. It's an archived video. You guys weren't able to see that live. But the Utah juniper split and tore in a way that I was not used to. And notice how this is fracturing. We're leaving behind these big kind of remnants of older branches, much like the clip that you guys just saw where the actual core of that tree was left behind. And then notice what's up here. You've got some of those remnants. You've got this feathering and breaking and splitting and tearing. You've got these remnants here. You definitely are circling around an old branch right here that probably existed coming out towards us. And so I can't fight that. And quite the opposite, I don't want to. That's really what I'm trying to get to. But the interesting thing about it too is I had to get all of that exterior. Notice how you can see this white exterior wood and this red interior wood. Well that white exterior wood probably is growth that occurred after this tree came out of collection from the mountains. I'm assuming when this was first in the potted container out of the mountains that this white wood was just a minor little sliver like that. And as it put on more and more foliage, got a lot of water, got a lot of nutrients, it started growing faster and faster. This is the kind of wood that you see in field-grown junipers or very young junipers because it has the time to have the resin injected into the core, which is what you're seeing in this red. Now what's being left up here is all red. It's all sap-injected, resin-injected tissue. That's what you were seeing in that tertiary clip that you just saw about that core. All that's left is the most sap-filled, most resin-injected, most preserved remnants of what originally was there in the tree. And that story, boy, what a beautiful story that that starts to tell. David's curious how you would use this technique where the grain is really straight. Would you ever cut across it or would you still just go along it? I would go along it, but what happens with straight grain, as opposed to this that's rotating, is you start to pull deeper. So you'll go deeper in some areas, shallower in others, and you create, hopefully from the front, and this is where front orientation matters. When you're looking at a straight-grained wood from the front, if you can shift your deadwood off like this and go deeper here and stay shallow here, you cast a shadow on the backside of that really foreground deadwood. So foreground, depth, and background with a shadow is how you make straight-grained deadwood look interesting. You guys are seeing some of that effect, so I'll just hold it like this. Notice the shadows casted, cast on this background, or the shadows cast in those crevices by everything on the foreground. We'll magnify that if you start to take that instead of facing you flush and turn it like this, you can create a lot of depth. So I wouldn't cut across it, because that's artificial, but I definitely would work to explore depth as kind of the more fundamental feature of straight-grained deadwood. And deadwood is a lot like deadwood is a lot like this kind of layered cake. You've got to get through the exterior to get to the interior goodies. You get that crappy frosting out of the way, and then you get the melted ice cream in the middle sort of a thing. Like, I've got to shed. Notice how I've shed all of the exterior layers, and look at what's happening on the interior. I've got this vein of really rigid, hard, I've got this origin of a once branch that existed and no longer does. I've got these fractured tails where they're like, this is all I'm going to give you. You can't pull me anymore. This is when it starts to get really fun. Excuse me. And I think when people are in too big of a hurry, or when they say I'm just going to go get my makita and carve that baby out, in my mind, you're missing such a design opportunity with Deadwood to create a really, really beautiful part of the story. In my mind, this is where you see people who really excel at maximizing every part of the creation process. You see them really taking advantage of Deadwood. So Tanya's wondering if the red color will bleach over time, or will you have to do that yourself? Oh, it will definitively bleach. Yeah. It will definitively bleach. There's no wood that will stay red forever. That's like, you know, if you put heart redwood or yeah, heart redwood out in the sun, it will always turn gray. Heart cedar will always turn gray. That graying for the wood, each wood has a different manner in which it kind of grays out. I have to stop that right there, because that's getting up into that living vein. And then notice how occasionally I'll just leave a little piece. Like, I'm happy to leave this. I took out something behind it. Leaving this, I mean, when you start to look again at this and the depth of the Deadwood that you have up here, this is fun. Like, you can pull and split and tear and spread and remove and leave something there, too. Like, leaving remnants, not just pulling and pulling and pulling and pulling. Pulling and you got something interesting, leave it. Take advantage of that. Now, create depth behind it. Give it that shadow. Give it that movement. Give it that interest. This has beautiful movement that shows that twist. Let's keep it. Okay, that might be a little bit overzealous, so I'm gonna come in and I'm gonna split this again. Boom. Rudy's wondering if you have a final shape in mind when you started working on this. None. None. None. Not a final anything. I'm just basically letting the wood, I'm literally letting the wood dictate where it goes and how it looks. And I'm responding now, but I am strategically preserving the surfaces that I feel have value. Okay? I've still got this most aged piece in tact in the front. I've still got this beautiful gin that we wanted to preserve. Other than that, I'm just kind of going. And this is, again, like, you know, I keep saying this. This is creation of deadwood is one of the most underutilized design tools that we have in bonsai. Mainly because people don't invest a lot of time in sitting here understanding the grain and just giving it, giving the grain time to tell a story, to pull and to tear. I mean, you know, a lot of people will kind of do it real rough and then be like, I'll come back to it later. But I'm sitting here and I'm just kind of picking at this as I'm talking to you guys, but really what I'm sculpting with the wood right now. I mean, this is how you create really natural looking deadwood. And, you know, even some of the best deadwood creationists, for example, Kevin Wilson, you know, from the UK. I've never seen anybody carve like Kevin Wilson. And I know there's a lot of people who are like, well, I'm a good carver. Cool. Awesome. Great. I just haven't seen you, right? But I've watched Kevin Wilson carve a lot. And that guy can do amazing things with I lost my fertilizer bag. I'll go right there with you. I've seen him do amazing things with power tools. And there are a lot of times where Kevin will go back to hand tools. I mean, a lot of people want to see Kevin demonstrate for his carving. There's a lot of times that Kevin will say hand tools are going to be the best way for this deadwood to be created. And I really respect that versatility. Because every tree is going to have a different way that you're going to maximize. I'm going to show you how to carve a deadwood. How's that? Now, does this and this have similarities? Does that feel accurate? Here, although this is a little young and there's still some fuzzies, you know, I can come back and I can further kind of pull and cut and tear it. But the question is, are we getting towards kind of that fundamental characteristic that is Rocky Mountain Juniper deadwood? Highly exposed grains, fractured tips. You know, and also what creates that character, you know, of those really, really fine grains? I'm asking you guys that, by the way. Fire back at Kendall if you've got answers. What creates really fine-grained deadwood versus really coarse-grained deadwood? For example, California Juniper, coarse-grained deadwood. Why? Why does a California Juniper have coarse grain? Why does a Rocky Mountain Juniper have fine grain? Why does a Sierra Juniper have hollow deadwood? Why does a Western Juniper have cylindrical deadwood? All very interesting questions. You start to answer these questions, you start to immediately improve your deadwood game. Playing that strong deadwood game, it's important. What do you think, Deeds? I like it how it is echoing the little wing at the top. Nice, right? Yeah. I feel pretty good about it. I think I feel, I think I feel, I think I feel really good about it, actually. Really good? Yeah, I think I feel really good. Rudy's wondering what tools you usually use when you're creating deadwood. I use my root cutters, Rudy. That guy? This is actually probably one of the only tools that I ever use for deadwood because it's so versatile in terms of allowing me to cut, split, tear, and really form this deadwood. And you know, so there's a lot of, there's a lot of really fine pieces of wood here that are going to deteriorate and kind of go away over the course of the next year or two. And this is part of the natural sort of weathering process where we be patient with deadwood. Now I'm assuming I'm going to come back and I'm probably going to work this one or two more times to really get on top of the shape that I feel super, super comfortable with and really, really reflective of this tip. Because it still does feel a little bit heavy. But it is also just a stump cut that we don't have a lot of length to work with. And so it's interesting to try and show you guys an attempt to create the most beautiful piece of deadwood on this particular piece of growth right here because it's a short area to work with. If we have a longer area, we can go even further in depth. And probably what I'll do from the front is just make that accessible so that we can adjust these branches and start to show some of that depth. Okay? But I'm going to turn this around to you guys again. Actually, let me go one. We got some grain answers. Oh, we do? Yep. Why? Slow growth. Okay. Weather and climate. Okay. Coarse root structure. Okay. That's all we got back. Coarse root structure. So with the Rocky Mountain Juniper, that's interesting, right? With the Rocky Mountain Juniper, when you guys look at the foliage, okay? We're looking at the foliage and you see this very fine, fine foliage. In order for fine foliage to stay hydrated, you have to have very fine tubes transporting water through your xylem and your vascular system, obviously. The smaller that you, the smaller the foliage is, the smaller the tube that's got to be delivering because you're not going to be, you know, watering like an angel hair pasta with a fire hose. Okay? So be thinking about that proportionally. Well, when you come back to the desiccation of the soft and hard tissue where the soft tissue desiccates and goes away and the hard tissue, usually this is spring growth versus fall growth. Spring growth being soft, fall growth being hard because we've got so much more resin moving into the vascular system in the fall. Spring growth goes away, hard growth remains and it's very, very fine tissue because of the fineness of the foliage. So when you go to the California Juniper, you get a much coarser foliage and you get a much coarser grain to the deadwood because you've got a different size vascular system keeping that foliage mass hydrated. So be thinking about that, right? Very interesting proportional discussion of foliar mass to the vascular tissue. Okay. I've got one more piece of foliage that I want to take out and create a piece of deadwood with and it's actually this one right up here in the canopy. Now I've got some length here but I notice that this is kind of preventing some visibility in terms of reaching the interior. I'm going to take this guy off. And this is going to give me a little bit more. The apex still feels a little bit lopsided and heavy. I'm going to go in and I'm going to kind of start to even this out here and that's really going to be I think for me the last significant yes, the last significant piece. Yes. Yes. So in terms of that, is it juvenile foliage that's is that what that is that's growing elongating or is that? This is, so this tree is kind of because it's so vigorous, it's kind of in like the quasi juvenile, quasi mature. It's like a mature that's like overly vigorous so it's kind of fanning out with some sharpness. Greg's wondering if that is an indication of anything but just like strength. Strength. Strength. So when a Rocky Mountain Juniper, you know there's two reasons that a Rocky Mountain Juniper goes juvenile and you can tell whether it's because of stress or strength based on how much of it is growing from what point it's growing. So when a Rocky Mountain Juniper goes juvenile and it's growing from the tips and they're extremely dense and they're elongating, it means like I'm feeling like so happy, I'm like a little too happy, right? But when a Rocky Mountain Juniper starts producing weak sprigs or short or very thin sparse sprigs of juvenile from the crotches that is a very bad indication. Just from the crotches. That says I'm super stressed, I'm super weak and I'm kind of putting this out there saying essentially like this is my last ditch effort. But this tree right here and this oscillation between you know mature and juvenile is simply a discussion of probably overly aggressive growth. Would it be a sign to dial back fertilizer? It could be a sign to dial back fertilizer. It could be a sign that it's time to come in and do some work on the tree to rebalance and redistribute and shift all of the growth from those really aggressive tips that are turning into juvenile to some more of the interior tips that may have a greater tendency to stay mature. Sergio I was wondering if you ever deal with rot on deadwood? Sure, sure. How do you treat it? Common, common discussion and actually Sergio we had we had the intention of treating we've got some junipers that we need to preserve the bases of a little bit beyond what lime sulfur can do and we were going to use the product of choice that Troy has brought in because Troy used to rework antique wood boats like old Chris Crafts and Runabouts and stuff. And the product that they use in that industry to preserve some of the mahogany and those woods that you can't replace anymore is called C-Pez, C-Pez like S-E-A-P-E-Z C-Pez. It's a two part epoxy and the beauty of it is that it doesn't get super hot because there's a lot of there's a lot of wood hardening preservative epoxies that when you mix the two parts together can get so hot that you can't even really touch it and obviously that could be detrimental to the living tissue of a living tree. C-Pez doesn't. You definitely want to use it outdoors and it only comes in like I think the smallest size you can get it in is like a two quart or one quart bucket. C-Pez stands for clear penetrating epoxy seal sealant. There you go. There you go. Kendall. That was Google. Oh that was Kendall on the Google. I don't know that. Kendall on the Google. I'm just trying to stand in for Troy. Ask the Google and it will tell you. Yeah. So anyways that is what we've been using on our trees that need a little more shoring up of the deadwood and it's been amazing. We did a lot of tests on multiple different products on multiple pieces of deadwood that weren't associated with an actual tree. That was the one that when we left it outside it wasn't as shiny as quickly so it came back to that matte finish within a few days. Offered the most protection but you want to lime sulfur first, C-Pez second because if you C-Pez first it fills all the pores. Your lime sulfur won't oxidize and we tried it both ways. Doesn't work unless you lime sulfur first and then wood preserve second but that's the best way to shore up really soft pithy wood. So how soon after this work would you lime sulfur and do the epoxy? Yeah. So for all of these freshly created pieces of deadwood we're going to come back and we're going to be lime sulfuring probably in 60 to 90 days. The longer that you wait the more it has time to shrink. The wood dries out, loses moisture, shrinks, the pores start to open up and it can accept that moisture into the wood that oxidizes with the lime sulfur and leaves behind that calcium that prevents algae growth and deterioration of the wood. Which is really how lime sulfur works if we're just talking about it. And so you want that wood to shrink and open up and that's really what we're looking to achieve. And so for us we'll go as long as 90 days or even maybe 4 months and then when we come back even the most red tissue will turn very brilliant white and have a uniform sort of tint to the deadwood that contrasts really beautifully to the living vein and then we'll paint and we'll make it stark white with 100% lime sulfur solution as long as we're not going to exhibition and it'll gray out over the next 3 months and take on a lot more of a silvery natural look and that's really how we tend to handle our deadwood. I'm not a big like I gotta make it look natural right now it will always weather and come back to a natural form. Artificial treatment of our deadwood never lasts forever and so I would rather have the preservative capacity of the lime sulfur. How much time we got? Where are we at? Hour and 40? Okay. So the scope of work now for this tree now that we've opened up so much negative space and I'm going to give you guys one more square look at this tree. The scope of work moving forward for this piece is going to be to come back in and to reorient all of that foliage mass that we've left behind creating beautiful different sized space pads now notice how much smaller the apex got up top. When we start to talk about old and Arthur can you take us back to the first styling that Todd sent you? Can you show us that? Okay. So notice how big the crown is on that now as a bonsai as a bonsai like from the Japanese form of bonsai it's very very beautiful right the the you cannot deny that that big green dome is outstandingly beautiful. Okay. Can you take us to the picture prior to work starting? So whenever we start to talk about the evolution now notice what happened to that beautiful green dome it expanded to a Darth Vader helmet right which now we've really lost the design benefit of the apex contributing to any sort of insinuation of flow or character in the design. Okay. So then bring us back to where we're at now. Okay so that last branch that I that I removed and opening up that negative space in the upper portion of the crown opening up the negative space on the right portion of the crown I've condensed the size of the crown in a very very big way. When we talk about truly old trees the sign of truly old trees are small broken dead really minimal crowns okay for a juniper. Now when we start talking about a pine maybe that crown is actually quite expansive as a sign of age but I really feel comfortable and confident with where we've gone with this and I think as we work this out and start to reform the design you guys are going to see how that reduction of that canopy is going to enhance the overall age of this tree. So again we're going to have the oak we're going to have the little shimpaku that we did live vein reduction on we're going to have the black pine that we decandled and we're going to have this juniper available for you guys on these as tertiary content on the streams that we've covered over the past several weeks. That's all going to be available for you guys next week and I'm really looking forward to getting all those done, filmed and delivered to you guys. I think that I think we did it. Yeah I think we did too. Do we have any questions? Yeah we have a couple more What do you recommend to treat Phytophthora? Yeah Phytophthora Okay so if you have Phytophthora one of the biggest treatments for Phytophthora is changing the horticultural conditions which means improving the drainage removing it or cutting down on your water to regain the balance of water and oxygen and just overall improving the health of that root system via regaging and recalibrating water oxygen content. Okay so that's number one because you can treat with all the chemicals in the world and if you're not solving the overabundance of water and the limitation of oxygen then you're going to continue to have root rot. Okay number two there are a few products that prevent Phytophthora from forming if you know that there are species that are sensitive and I said listen Juniperus Occidentalis whether it's Occidentalis Occidentalis or Occidentalis Australis Occidentalis Occidentalis being the western Occidentalis Australis being the Sierra Okay those two seem to be highly susceptible to it. I probably want to preventatively treat next year before I start to see issues arise. The product I'm going to use to do that is Subdue Max Subdue Max M-A-X-X Subdue has long been the industry standard for preventing Phytophthora particularly in propagation for nursery propagation down like in the Willamette Valley. A lot of people just inherently dip their cuttings in Subdue before they ever stick them into their propagation flats. But we've been working with a new chemical lately called Alude A-L-U-D-E Alude and Alude actually has the ability to stop Phytophthora rot from spreading whereas Subdue will only prevent it. Alude says that it's capable of stopping it and protecting it. And so we're going to be trying that on some of the trees that we're losing an abundance of interior foliage on and we're seeing some branch failure and see if we can't stop it from continuing to advance and in fact get those trees to recover. So far with major Phytophthora infections I'm 0 for 2 and this year we've got probably 3 or 4 trees that are right in that same wheelhouse. I want to see if we can up our success rate this year by changing some things and learning from our mistakes in the past. One last question. Sergio is wondering if it's normal for some of the older foliage on Rockies to turn yellow in the spring. It would be normal quasi normal in the spring depending on when you define spring if it's interior older foliage or weaker foliage. It would not be normal if that was a grown tip and that probably yellow is going to turn to brown and that becomes juniper tip blight or phomopsis if you see it on the tips. So if you see that on the tips I would say not normal. If you see it on interior foliage I would say normal. If you see it on all the interior foliage and all you're left with is the tips you're looking at phomopsis. One of the interesting things about this year and I said it in the growth perpetuation stream that we did from BSOP. This is not the year to be fully defoliating any tree. This is not the year to be really challenging horticultural the integrity of your trees because we've had such a gnarly winter and this is universal. All through California all my students, people are reaching out to me. What is happening to my trees? People in Oregon. I've never seen my trees behave like this. What is going on? Washington on the east coast. We've had a super wet spring. I've had people in Manhattan saying I'm getting nailed, destroyed by juniper tip blight. All of that moisture starts to cause a lot of different issues to arise and understanding those things and being able to address them, that's a whole other thing. If you guys have those questions, join us on Thursday at 5 p.m. Pacific time for the impromptu Q&A. We've got some super, super cool tertiary clips discussing deadwood on a lot of other species. For Tier 3 members, there will be three additional tertiary clips that are very interesting discussions to be had, particularly if you're interested in native pines and their deadwood. I just want to come back one more time to the creation of this piece on the back here as, I think, a really good sample of how we can utilize the characteristics of the species to create deadwood that is representative. I hope you guys learned a lot about the foliage and the fine grain and tearing and cutting and splitting, opening up negative space, enhancing the age of the design by removing positive and replacing with negative and deadwood in its place, proportion of foliage mass, all of this stuff. We're going to continue to be doing this. Your guys' design IQ should be shooting through the roof as you hang with us at Mirai Live and we look forward to helping you guys continue to grow. You got anything else? No. Arthur? No. Good to go. Lime, Ricardo, we good to go? Thank you guys so much. We appreciate it. We can't thank you enough for the support and helping us make this happen. Mirai Live continues to climb at an astronomical rate and we're super excited for all you new people who are joining us. We hope you enjoyed it. For everybody who's been with us, from the beginning, boy, you guys, right here, thank you very much. We'll see you on Thursday for our tier threes. We'll see you next week for everybody else. Until then, happy bonsai and have a good week, you guys. 
