Hi, I'm Dennis Wojtyla and I'll be talking today about late winter early spring pruning on Japanese maples. What we'll be doing today is taking off the growth that was on the tree that extended too far last year and also pruning for balance. So taking off shoots that have become too thick last year and that might in the future spoil the shape of the tree. This is my best Japanese maple. It was fortunate enough to win the best deciduous tree at the national exhibition. It's been mostly well taken care of. The buds were pinched early so that there's not very long extension. It just needs a little bit of cleanup where I had missed the buds popping out and extending last year. So I'm shortening the shoots that grew too long last year so I have this rule of thumb. So the distance across your thumbnail from one side to the other that's about three quarters of an inch. So if anything extends beyond three quarters of an inch I snip it off. In some cases too what we want to do is control for the growth of the plant. We want to diminish shoots that are too strong. And here you see an example of a shoot that is much stronger than this other little side shoot or the other little ones over here. So because of that this is likely to get long and strong very quickly. So in order to balance the energy in this branch I'll take it back to there. I have three shoots coming out from the same spot. It's usually not a good idea to have three. So because the central one is a lot stronger I can remove it. When the new shoot expands it'll grow typically one node sometimes two. But I'll often take that off that second node because what I want is a change of direction. So for this one what I'll just do is I can use my fingernail for this just by pushing it at the point where the buds come out. I remove the extension from there and I'll have a change of direction. So for really high quality deciduous trees what you want to do if you can is that each node you want to change what I call the three d's. You want to change the distance between nodes. You want to change the diameter. And you want to change the direction. Now in some cases there's no bud apparent there. But I feel pretty confident that by trimming it back that it'll push new buds at that point. At this point at the tips of the of the branches there's no reason for it to be longer than it has to be. And I know that the tree will just will sprout back quite easily. So there should be no harm in taking off the extra long shoots. There was a third branch coming out that died back a little bit and was awkward with a little saw. I'll come back cut that out and improve it. That's basically it. This is another Japanese maple. This one I found walking through a nursery and I looked at about probably a hundred Japanese maples that day. And this one was special because it had very strong short inner nodes. And you can kind of see that on a lot of these little branches and twigs. So it's almost a dwarf variety. This past year I let it grow and extend a little bit more just to build overall strength in the tree. I don't want to let it grow too much more than that because some of these longer areas might sap energy from other parts of the tree that need to get stronger. So I'm using just kind of plain rule of thumb pruning again. So I'm removing anything that extends more than three quarters of an inch. Where the shoot has been very strong you can see it's kind of a lot thicker here than it is say just below there. So this is a case where letting it extend was actually a little bit detrimental to the shape of the tree. But that's easy to fix by just cutting it back the extra node to that point. We do the same kind of process around the rest of the tree. So by pruning back to a to smaller buds I am automatically changing the diameter and and improving how the the the branch what the branch looks like as it extends. Twig. I'm going to prune it back to these side twigs and use those as the piece that extends. So what I want to do is first I'll take these back to one node. There's no reason to keep more than that. Then I'm going to spin it around and see what it looks like from the front. Having looked at it from both possible fronts. I don't need this strong one down below. And I also don't need the strong one on this other side. Most of the pruning is done. Just one or two quick spins around to see whether there are other things that are extending more than I would prefer. So in some cases it's no big deal, but for example this one has nice short nodes and then a little bit longer node. It's still within the rule of thumb, but it's not something that I really need. I can by pruning it back a little bit I can get something smaller to be the new continuation. So what we've done just now is prune the Japanese maple back to smaller buds. So we remove the longer shoots that were there last year to help build energy in the branches and overall in the tree. And now we prune those back so that the smaller buds can take over from this spring and forward. For deciduous trees in general there's two ways of growing them. Clip and grow where you let it grow, extend and snip it back, or wiring small branches. There's a third way to do it for Japanese maples and that is to take out the center of the new bud when it's just starting to elongate or just as it comes out of the bud stage. And by doing that you keep the nodes very short. So the nodes that you've seen on the other Japanese maples that I've pruned have had that technique done and this is how you do it. So here's an example of a Japanese maple. This is a Japanese maple with its first set of new leaves and what we're going to do is we're going to take out the center of the shoot and just pull it back on itself. So I remove the center. There's no longer that growing center but there's two little buds that will form at the base of each leaf and that'll give two new shoots either later this season or next spring. I pull the center back on itself, it snaps and it's gone. If it doesn't snap when you're pulling it backwards, it means you've let it on a little too long and so it's just a note to do it earlier in the season. And if it doesn't snap then you just may have to pull it back on again. Prune it off with scissors. Or you can also just kind of pluck it. When you mess up by not doing this early enough you just trim it back and let two new shoots pop from further below. Further down on the tree it doesn't get quite as much light so it extended a lot more than I would prefer. So in this case the whole thing comes back off to where it started. So we've taken out the center of the extending twig and that keeps the node short and gives better ramification. By pruning at that center it activates buds behind there as well as two buds at the base of the new leaves. So we trim back one shoot we'll get two new shoots as a result of it. This is another Japanese maple. This one is not as far along as the previous one in terms of leafing out in springtime but it's probably just perfect for giving you an idea of the proper time to pinch out that center bud. So by pulling out the center I've stopped the growth and now I have an extension of probably an eighth of an inch or less. The shoot will continue to extend a little bit but usually only in 16 inches. So I'm going to go back to a smaller piece and take out that extension and go back to a smaller piece. So I'm going to go back to a smaller piece and take out that extension and go back to a smaller piece. So here's an example of one that I waited too long to to pinch out the center and so again it's a it's a shoot that's a little bit lower down but it's already extended probably close to an inch so at this point there's nothing to do except take out that whole extension and go back to a smaller piece. So I'm going to go back to a smaller piece and take out that extension and go back to a smaller piece. So here's an example of one that I waited too long to take out that extension and go back to a smaller piece. So here's an example of one that I waited too long to take out that extension and go back to a smaller piece. So here's an example of one that I waited too long to take out that extension and go back to a smaller piece. So here's an example of one that I waited too long to take out that extension and go back to a smaller piece. So here's an example of one that I waited too long to take out that extension and go back to a smaller piece. So here's an example of one that I waited too long to take out that extension and go back to a smaller piece. So here's an example of one that I waited too long to take out that extension and go back to a smaller piece. going to be too long and you're going to cut it off. If you do that repeatedly, you get something that kind of looks like this chunky piece here, where you're cutting back repeatedly, repeatedly to the same section, and it gets to be too large, essentially too fat at that point. And so if you want something desirable, you're probably going to have to prune it back to a lower set of buds and maybe bring these new buds up to become new top buds. Okay, so what we've done today is both prune the shoots from last year, as well as the new shoots that are just popping out on Japanese maple, and how important it is to get it early so that the amount of extension on that shoot is small. So you get nodes that are a quarter inch to a half an inch rather than an inch long. It's a lot of work, but it's a lot of work. It's a lot of work, but it's a lot of work. So you get nodes that are a quarter inch to a half an inch rather than an inch long. So you get nodes that are a quarter inch to a half an inch rather than an inch long. This has been Dennis Wojtyla, pruning Japanese maples in the springtime. Have a nice bonsai year. This has been Dennis Wojtyla, pruning Japanese maples in the springtime. Have a nice bonsai year. 
