Over the course of time, the biggest question that I get is, how do I design a bonsai? And I think what I've come to learn is that the question isn't how to design a bonsai, it's what is the purpose of the design? What are we trying to convey or communicate in the creation of form and bonsai? Are we trying to create something beautiful? Are we trying to recreate nature in miniature? Are we trying to duplicate age? Are we trying to generate something interesting? Are we trying to elicit an emotion from the person or people taking in our composition? These backbones form our guideposts for how we design a tree, but the interesting thing is, all of them funnel to the same singular point, and that is, asymmetry in bonsai design allows us to convey and generate all of those different purposes of design. Now when we look at nature as a pattern, it's this beautiful, wonderful, worked-out sequence of growth. It's symmetrical in form and it's youthful age. Pyramidal. Maximizing photosynthetic capacity in the production of food for that tree to survive. But we know, and a tree knows, that as life goes on, the randomness of nature, the randomness of the elements and the environment, start to change that perfect pattern. Nothing goes according to plan, and in that change, we start to see the creation of asymmetry. to see the telling of the story of that tree's life. And when we look at that and we talk about evoking an emotion, we talk about generating something interesting, we talk about creating something beautiful, the asymmetrical form allows us to tell that tale. Now there's three elements that really engage with each other in bonsai design to generate that asymmetry and start to evoke that emotion. The first is the trunk line. This is the scaffolding of design. It holds and supports everything. It guides our design intentions. It informs our design decisions. There's the defining branch, which is the longest point of the asymmetrical form of the canopy. It generates direction. It generates flow. It generates length. And it starts to create that asymmetry that builds interest. And we've got the apex. The apex rounding off the top of the canopy of the foyer mass, working together or against the defining branch and the trunk to be able to elicit an emotion. And that's what we're talking about. And that's what we're talking about. An emotion in the viewer that we come to find as design feel. If we understand how to use these components to make sure we maximize the tree's ability to tell a tale or evoke an emotion, or we utilize these elements to be able to compensate for something that the tree is potentially lacking and needs to support itself visually and physically, we're now touching into another level and that bigger question of a really, really outstanding bonsai design and how we create pieces and how we create compositions that allow us to utilize bonsai as an art form and as a medium to open up the dialogue and discussion of art. Before we dive into design feel, I think we first need to just take a look at these three elements. And their presence in bonsai, maybe we're aware of them, maybe we aren't. But let's make sure we understand them and we understand how they function, where they exist, and how they can potentially be identified so we can start to dialogue about their purposes and how they interact to be able to generate design feel. If you take a look at this drawing, this is a great illustration of just identifying the key parts of bonsai design. When we start to look at design, we've got goals that we've got to accomplish to maximize the quality of our tree. And those goals are set by three elements that create and combine to give a design feel. Now that first element is the primary line of the trunk. This sets the backbone for all of our design to be built on. When we start to talk about directionality in the trunk, we can find the center of the base, draw a perpendicular line to the center of that base, and look at which side of that perpendicular line does the majority of the visual weight of the trunk exist. If we have a trunk that starts out moving to the right, you can see the majority of the visual weight exists to the left. This is definitely a left-moving trunk. Now the second element that we start to play with in design is the defining branch. The defining branch starts to give flow and asymmetry to our canopy. Asymmetry generates the feeling of age, generates the feeling of interest, and generates the feeling of flow in the silhouette. This defining branch is that farthest point in the canopy that generates that concept of flow. starts to create that dynamic that gives a symmetry and age to our design. Now when we talk about that third element, we're talking about the apical region. The apical region oftentimes is thought to just be a round crown to finish out the design, but in all actuality apex too generates direction. Generally the direction of the apex is found by locating the highest point in that apical region. We have a visual mass that's created by the cuts or the separation that form that apical region and differentiate it from the foliar mass, and the direction of that high point in terms of its relation to the central portion of that mass starts to insinuate direction in our apical region as well. The combination of the trunk direction, the defining branch direction, and the apical direction give us the concept of design feel. Now that we've seen the elements that we're working with and we can better understand how to identify them, let's take a look at how we can utilize those elements, how they interact, and how they interact with each other. And how we design or utilize the concepts within these elements to be able to elicit three really powerful and diverse intentional designs in our bonsai. We've got three major design fields that we can establish through the use of our three elements of design. Here we see a trunk again clearly moving in the direction of the right, and again I want to reinforce we find the center of that base, we draw that perpendicular line, and we notice that all of the visual weight of the trunk is moving to the right. Now once we come back to that defining branch, we see the asymmetry of our silhouette. We notice that this branch that creates that longest point of asymmetry is moving to the right as well. And when we come back and we look at the apical region, we identify the location of that high point. We see a break in the canopy here, we see a break in the canopy here. When we trace that apical region, we recognize that in terms of the visual mass of the apex, we've got a rightward-leaning apical region based on the position of that high point and the location where those breaks are formed. When we have a trunk moving to the right, a defining branch moving to the right, and an apex moving to the right, or when we have all three of the elements agreeing in the direction that they move, this creates harmony in terms of our design feel. All of our elements are working together, moving in the same direction, and generating the same exact motion. Harmonious design is this wonderfully elegant, simple, almost accepting of what you're given by the tree. We're saying that the trunk, the defining branch, and the apex all move in the same direction, working together to create this very passive, agreeable design. Now, when we look at harmonious design, we need to be equipped with the knowledge of when would we utilize this, what type of tree, what material would present itself that would encourage us to pursue a harmonious design. Harmonious design being a more soft and passive form of design could be utilized well with an elegant tree, a feminine tree, a delicate tree, a simple tree, a curvaceous tree. But then inside of all of that, when we look at that, we can't limit harmonious design. Just to softer trees, because there are a lot of bonsai that have wonderful characteristics, tremendous amounts of visual interest and quality that we don't need to utilize design to generate more in that tree. So we can also use harmonious design in a tree that has enough. It has enough interest, it has enough age, it has enough features and qualities that allow us to take this passive form of design, have all of our elements agreeing, and maximize that tree. That tree for what it is, what it's bringing to the table, and allowing that tree to stand alone with a very comprehensive, soft approach to harmony. Music playing Music playing Now when we start to mix in the harmonious design, the harmonious design is the best way to create a harmonious design. this up, we can use these elements to contrast each other. For example, here we see, finding the center of that base, drawing that perpendicular line, that our primary line of the trunk, majority moves to the right of that central portion of the base. When we come back and we look at the defining branch, however, we have asymmetry formed in the canopy, and that longest branch is actually moving to the left. When we come back and we look at the apex, we see the high point of that apex. Also leaning to the left, we see a break in our canopy here, we see a break in our canopy here, and looking at that mass in the position of that high point, we see a leftward moving direction of the apical region. Here, our trunk is moving to the right, our defining branch is moving to the left, and our apex is moving to the left. The main branch, or defining branch, and the apex are moving in a direction against that of the trunk. This creates a feeling indescribable. This is the design that we refer to as tension. Tension is this interesting design quality that we can add to trees. If you look back at some of Mr. Kimura's earliest works, when he was dealing with material that wasn't expensive what he could afford, he would often implement tension-filled design to use design as that element that actually generated the interest. A lot of times we have material that might be humble in form, that might not necessarily have the same deadwood, the same bark, the same movement, the same extravagant characteristics that maybe harmonious design would allow us to tap into. And this is where we apply this idea of the defining branch and the apical region moving against the direction of the trunk to use that tension-free design to that tension created by that conflict of those elements to be the component that gives that tree its element of interest and quality. Tension is this amazing conflict, but also tension can be utilized to offset maybe a weak base that can't support all of that asymmetry moving in one direction with harmonious design. So we see an artistic component where we're using it to generate the interest and we see a technical component where we're using tension to offset the weight of the tree to be able to still create a visually stable and physically stable composition. Now one of the more fascinating design fields that we can create is something that Mr. Weber really brought to the forefront of bonsai. When we start to look at this utilization of the components that we have to generate feel, we still stick and abide by the same concepts of analyzing the design. So when we see the base of this trunk, that central portion of the base when we draw that line, we know and we see that this dynamic and very interesting trunk line definitively occurs in a rightward direction. When we come back and we look at the asymmetry of the canopy, we see we have the trunk line, and we see we have this flow generated by the length of our defining branch moving to the right. However when we come back to the use of the apex, we can clearly see that the high point of the apex is leaning to the left, and we can analyze that by where these breaks in the canopy occurs, noticing that with that offset of that high point to the leftward direction, our apex actually counters the movement of both the trunk and the defining branch. This is where we start to establish the structure of the trunk. This is where we start to establish the structure of the trunk. This is where we start to establish the structure of this dynamic. Now dynamic design is one of these very special scenarios. Five percent of the time in Bonsai Design, do we actually have the characteristics in the tree and the nuances of the foyer mass to be able to generate dynamic design. A majority of our Bonsai design, in terms of establishment of feel is gonna be harmonious or tension, and it's gonna oscillate between the two in the redesign process. These three feelings. generated by the utilization of the trunk, the defining branch, and the apex create a full cycle of design approach that allows us to convey to the viewer what we see in that material and what we want them to feel and how we want them to see the design that we're executing. Dynamic design is this rare opportunity, five percent if we try to put a number on it, of trees that we're going to be posed with the opportunity to engage with dynamic design. In dynamic design we see the apex and the defining branch disagree and inside of this there's a technical aspect to dynamic design and there's an artistic aspect to dynamic design. Artistically when we get that piece of material that has this rotating deadwood and live vein, rotating living tissue and dead tissue, characteristics that sit outside of the dynamic design, we're going to be able to see that dynamic design inside of the norm of bonsai. We have a piece of material that artistically we can execute a design that raises its level that little bit higher. When we think about technically, when we have forms like the semi-cascading form or the cascading form and we may not have the features in the trunk to anchor that big long distribution of visual weight of all of our elements moving away from the base, we can pull the apex away from that direction of the defining branch to bring that visual mass back towards the trunk and visually balance that design. Dynamic design is something that should be utilized sparingly and in those opportune moments to put that technical or artistic exclamation point on our design but it is a wonderful tool to have in the toolbox so we round out our ability to maximize every tree that sits on our turntable. We'll see you at the next episode of envoy fiction, we'll go to the entrance and walk the path out to the front, then unbox the whole thing to see what the story of the project gesehen here is on the bag дол coke. More oncology-related Н config . ev anat ta э Mrs. Representative b De r du . Over the course of my bonsai career, one of the sensations that's always told me I'm on the right track in terms of the design that I'm pursuing is whether or not I can identify with the tree in terms of its characteristic and its emotion. And I see trees and their forms, when they're well designed, as being very similar or almost mirroring the human form. A lot of times to break into design feel, body motion is one of the very best ways to just simply take the pieces that we can utilize to create good design and move our body to understand the impact that they can potentially have to compensate or maximize different characteristics that the piece of material we're working with gives us. Let's take a look at some of those body motions to just get a simplified and a general idea of the different design feels we can create. And in that, it's going to allow us to start breaking down. Trees and looking at how we utilize those in the form of a tree to design bonsai well. Let's start with symmetry. Notice the equal length of branching and the rigid upright form of the trunk. Now there are differing degrees of asymmetry that we can create and design depending on how we use the elements. If we change the angle of the trunk, I still have a large degree of symmetry in the branches. As I shorten one side of the branch, we start to delineate the defining branch moving with symmetrical form. As I take the apex and turn it towards the branch, I've now created harmonious design, but I have a minimal amount of asymmetry. The degree of asymmetry we can pursue depends on the strength of the base of the tree. The wider the base is, counter to the movement of asymmetry, the farther asymmetrically we can move the design. This forms a boundary and a guidepost for how far we can push asymmetry. If I lose the strength of that base or I need to add character to the design, I can shorten that defining branch and elongate on the other side. If I change the direction of the apex, I now start to create tension where the defining branch and the apex move against the direction of the trunk. If I want to start to tap into dynamic, I can alternate the position of the apex and defining branch. Either. Against that form of tension or against that form of harmony to create dynamic design. Here we have a Shinpaku Juniper in a harmonious design feel. We see this trunk moving up and to the right. We see that defining branch coming from the upper canopy of the tree and really ending up right here giving us that movement to the right. If I move it, I get to the center of the tree. We notice our breaks in our apical region here as well as here with that high point offset to the right. That generates that movement of directional flow to the right in the apical region as well. All three elements agree. All three elements contributing to the same direction of movement. If we notice, the live vein actually occurs on the left side of this and we have this very strong root that's pushing down into the soil. Yeah. Yes! Yeah! Yeah! Yeah! Yeah! Yeah! Yeah! Yeah! mass of foliage away from the base. Now when we look at the totality of the movement of the trunk to the right we see our breaks in our apical region and our high point offset to generate that rightward direction. This overall overarching body of visual mass and we start to look at that central point of this visual mass we notice that the length of the finding branch and the length of the counterbalance branch are equivalent. Now this tree has that strong base. When we look at all of the techniques that we can utilize to enhance asymmetry, redirecting the apex, redirecting any of these branches, not a technique that gives us a lot of options and we have the information to enhance that asymmetrical form by the strength of that base. Now would we want to shorten this counterbalance branch? This is a very important part of this tree to hold your eye on the design by having this green mass on the left side even though we're moving to the right. Now when we take a look at this base, this really nice strong root, the living tissue of the juniper forming the greatest visual anchor and that nice strong root diving into the soil here that gives us the stability. This is informing us that in fact as opposed to shortening this counterbalance branch to decrease the length here, therefore creating more asymmetry there, we actually have the opportunity to push our degree of asymmetry farther here and really create a more dramatic, more maximized harmonious design feel. Let's dive in based on this information and utilize the thought process and concept of not pruning to reduce, not wiring to redirect, but actually guiding our principles of design through the use of developmental growth to further elongate, to enhance that degree of asymmetry knowing that this base is present to be able to anchor that movement. So many times in design we reach this point as the tree evolves, maybe we don't have enough length, maybe we don't have enough growth, or maybe as the tree changes, adds that growth, we see different opportunities in design, but ultimately the tree is moving back towards symmetry as it's evolving and growing with this unlimited amount of water, plenty of resources, really prime growing conditions. It's going to move back towards that photosynthetic efficient form of that conical shape. And when we look at this tree we come back to the idea that this live vein on the left side of the trunk is what anchored and drove us to pursue harmonious design. It has that powerful root entering the soil, it's able to hold visually and physically the stability of the tree as we push farther to the right. We also notice that at times one of the techniques of choice to potentially offset that symmetry could be to reduce a branch on one side of the tree further elongating in visual appearance the other side. However this counterbalance branch on the left holds our eye on the design and helps carry us through the rest of the design execution of harmony. So when we look at all of our options, do we shorten? Do we shift, change wire to try and enhance or improve this asymmetry? Or do we actually look at the act of helping and assisting the tree in growing and continuing to develop that length to generate that asymmetry that's been lost? For this tree, knowing we have the visual stability on the left side of the trunk and at the base to be able to anchor more asymmetry, we're actually gonna put this branch back into development and start elongating it further. Good good. further, elongating it to enhance asymmetry, elongating it to outpace and over elongate beyond that supporting branch, and elongating this to give it more length compared to this depth branch that also has a very nice presence, very nice length, and very nice position and function in the design. I want to attach a branch that we've prepared just so we can kind of wrap our minds around and conceptualize this idea of, as opposed to pruning, as opposed to wiring and redirecting, I'm actually going to allow uninhibited growth to get that length and that elongation so that we can see what the product of that will be, we can make sure that the aesthetic of the tree can anchor that elongation, and we can really formulate confidence in that design approach to go back to development to achieve further asymmetry and a quality harmonious design. I've prepared a Itoiagawa whip that I cut off of a parent tree, and I even tried to wire it so that it looks really, really representative. Now I'm just going to attach this to this major structural branch here, and let's see what happens when we gain this elongation to this defining branch on the right side. Now in attaching this branch, we start to see the possibility and the potential for what would happen if we did put this branch back in development, start to elongate and really enhance that big push to the right side of the tree. Now maybe we need to shorten this, maybe we need to change the shape of this, maybe it needs to develop a little bit, but just in seeing that addition of length, one thing that we're going to notice is that it definitively draws your eye and creates that defining movement of that defining branch to the right. And by elongating, when we look at that total mass, we see that center line of that mass and by further pushing and elongating this defining branch beyond the length of our counterbalance branch, by enhancing the length here beyond this depth branch, we start to see the design really come to life and really start to create that asymmetrical form that the base can anchor and that maximizes harmony as a design feel. Now when we look at the totality of this foliar mass and we see the center line of that mass, we notice that this line is dramatically elongated compared to the length of our counterbalance branch. This addition. That plan to be growing for that elongation, knowing that we've got the base to be able to anchor that design. This is the concept that you have to be able to wrap your mind around to be able to develop the idea of how do I improve this? How do I increase the degree of asymmetry? What elements are encouraging me to choose this technique over potentially shortening and pruning, redirecting the apex, or using the other techniques we've discussed to accomplish that asymmetrical form in these different design feels? And again I want to come back and reiterate, because we have this base, because we need this counterbalance branch to be able to hold our eye on the design as we move up through the trunk, and because we're capable of supporting this physical weight of that elongation to the right based on that counterbalance of that branch and that base, elongation was the choice and we can now see what the addition of that foliage mass is going to do to the shape of the tree, the generation of asymmetry, and the rounding out of a really quality harmonious design feel. Let's dig into harmonious design a little bit and start to really understand all of the scenarios that harmonious design can be applied, because this is not specific to a singular style. The informal upright, the cascade, the windswept, the forest, it is applied as a universal design concept for how we're capable of generating a design feel in any bonsai. Here we have a California juniper. It's beautiful in form, powerful in its structure. We see that central line that exists. We notice that the movement of the trunk and the majority of the visual weight are to the left of that central line. When we see this asymmetrical flow, that flow is established by this longest branch originating from the upper canopy of the tree and giving us that directional insinuation to the left. And when we come back and we look at that apex again, we see that high point offset to the left. That's where the breaks in our design were established. Now maybe we interpret the break here, or maybe we interpret the break here. This isn't as important as when we start to look at over on this side where we interpret the break. And there is a definitive change in the structure of that silhouette that does insinuate a difference between the apical region and the foliar mass below it. When we follow that asymmetrical form and we incorporate that high point, we see that we have a definitive movement to the left with that apical region. Our trunk moves to the left, our defining branch moves to the left, and our apex moves to the left. And again, this creates harmony. Let's take another look at harmony with a different set of circumstances that start to generate some of that design feel. Now here we see, if we find the central portion of that base and we draw that line, all of the movement of the trunk moving to the right side of that central portion. We come back to that defining branch. We look at that asymmetrical flow. And we see that longest point originating from this defining branch at the lowest part of the tree, definitively moving to the right. Now when we come back to the apical region, we see a very fundamental break here. And we could interpret this break potentially here, but probably more likely in this region here in terms of that apical vicinity. We see that that high point exists right here at that peak of that apical location. And when we trace that asymmetry, we see that we also gain that rightward moving apical direction. Again, the trunk moves to the right, the defining branch moves to the right, and the apex moves to the right. Now let's take a look at a little bit of a unique scenario where we actually take on the entire composition of a forest in terms of the concept of harmonious design. When we look at the center of the base, we're going to be right in the middle of that composition where our visual mass exists. We come upwards of that, and we notice that all of the majority of our mass on this forest is facing to the left. We trace our primary line of the primary trunk. That generates that asymmetrical feeling in the design, and we recognize that is moving to the left, and all of these trunks as well are moving to the left in terms of that central portion of our base. We find that farthest point of asymmetry, tracing that silhouette, and we recognize, ah, this outward lying trunk is actually this branch here, the defining branch. In terms of the whole composition, this is the branch that creates the asymmetrical flow to the left. When we come back to look at that apical region, we see that our apex, or the uppermost living portion, not the gin, but the uppermost living portion of our canopy, is established in this region right here. This region in terms of that high point, either existing here or here, both of them, still insinuating that flow to the left and giving us a harmonious design inside of our forest composition. In terms of these three really fine examples of harmonious design, one thing that we start to question is, when do we actually use harmonious design? One thing that we notice is there's a lot of detail and interest in this tree. The quality of the trunk, the quality of the deadwood, the quality of the live vein is very, very beautiful. This tree doesn't need design to accentuate the quality of the tree. When we look at the limber pine in the middle here, we see the quality of this deadwood, the phenomenal interest in the line. We see the beauty in the asymmetry, and we recognize this piece of material, too, is has a ton of interest, and design doesn't need to be utilized as a tool to further enhance what the tree already has. When we look at the forest here, we also see a lot of interest in terms of the trunks. We've got deadwood running up this main trunk with these interesting contorted, smaller trunks coming off of it. Each one of these three subsequent pieces used in the design could represent a bonsai or stand-alone in a container and have a lot of merit and interest. The combination of the three of them, moving with the direction of the trunk, you're going to see a lot of interest in terms of the trunk. The combination of the three of them, moving with the direction of the trunk, you're going to see a lot of interest in terms of the trunk. And that'serma X. Utilizing the natural flow that exists in the tree is all we have to do to maximize the quality of the composition. Harmony is truly a passive approach to design that is literally letting the tree's characteristics speak for themselves and not using the approach to design to add interest beyond the characteristics of the tree. These three examples are perfect examples of how we use harmony to maximize the qualities the quiet of the tree and allow the tree to speak for itself. Here we see a really sound execution of the design feel that we call tension. Here we see the trunk moving up and to the right, definitive rightward direction. We see the apex move back to the left where we form the break here, and we form the break here, high point offset to the left to generate that leftward movement. And we follow that defining branch all the way down the silhouette, seeing the tip of that create that asymmetrical movement to the left, both the apex and defining branch moving against the trunk. Both the defining branch and the apex contradicting the movement of that trunk. Now this tree has a powerful base, but it doesn't have a lot of movement through the trunk and it doesn't have a lot of features in the trunk that would allow it to pursue harmonious design. We utilize the execution of tension as that element of quality and visual interest to really give this piece of material a sound design concept. However, over the course of time, we see that the length of the defining branch and the length of the counterbalance branch are starting to create symmetry in the canopy of the tree. As we've seen, there are multiple techniques that allow us to pull that asymmetry back into the design. And in the case of this, to regain that far degree of asymmetry, push that design to the next level, reducing the length of this counterbalance branch is going to be the technique of choice to be able to gain that bigger push towards asymmetry and truly execute tension on a higher level. One of the things that we've learned from designing this tree was the fact that it has a powerful base but not a lot of movement and not a lot of features. We chose to use the design feel of tension to contrast the rightward movement of the trunk by giving that defining branch the length to the left and pushing the apex to the left to really generate that tension and that contrast to the movement of this big powerful trunk. Over the course of time, this branch has grown very long and now its length is starting to rival the defining branch in terms of which direction is the flow of the tree actually. I'm going to come in and I'm going to remove this branch so that we can really set off that asymmetry to the left and that contradiction of the defining branch's movement with the apex, contrasting the rightward movement of the trunk. Now we see that very clear movement to the right. We see that definitive line and that defining branch moving to the left. We still haven't adjusted our apex. Through the technique of reduction of what once was a rivaling counterbalance branch, to the length of our asymmetrical defining piece to the left, we've made a definitive commitment towards that tension-filled design and that design feel that allows that contrast of the defining branch and the apex against this powerful trunk to create the interest in the design. Obviously, this base is capable of anchoring a push or a move design-wise into harmony or tension. However, its lack of feature is what encouraged us and propelled us to be pursuing tension-filled design. And in that commitment and that removal, we've executed that degree of asymmetry to perfection to really enhance the visual quality of the tree. When we have a piece of material that potentially lacks a lot of interest or maybe needs a little bit more of a boost in terms of the quality to maximize what that tree can convey to the viewer in terms of a feeling, we start to pull on a different design dynamic. When we look at both of these trees and we find that center portion of the base and we draw that vertical line, we notice that both of these are moving in different directions. The limber pine has a movement to the right. The vine maple has a movement to the left. Now, when we start to trace the shape of that line with that visual mass and that direction, it starts to give us guidance in terms of how can we, in fact, handle the rest of the design to really pull out a little bit more quality and character in terms of these trees. Now, the asymmetry of the canopy of the limber is moving to the left. The asymmetry of the canopy of the tree of the vine maple is moving to the right, formed by the defining branch on the vine maple to the right and formed by either one of these branches that create that asymmetry to the left in the limber pine. When we come back to the idea of the apex, we see the high point of the limber pine in the apical region here. We see a definitive break here and we see a definitive break here. The offset of that mass to the left of that high point generates an apex moving to the left. Now, in the vine maple, we see the high point of the apex here and we can interpret this break as here or potentially here in terms of that apical region. When we trace that asymmetry of that apical region, we recognize that that apex moves to the right. So we have a trunk moving to the left, we've got an apex moving to the right, we've got a defining branch moving to the right, and this creates tension in design. When we look at the limber pine again, we see a trunk moving to the right, we see a defining branch moving to the left, and we see an apical region moving to the left. This too creates tension in design. In tension, the apex and the defining branch are moving in the same direction, but they are countering the movement of the trunk, which gives that extra design sensation of our primary backbone of the trunk being contrasted or conflicted by the return movement of the apex and the defining branch. This addition of design allows the viewer to experience some of the angst of those two apical and defining regions, contrasting that movement of the trunk and adds a portion of design that generates more interest in the composition as a whole of our tree. It should be noted inside of design that harmony and tension create 95% of all bonsai compositions. I mean, these two designs literally anchor the backbone of bonsai, whether it's the first styling or whether it's a restyling in the future of that tree. That agreement of the apex and the defining branch, whether they work with the trunk in harmonious design, whether they contrast the trunk in tension-filled design, we see that oscillation of design and the agreement of the apex and that defining branch. But we have these special moments in design where we have this phenomenal piece of material, rotation and twisting of the deadwood and the live vein, abnormal qualities and characteristics in the tree that give us this opportunity to explore this rare 5% of design opportunity. This is where we dive into dynamic design. Now, dynamic design is really focused around creating this conflict between the apex and the defining branch. We've seen the apex and the defining branch agree in harmony and tension and contrast with the trunk potentially or agree with the trunk. But in dynamic, we're using that apex and that defining branch to disagree with each other and generate one more change of direction in the typical region, one more characteristic of flair and interest. We see this with that dynamic material, but we also have the technical opportunity to utilize dynamic design often in the semi-cascading and cascading forms where the base of the tree may not anchor both the defining branch and the apex moving away from the base to pull that apex back towards the base, distribute that visual weight and accomplish a visually balanced composition. Dynamic design should be used sparingly and only for those opportune moments where it absolutely caps off that extra little exclamation point on top of a tremendous composition. But it is a tool that we should learn how to use well so that we have the full scope of design feel to be able to maximize every tree that sits on our turntable. So dynamic design is one of these culminations of design concepts that really needs to be saved for very rare circumstances when all of the elements are right. We've got this wonderfully interesting Rocky Mountain Juniper here has movement of the live vein as it rotates sort of around on the backside of the trunk to this inside and then back out and up onto the top here. We've got this tremendous flowing line that moves up through the canopy sort of peaks right over here by the apex and then drops down and we get this beautiful defining branch right here. And one of the stumbling blocks to this design is we've got this wonderfully round apex right here creating a very simple sort of contour almost ambiguous in terms of its leaning towards a direction you can see it's grown out and really pushing in that direction in terms of the apical formation. Now we see that illustrated by where this break exists in the apical line and we also see that sort of driven in that direction by the length of this branch as well as our high point being right here. Now when we look at this tree one of the areas we need to focus on is really right here around that very very weak base. So this weak base isn't necessarily capable of holding the length of that branch and in order to compensate for this with the characteristics of that rotating live vein in the trunk and the fact that this tree does have a lot of different elements of dynamic design another element being the close proximity of this defining branch to the apex it's very very realistic and perhaps the best design decision now to take action and instead of having our apex facing that direction pull the apex back and have the apex face this direction. Now in order to do that we're going to come back up into the apex and we're going to close down this line start to create more length in this direction but the big shift we're going to reduce the length of this line and we're going to shift the high point from here over into this region so that the high point of our apex is heavily brought this way and our apex will start to generate a leftward moving apical design. In that redistribution of that weight we're going to be able to counterbalance the weakness of this base and that really minimal amount of taper so that we're able to better support this design with this asymmetry by using that apex as the offset. What we're looking to do is bring the apex back to the left to compensate for the design. What that means is we need to close the line here reduce the length here and shift the position of our high point back to the left to bring the apex back towards the leftward facing direction. Okay, so our first actionable item in order to start moving the apex back towards the left side of the tree and creating that dynamic design where the apex contradicts the defining branch was to close down this first piece of negative space. I'm going to drop that down not to necessarily mitigate the break that exists in the apex but to reduce it so that it's not such a hard line and I start to pull on the length of these branches on the left side of the trunk starting to create some of that length and generation of distance over here. And my second move was going to be to relocate that high point that really pivotal significant peak of the apical region by a reorganization of some of these branches both in terms of their length as well as the presence of the greater amount of foliage mass that exists in that middle ground. Now we can see we've got this piece right here. This ties into that exact same system and notice what happens as we start to push that length and that height and that position of the high point towards that direction we've already started to initiate a major shift. Now one of the last pieces that we talked about was starting to look at some of the length over here and eliminate some of the length over here so that we don't have this visual pull we don't have symmetry in our crown and instead we push in here and we run out on the left side we shift that high point we change that break to relocate what people interpret as the apical region and therefore create that dynamic design where the apex moves to the left and our designing branch moves to the right. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take out our biggest visual draw. And now we can start to see that shift lengthwise we can see that shift heightwise. I'm going to go ahead and relocate this piece and just pull this piece into the canopy slightly. I'm going to come in and I'm going to further drive this point home with just a little bit of reduction in some of these high pieces over here. Some of the length that exists on the right side of the apex over here. Cleaning up and adapting the foliage mass as I go. We need to be very aware of the branches in the back that are forming depth also contributing significantly to our interpretation of how this apical region is reading. Now we'll work up into the upper portion in terms of length and the continued push in that direction. Pruning, adjusting, just finding the right distribution of foliage to allow our apex to look mature to look nice and firm. But also to be giving that directional shift that we're really hoping to achieve to establish that dynamic design. Now we've got to start to manicure some of these pieces that we've raised up and really given a lot of height to. I'm going to focus on this area for a moment to see if we can keep as much of this foliage as possible while also using it to generate direction. In doing so now if I just take off elongating tips or anything that lies outside of that vertical boundary this is the peak of our design right here so I want to make sure that I don't overly reduce this portion of the apex. I can sort of pull out foreground I can pull out high points that don't work inside of the new contour that we've created and if I've got a few of these pieces that are just sticking obnoxiously out of the silhouette that's cool, that's okay. But we notice that now we've established this area. Now I've got to be very careful about how I handle these other pieces. Can I keep these pieces actively contributing to the apex? Yes, most of them I can. Some of them I'll need to reduce. Some of these pieces when I drop this branch over here needed to be lowered as well. I'm going to give a little bit of control over here in terms of reduction and just continue that shift of that high point until it starts to really generate the direction that we're after. Now we're starting to see that direction come together. I'm going to pull up a few of these pieces just to pull on the length and start to reform the breaks where our apical region is interpreted. Now notice how when I start to shift these up it starts to change how that apex is flowing into the rest of the design. This starts to become interesting. Now watch what happens here. I can elongate that as well and it really starts to give direction. Now, do we interpret the apex here, here, or here? This is the question that we've got to ask ourselves. I want to carry that length down to here. So these breaks in the foliar mass I'm actually going to close them a little bit and unify this portion of the apex to really give this beautiful smooth, asymmetrical arcing convex, right? Not concave. Convex curve out of that apical region insinuating direction to the left. One thing I noticed as I stepped back from the tree is that we've got a real synonymous length here on the right side of the apex with this longer branch on the left that we really were using to generate that direction Now with the depth of field manipulated you can really see how effective this is in giving that slope and generating that leftward move but in order to finalize that, this is the last remaining piece that we've really got to work towards. By pushing this in further and compressing the right side it's really going to accentuate that leftward moving branch. Let's take a look at what that will give us aesthetically when we manipulate that piece. Okay, so anytime I'm shortening, I'm always going to go into the tree. I'm going to shorten from the very shoulder of the branch and then I'm going to return. Return with the finer branches to really chew up that length. The last thing that we want to be doing is snaking all of our branches into the tree and creating faulty structure and unsustainable design from the perspective of having to come back in and rework that piece over the course of time. By allowing that structural move in, in those branches coming back, we've greatly reduced the length of that. Now notice how compressed that is here, accentuating that elongation here, the shifting of the high point from over here now to right here, generating that kind of direction in our apical formation. We can see this engagement of this defining branch dropping down and generating this longest piece of asymmetry and the response with the apex now being shifted away from the defining branch. Compression on the right side, elongation on the left side. Notice the interplay of these two pieces. Now let's take a step out further to actually be able to see the tree in its totality and enjoy the fruits of this very intentional and very accurate utilization of dynamic design to maximize the quality of the material we were presented with. Okay, so now that we're back out wide again, we get to see this wonderful trunk movement all the way through the canopy of the tree. We come over, we see the defining branch dropping to the right, and you can really notice a dramatic difference between the defining branch here and the apex here in terms of this shift of the length that was over here and the length that was over here. Pulled back, pulled back. We changed the high point from right here to right here, and we really accentuated the elongation of this piece, closed down that negative space that was right here, and now we get this motion coming to the left. Now the defining branch here and the apex here are very closely associated in terms of this vertical line and their proximity to that same point on the tree. So by taking the apex and shifting it from this direction back this way, we still have a relationship between the two. However, the distribution of visual weight and the added extra piece of movement in the apical region work well to start to complement that weak base that needs more visual weight brought back to it as well as this twisted bursting contorted character of this juniper that can utilize a better relationship between our defining branch and the apical region. This is a wonderful execution of a really intentionally applied aspect, concept, and realization of dynamic design in a way that maximizes and truly improves the quality of the tree. Music Now in terms of the utilization of dynamic design, dynamic design often refers to dynamic features or characteristics inside of the tree. Notice the spiraling of this jun and the interesting movement and character that exists in the branches throughout this tree. Now when we trace this and we start to look and break down the design feel of this tree, we notice that the trunk moves to the left of that line. We trace that trunk line and we see that definition of the line, base to tip, moving to the left. Now when we come back and we look at the asymmetrical flow of the tree, the asymmetrical flow of the tree as defined by this defining branch is definitively moving to the left. But this is where we start to really pull on this interesting character of dynamic because when we look at the apex and we find that high point of the apex and we analyze the break as it exists here and a break as it exists here or even here we notice that the apical region has a rightward facing direction. Now we see that apex moving in an opposite direction of that defining branch returning the movement against the trunk while the defining branch is working with the trunk. This creates that notion of dynamic that really starts to play on the spiraling of that gin and the distribution of characteristics throughout this tree that allow it to really execute that unique design feel. Let's take another look at a dynamic design that we can potentially utilize. Here we have a semi-cascading hemlock. When we look at the totality of the base of this tree in the center, we draw that central portion to start to get that concept of trunk movement. We see that it moves to the left. Let me go back and trace that line just so that we're clear where the definition of our line is based to tip. Now when we come back and we look at the asymmetry of the canopy we start to see the asymmetry of the canopy really referencing this far this point that generates this directional movement of that defining branch to the left. However, again we come back to this concept of directional insinuation in the apex and we notice that our highest point where we read the breaks here and here and trace that asymmetry is offset to the right generating that contrasting movement to this defining branch moving to the left. Here again our trunk is moving to the left, our defining branch is moving to the left and our apex is returning to the right. This generates again that feeling of dynamic in design where the conflict of the apex and the defining branch give that extra little nuance of interest energy and add one more change of direction in the movement up in the apical region that adds that extra distribution of quality to really accentuate the material and all of the characteristics that it has. Now between these two there's one more thing that happens in terms of dynamic design. In this semi-cascading form of the hemlock here where we have so much visual weight out here to the left and we have a base that potentially in this negative space right here that exists in that base lose a little bit of the visual stability in terms of the design. By turning the apex back and bringing it back towards this base where we have a little bit of that instability we redistribute the foliage mass and allow ourselves to compensate for that lack of stability or space in the base of that design to still execute a tree in a design that feels stable and comfortable to view but it also adds that extra degree of interest to the design in the material that maximizes everything that this hemlock has going for it. This kind of dynamic design and utilization of the trunk, the defining branch and the apex gives us an opportunity to be able to take any piece of material whether it's harmonious, whether it needs a little bit more design influence and we choose tension or whether we have a truly superior piece of material that we can add that extra little nuance of dynamic to to create a bonsai worthy and justified of the material. Music So let's come back and recap what we've learned over the course of this exercise. Obviously our biggest motivation inside of creating bonsai design is to generate asymmetry. Asymmetry being sort of that insinuation of age. To generate asymmetry we've got three different elements that are going to exist together. We understand now that by identifying the center of the base and the direction to which the majority of the visual weight of the trunk exists is how we start to understand what direction our trunk is moving. We understand that in order to read the flow or create the flow in our design we need to find that longest point of asymmetry. This becomes our defining branch. And inside of that flow we recognize that our design is finalized and capped off by the formation of this apex which also needs to have a directional insinuation dictated by the high point and where we form the breaks to isolate that apical region from the foyer mass below. The offset of that high point gives us that insinuation of direction. When these elements combine, the trunk movement, the defining branch, and the apex, we have all of the elements present to be able to create a design feel that the viewer can see and interpret what it is we find about that material to be valuable and the feeling that we want to convey when they view our work. Over the course of our time together we've dissected the elements that allow us to create asymmetry and form. We've talked about the components that engage with each other to create design feel. And we've built a real dialogue of vocabulary in a toolbox that allows you to respond to the material. Some of these design components and design feels allow us to compensate for things that are lacking in the tree. A lot of these allow us to communicate what that material is conveying to us and to be able to open that dialogue for a viewer to be able to witness our work and understand exactly as an artist what we were trying to accomplish. As we wrap up this very, I think, pivotal discussion about design, I want to come back to the original question that I've experienced which is, how do we design bonsai? And I want to put this back on you as the viewer. What am I trying to accomplish with my design? As the question that I want you to start asking yourself. We understand the impact of asymmetry and how it comes to play in the course of a tree's life as well as how it exists in the design process. We understand the elements of the trunk defining branch and apex as being this cohesive unit of tools that allows us to respond to the tree both in its limitations as well as in maximizing its quality. And we understand the artistic concepts behind the execution of the three different design feels to be able to really maximize the quality of the material and what's put on our turntable each time we sit down as a bonsai artist. Over the course of your bonsai practice and evolution as a bonsai artist, if we can start thinking about the bonsai as a medium to open up a dialogue and communicate, and we start thinking about the ways that we can convey all of these concepts that are possible in terms of the creation of this composition, we start to be able to build on that idea of bonsai as an art form and really maximize exactly what it is we're capable of communicating through this wonderful medium and vehicle that is this tiny tree. 
