When I started doing bonsai, had somebody shared with me what I'm about ready to share with you right now, it would have changed the entire process of learning how to do bonsai. This is something that even now I've never heard anybody ever illustrate, yet in my process as an apprentice, this was the thing Mr. Camaro was trying so hard to get us to do and to get us to understand. And I still don't know why in the world of bonsai education, nobody talks about the aesthetics of a branch and how you develop the moves, the actions that we take. Once we've effectively wired the actions that we take in our ramification on a branch pad to give us the fan shape and the simplicity in that design that allows us to make beautiful bonsai. I'm going to break this down for you guys. I want you, if you key into nothing else, key into this. This will change and improve your ability to design bonsai, okay? First and foremost, when we talk about branch styling aesthetics, on the structural level, when we apply that thick wire to that branch and we're putting movement into that branch, nobody ever told me that there is a theory to adding movement to a branch, right? And we say, okay, the theory comes from the trunk line and the movement in the trunk and the environment you're trying to represent with the tree. And this is true. This is true. But that is still head in the clouds talk. You are right. The more dramatic the movement in the trunk, the more dramatic the movement in the primary branching, okay? But where we choose to put a bend in our primary branching or our structural components is informed by and directly influenced by where our secondary and tertiary branching exists. If we think about the fact that we're trying to put a bend in our structural branch where we have a secondary branch existing on the outside of that bend. So say, for example, we have this branch here and we have, after pruning and cleaning up and making all of those structural decisions, we have this alternating layout. It makes sense to put our bends where those pieces are on the exterior portions of those bends. It's how we're creating a fan-shaped pad. We always talk about, in bonsai, pruning branches that are on the inside of the bends out, yet very rarely do we talk about the strategic creation of structural shape that sets our secondary and tertiary branching up to be able to create that structure that we want so much. So when we're putting that structural movement in, be aware. You should have already pruned. You should have already set that branch up for success, right? And now we're looking at that. Those bends are placing those alternating pieces on the outside of the bend so that we set up the structure for a fan-shaped pad. This is a structural level consideration. Now, when we get into the secondary and tertiary, we know we're wiring branches in combination. We know we're deriving function from the structural wire being present and all of the influences that have affected our decisions. But when it comes time to now start to create these finer pieces, we're going to have to understand that there is a strategy and a theory to this, okay? And again, I was just mind-blown when I finally got it, watching Mr. Camaro work, watching him change my work, watching him adjust my work, and I finally understood, oh, that's what you want me to do? Like, it took so long and there was so much other information I was trying to process that by the time I realized what was happening, by the time I could shed all of the other information, I was finally able to focus on what he was doing. I was like, God, you could have just said that from the beginning. Now, that's not how he teaches, but guess what? That's how we teach at Mirai, okay? When we start with our finer pieces of ramification, and this goes even for these pieces that are on the outside of these bends, first move is in towards the main, okay? So we're going to say in order to set ourselves up for this fan-shaped pad, our first move is in towards the main, and we're creating right here, we're creating an acute angle between the inside of that branch and the main structural piece that we're existing in. So our first move on any of these, even on these finer guys, in to create this acute angle, second move out towards sunlight. So we go, if we have a branch here, we're going to go in and then out and create that acute angle, okay? First move is in, second move is out, first move is in, second move is out, first move is in, second move is out, and what that sets you up for, if you start to just think, in, out, in, out, in, out, the final product of that, you cannot help it. It creates a fan shape. You don't even have to artistically try to execute that. The technical function of that creates a fan shape. It's one of the most amazing, liberating things that you can know as a bonsai practitioner. This is how we create a bonsai pad, all right? So we're saying bends in the structure, put our secondary branches on the outside of those bends. This influences the way you form your structural movement. Once we get into secondary tertiary, in towards the main, out towards the sun. We're keeping this simple. Keep it simple, keep it straight. That move in, that move out, that's about all you need. The simpler the lines in your secondary tertiary wiring, the more you see the detail, the nuances, the bark, the movement, the base of the trunk, and the primary lines, okay? So we keep that final piece of the branch to unify the level of the bottom of the pad. Inside of this whole organic shape that we have, there's only one location on any pad of foliage or positive space that we can draw a clean line, and that's the bottom of the pad, okay? Now, the more that this line evolves, the more organic that's going to be. We're not going to go there right now. We'll talk about advancing branch design and nuances of that age being reflected. When you form it into the main, out towards the sunlight, up or down to unify that bottom of the pad so that it's flat and gives you definition. These are the three principles of secondary tertiary. We call this wiring. The very first time Mr. Kimura gave me a branch to wire, he cut it off a tree, he handed it to me, and he said, wire this. I wired it. I didn't style it. I wired it. I handed it back to him. He said, what is this? What is this? Wiring is not just applying the wire, because you apply the wire to do something. Wiring a tree is wiring and styling. Secondary tertiary wiring means the mechanics to wire it, the mechanics to be able to aesthetically achieve a really quality product, but also the mechanics and the concepts aesthetically to make a beautiful pad with it. This is probably three of the biggest pieces of knowledge that I can give you guys about designing bonsai on this secondary tertiary level. Let's see how they're applied. Now, when we come back to the aesthetics of branch pad formation, we have, you know, we have a lot of things that we're going to be doing. We're going to be doing a lot of and again, we went over this on the whiteboard, but I want to reiterate it here. We have three very fundamental moves that set us up to create a branch pad. First move on any one of these branchlets is in towards the main, and I'm going to set myself up here just to get these out of the way, in towards the main. Okay, now this in towards the main creates an acute angle. When a branch and a bud starts to grow in terms of establishing photosynthetic efficiency, bud moves out towards sunlight. So when we have this branch out here in this miniaturized scope of a pad that has photosynthetic efficiency, we're always going to bring those branches in to form that efficient acute angle in towards the main, number two, out towards sunlight. And we say, listen, as far as this finer ramification is concerned, keep it simple, keep it straight-ish, relatively straight. So when we go in towards the main as number one, we hold the branch out towards the main, and we're going to set ourselves up here just to get that in towards the main and out towards sunlight number two. In towards the main and out towards sunlight number two, okay? In towards the main, create that acute, and out towards sunlight number two. Now when we get to these longer branches, we may choose to put a slightly greater amount of movement into that. That's okay, but notice how minimal the movement is compared to what we've put into the primary structure. Major movement should occur in the trunk and our primary branching. That sets us up to have very simple movement in terms of our secondary tertiary branches, which creates very clean lines here that allow us to generate this positive foliage mass and use this positive foliage mass with those simple lines to focus the viewer's eyes on all of the features of the trunk and the primary branching that gives the tree value. So I'm going to go through this, and I'm just into the main, out to sun, into the main, out to sun, into the main, out to sun, into the main, out to sun. And all of a sudden, if I notice gaps or I notice inconsistencies, then I can start to adjust some of my structural pieces to start to pull this pad together. If I have some pieces like this, I can start to shift to redistribute my foliage mass. Maybe I need to shorten that, which means I can unwire here. I can flex that bottom of the pad over here. I can go ahead and I can cut there, and I can drop this back to a strong secondary growing piece there. Now maybe this is some thickness on the top of my branch. So maybe I go into the main and out towards sun, but I keep that elevated to be able to create photosynthetic efficiency and function in this finer piece of ramification here. Maybe I choose to add another jog, which puts that on the outside of that bend so that I give a little bit more movement and distribute that foliage mass effectively and efficiently. This is sort of the manipulation of the styling that allows us to achieve that really beautiful fan-shaped pad. Okay, so I'm going to Okay, so I'm going to Okay, so I'm going to carry through on the rest of it. In towards the main, out towards the sun. In towards the main, and notice that I carried this one in towards the main and up. The third piece that we talked about in terms of effective branch pad creation when we're creating this fan-shaped pad is to create that correct elevation so that we form a flat bottom here. This flat bottom, when we talk about the flat bottom of our pad, this is what creates that delineated line pad to pad when we look at the tree from the this flat bottom, when we talk about the flat bottom of our pad, this is what creates that delineated line pad to pad when we look at the tree from the front to separate our foliar masses and give definition to those positive pieces of space. It's why we clean off the needles hanging off the bottom. It's why that move is executed. front to separate our foliar masses and give definition to those positive pieces of space. It's why we clean off the needles hanging off the bottom. It's why that move is executed. front to separate our foliar masses and give definition to those positive pieces of space. It's why we clean off the needles hanging off the bottom. It's why that move is executed. If it's on the bottom, bringing it up, holding it up and in towards the main, and then out towards the sun. Notice my index finger holding that bend, bringing this piece up from the bottom of the branch where we had no branchlets over here, so we saved a bottom piece, still making it a functional and effective aspect of our pad formation. In towards the main, I'm going to go down a little bit to establish that pad out towards its sun. If this is hanging down, I can just clean those pieces up, and then in towards the main and out towards the sun, and all of a sudden you start to see this beautiful branch pad formation. Now maybe I say, boy, this feels a little bit long. Okay, maybe I'll cut here. Straighten out that wire to form that pad so that we've got that, and I can drop back to a strong growing secondary piece here. Very simple moves to start to execute this fan-shaped pad, and create the beautiful beginnings of a bonsai branch that's going to really reflect sort of a defined style and shape for the tree. This branch feels like a very well-wired initial step on a very raw, unwired, unstyled branch to become a future quality bonsai pad. Now we're going to be addressing these more refined, more refined branches that have been bonsai branches before, and we're carrying forward that maturation. So it's going to shift a little bit from the raw branch that we just wired. Okay, now we know we carried our structural wire to this point to provide that turn and a half of support for both of these to be wired in tandem. Similar size branches, we're going to use a gauge that allows us to move those anywhere that we're trying to position those. So we're going to go with an eight gauge on these to give us total control. Okay, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to start that. I'm going to maintain that same angle. Same spacing, no gaps. Now again, coming back to our checkpoints, following my structural in the clockwise, spinning opposite with counterclockwise, entering the backside or the trunk side of those shoulders, right? And now once I start in this clockwise direction, I have to maintain that clockwise direction through the duration of this wiring process to be able to make sure that my wire functions. Now the more movement and the more sort of zigs and zags that have been formed in this branch, the more intelligent I'm going to have to be about how I utilize my supporting hand to be able to make sure the wire enters all of those spaces to the best it can possibly enter them to maintain contact and provide structure and functional support. Okay, so I'm going to come in here and you'll notice that more often than not, I'll be hitting the inside. Notice that we have a curve here. I hit the inside of that curve. Notice we have a curve here. I hit the inside of that curve. That comes back to structural wiring, but you'll see it applied and functional in the secondary-tertiary model as well. Okay, now I have the opportunity to combine these two pieces and notice their spacing in between my structural wire. Notice how they're both at the midway point. Pay attention to that as we move forward. I have two pieces here. I have two pieces here. In order for any of these to be combined, my thicker wire, this secondary piece, even though it's eight gauge, this is still secondary, to the initial six gauge structure that we have on this branch, I at least have to get this past the point where these branches exist so that I have structural support in this area. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to carry this right there. I'm going to finish this across the bottom. Okay, and notice that this time, I didn't carry this eight over that crotch. And we've talked about how carrying this over that crotch would relieve the pressure on that crotch. Because I didn't carry it over that crotch, I've got to be very careful about this, but it would have been In a very tight turn, I would have violated my same angle, same spacing, no gaps. I went ahead and carried it onto the branch closest to it here to be able to utilize that right across the bottom. I'm going to go ahead and cut that with my pad. You'll see how I come back and I direct that growth to be able to maintain function. Now when we come back to this piece, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to go into the main and then out to sun to be able to close down that acute angle. The same thing applies no matter how big and how thick the branch. I'm going to come back and I'm going to wire this piece first. I notice that these are very close in proximity and my structural wire only gets to this point. It doesn't get out here where it gives me that structural support. What that means is I've got to carry a wire from here down to one of these and I've got to carry my wire here down to one of these. That will create three wires in this area, but we're still okay. Three wires is our maximum. I'm going to go ahead and come back and wire those pieces together. Okay. Now my checkpoint again, if I'm going to be wiring this down to one of these branches, I'm going to be following the turn of my structural wire and I'm going to be coming on this and spinning opposite. So I'm spinning clockwise here, counterclockwise here. Once I get those set up, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to follow this down and I need to carry this wire all the way down to the tip of the branch to create any sort of structure and function inside of this region of the tree. I'm going to go ahead and carry it to the farthest tip. How I handle this wire through these different pieces and also watch where I stop my wire in order to have control of the tip. I'm treating this foliar mass as the mass that I'm trying to control. I'm not going to wire all the way out this linear piece because what it would do is it would fragment all of this foliage. I would break some of it. It would disrupt it. As long as I've got the ability to control this entire mass, then that's far enough. I've got control of the tip. I'm going to in that across the bottom. Okay. Now coming in here, I've got a very odd situation because I have these different pieces of branchlets here. I'm going to go ahead and carry this across and watch how I use my offhand to go ahead and guide that other branch into a position. And this is where the nuances of watching somebody who's really proficient at wiring. Watch how I use my offhand to just rotate this. This is rotating opposite of the turn of my wire, okay? So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to rotate this opposite the turn of my wire. When we effectively wire, all of our foliage should have an upward orientation so that when we come back and we look at the product of our branch, we don't see foliage sitting on its side or facing upside down. All of the tips should be up. We should have this beautiful curve and this maturity to the branch that it's already gained and we're maintaining. This is where the skill of evolved bonsai, refined bonsai wiring, starts to shift. Because when we wired the raw branch, and we'll come back to this, when we wired that, we laid every branch. We laid everything down flat. Now when we come to the mature, we start to form this angle so that those tips are up and we maintain that maturity. This is a big part of aesthetics in secondary tertiary wiring, okay? In towards the main, out towards that. In towards the main, out towards the sunlight. Now we're set up to wire these two guys. Whew, a lot of knowledge. A lot of things to be aware of. Now when you start to get into the nuances of really high-level bonsai, you start to understand why do people study bonsai? Why do people study for six years in Japan? What in the world, if those Japanese professionals would just teach their students, then wouldn't it just be so much faster and so much easier? No, not really. Because every single tree has different nuances that you've got to be able to address. The time and the repetition of a six-year apprenticeship is what allows you to encounter all of these different situations and learn different foliage types. We were on a Kishu on the raw piece, now we're on a Hollywood juniper, which has longer, coarser foliage. It's like getting around on a wire. It's like getting around on a bouquet. Nice. Great. Thank you. Cheers, guys. Cheers, guys. Cheers, guys. course of this rotation, and one of the tricky things, I don't want to change the orientation of this piece. I've got that across the bottom, go ahead and I'm going to shift there, I'm going to go in towards the main, out towards its own piece of sunlight, I'm going to prop that up so that I have control of that tip, get that orientation, and then I can always come back. When I'm in this situation, I can always come back, I can tweak the rotation a little bit, I can go ahead, I can back that off to drop down that, and I can change the way that that tip is reading to the viewer so that I maintain all of that foliage in the same direction, and if I've got any outliers that are being a little bit crazy, I can come back and I can clean those so that they fit into that shape and that thematic sort of delivery of that beautiful nuanced slight curve to that mature branch, bringing these down so that they're flat even though this is a mature formation. We still want to have that here, tips are coming up. This is a beautiful example, beautiful example of a mature formation. A mature branch and maintaining that maturity in the way that we're applying the secondary tertiary. Notice I have three here and three here, that's my maximum. It doesn't look that convoluted because of the organization and sort of the systematic approach to applying that wire. Now I'm on to this side, I'm going to wire these two together and make sure that I get those seated in the correct position. Now when I apply this, I'm going to be following counterclockwise turn here, spinning oppositely. Opposite clockwise here and notice that this is occurring in the middle. I'm going to maintain that same spacing. Notice how I'm in the middle of those two pieces. Same spacing so that I come out right where that shoulder exists. I'm going to hold that contact with the shoulder just like we did with the structural, making sure to enter that shoulder. Doesn't change with our secondary tertiary wiring. We've still got to have that. Offhand supporting, same angle, same spacing, no gaps. Now I get to this point where I've got two major pieces of foliage mass. Which one of these do I need to be wiring? Do I wire this one or do I wire this one? And this is where we start to use some of our intelligence. Now when I pull this away notice how evenly spaced these three pieces? Are notice how they all have the same inclination up and this guy is sitting below it and is kind of the odd one out in terms of its distribution. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to apply the wire to the single branch that doesn't fit inside of the system. and maneuver this so that it behaves in the same way as these other three, okay? Across the bottom, notice how I'm spinning in the clockwise. I continue spinning in the clockwise. Finish across the bottom. Before I place that, I'm gonna go ahead, again, thumb position holding into the shoulder so I have that contact. Notice that I maintain that same angle of turn. Even though I'm entering that shoulder, I don't overemphasize that turn. I don't crank it into the shoulder. That offhand really supporting that shoulder. Let me show you here so you can see. Holding there so that I'm in, then I move my thumb out to continue that contact and support. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna carry my hands out, maintaining that pinch, pinch. Notice that I'm not rolling this. I'm maintaining that same orientation here, right across there, again, across the bottom. I've now got control of that tuft at the tip. I finish here. There's my pad for control in towards the main, out towards the sunlight, propping that tip up with that nice, nice curve across this hole. Little section, really soft curve, flattened it out to the structural piece so I went in and down to bring that in, out towards the sun, nice, slight inclination up, giving me that beautiful presentation of the foliar mass. Before I set this, I'm gonna go ahead and wire these guys so that we don't put that in the position where we're not gonna be able to necessarily see what we're trying to accomplish. This is a tricky situation here. Notice how far forward from this turn this branch is. It would be tempted to come straight across the bottom and come up against this wire. If we did so, if we carried this one against this wire, it's naturally gonna push this branch to be wired here, and let me just show you that so that you understand in terms of theory, okay? So if I've got my pipe cleaner here, and I carry this forward, and I carry this onto here, if I make that combination in that style, now the only way to combine these two is either to cross over two wires here, something like this, cross over those two wires there, and then to there for structural support. Notice how ugly and unsightly that gets. Or the only other option would be to come here, and that would create a seesaw because I'm not pulling on that structural wire for support if I went here and I went here. Neither of these are acceptable situations, and this is how you avoid it. This is how you fix this, okay? When I'm working here, as opposed to carrying that straight across, if I maintain, same angle, same spacing, I come forward, notice how close this is to this, notice how this branch is very close to here, now I carry this onto there, and that allows me to come back with my wire, and now I've got a full turn with that structural. I've got a full turn with that structural, far more effective and efficient way to be combining those four branches at the tip based on what my structural wire is doing. This is the logic of secondary tertiary branch combination. This is the logic of secondary tertiary branch combination. combinations, okay? And this takes a lot of practice. You're going to have a lot of failure. That's okay. Continue to stick with it. Continue to reason through. Use logic. This is all part of the learning process for being able to do this in an effective way. So based on what I just did, I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to enter that trunk side shoulder here. I'm going to follow the turn of my structural wire here. I'm going to spin opposite right here, okay? I'm going to hold that contact with the shoulder. Same angle, same spacing, no gaps. I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to hop right through here, right through that crotch. I'm going to pick up across the bottom. That gives me control of my tips, okay? Right on the base of the needle. Notice that I'm not out here pulling all of this up and really clumping all that foliage together. I'm right across the base of those needles right there. It allows that tip to breathe, have that space. This aesthetic of that freedom in the needles, far more attractive than taking them all and clumping them all up, okay? And then when I come back to here, in order for this piece to sit with the correct orientation, I actually need to rotate counter to the application of wire. So I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to give it that spin. Notice that I still don't have control of this tip. I'm going to clean off a few more of these weaker pieces. I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to maintain that rotation. I'm going to come to here, clean off that bottom. And now all of a sudden, just with that slight rotation, I have that orientation that's shared across the rest of them. This is how we start to make those tweaks. And notice how delicate that is. Across the bottom, I hold that spot. I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to wire these other two together based on the strategy we created with the pipe cleaners, which means I'm going to be coming in here, entering that backside or trunk side of the shoulder, following the counterclockwise turn of my structural wire, turning opposite, coming right against the base of those needles. Okay, and I make this look easy because I've done this hundreds... Actually, I take that back thousands of times, right? Back in Japan, we wired on average 300 plus trees a year. I studied for six years. That means that I've at least wired over 1,800 trees in Japan, probably more because we would do more than one tree in a day. And then I've been home for eight years where we've been creating a lot of new trees out of Yamadori and working on older established trees. I've done this literally tens of thousands of times, and that's why it's working out for me each time. Your focus is not lunging. Not changing the angle or the spacing and still getting that wire to hit that appropriate point. If you focus on it, you will work and you will build that skill to be able to see that spacing and adjust your timing. Okay, into the main. My main is still over here, out towards sunlight. Nice tip. Notice my index. Notice my thumb. I'm just going to pull with my thumb and push with my index. Creates that nice, beautiful, soft arc. Not exaggerated. I'm not going here. I don't want to see that. When I look at this branch, I don't want that angle where I see that underside. I want that to just be push with the index, pull with the thumb, a nice, clean arc up. Into the main, out towards the sun, push with the index, pull with the thumb. Okay, into the main. Now my main becomes this group of branching. Into the main, out towards the sun, push with my index, pull with my thumb. This becomes so incredibly second nature. I'm going to start forming. This one, into the main, out towards the sun. I'm going to keep this kind of in the interior here. Even though it's a lateral branch, it gives me a little bit of body. Notice that these two are a little bit close together, so I'll just change that orientation slightly to get even full your distribution across all of those pieces. Okay, now I've got this big interior piece. I'm going to go in towards the main, out towards the sun, but I notice that I've got closer proximity. Whoops, I missed one. I've got closer proximity of this foliage mass to this foliage mass, so I'm going to go ahead and even though I've gone in towards the main, out towards the sun, I'm going to flirt this back in here just a little bit. I'm going to sort of finagle this, and then this odd man out, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to flex it laterally so that we do create the ability to utilize this foliage in a way that gives us even distribution. I'm going to rotate to prop these guys back up, and this is where we start to, whenever we're starting to create this body, we never take this and cross over. We don't cross over, so this isn't coming over this structural, it's not coming over this structural piece. It's still sitting in here, but I can very easily flirt these pieces diagonally to the side to create this contour in the pad, and that starts to build a really beautiful aesthetic. I can come back in here, I can clean off some of these bottoms, I can adjust the position of this and maybe clean out one of these interior pieces, and you see just some of that manipulation that we're able to do as we style this. I think so many people are sort of convinced that there's just a solid singular movement to the creation of this branch pad, but in all actuality, it's a work in progress where we're constantly sort of focusing on and maneuvering the foliage mass to be able to create this pad shape. Now, I do have a little bit of length here compared to what I've got here. There's a few options. I could straighten this out, and you can see how closing that gap will start to create some unity, but then I've got this sort of branch in no man's land here. I could potentially look to flirt this over here in terms of in towards the main out, consume some of that space, sort of pick this up, pull these pieces over. Notice how I'm just eating up that space. I could close this in here a little bit. I'm just playing. This is just bonsai in terms of being able to utilize sort of the length that we have in the branching and start to connect with the other branches. I could break them up and start to the other branches and start to connect with the other branches and start to connect with the other branches and start to consume some of that space by putting some of that movement, not super dramatic movement, but just putting some of that movement into that space. We start to play with the appearance of that space so that we get a more uniform. Notice that we have a more uniform distribution of foliar mass, et cetera. We could even say, man, I could remove this or I could shorten that piece. That would probably lighten some of that. And we can do this until we feel really comfortable with where we're at in terms of the shape of this branch. Just nice, simple, delicate movements creates a beautiful bonsai branch. We've got a much better creation of that pad. I feel like that's a really good finished product for what we're striving to achieve. And when you see the profile of that, you're gonna see how all of those small little moves really manipulated that to being a beautiful bonsai branch, okay? Let's move on to this one. Okay, so in here now, we talked about the fact that when we removed the structural flaw because we had three similar size here to here, if we weren't capable of carrying our thicker wire out to here, we could have cut our thicker wire and carried this out to here. That would have forced us to combine these two. Because we were able to change that and adjust that, now we can go here to here and we can treat this as its own unit, okay? Again, following my structural with a clockwise turn here, entering that shoulder, spinning opposite, spinning opposite. I'm gonna avoid those old wire scars as much as I can. We don't wanna put the wire back in the wire scars. It will exacerbate the wire scars, okay? So now I'm set up there. I'm gonna go ahead and just make sure that that's tight in that shoulder. Notice my index finger holding that contact. Notice how I get that wire nice and snug up in there so I have good contact on that shoulder. Now I can come in and I can use that offhand to just support. Notice how I'm not rolling the branch. The branch isn't rolling. I'm not rolling with my wire. I'm holding that with that supporting wire, making sure. Now here's an interesting situation. I know that I probably am gonna wanna wire these two together and we would say, okay, if I wanna wire these two together, technically I should split that. But in splitting that, I would definitely be violating that same angle, same spacing, no gaps. I'm gonna show you guys a little bit of a cheat there to be able to still wire appropriately, maintain same angle, same spacing, no gaps, and maintain structural integrity when I do combine those two, okay? I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna come in, support that end, supporting that as much as I possibly can. Got a little bit of a lunge there, so I'm gonna tighten that up. I'm gonna cut that across the bottom. Okay, I'm gonna go ahead. Let me finish this guy first. Right across the bottom there, okay? Picks those pieces of foliage up right across the bottom. I'm gonna go ahead, I'm gonna support here. Down, in towards the main, out towards the sun. the position of those pieces. I'm gonna come back to this now. My best combination here are these two and these two. In order to go these two though, I'm either gonna have to cross or this is where we oftentimes can find some space right in the interior portion of that where that wire hit. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna feed through there, okay? Now we treat this exactly the same as any other combination. So I'm following the turn of my structural wire. Structural wire is turning clockwise. This has to continue turning clockwise. If I came in on this side, I'm starting this clockwise turn. I come in on the wrong side of the shoulder here and I reverse that turn, okay? And if I do this correctly, so I'm turning clockwise, this one has to spin counter. I enter the correct side of the shoulder that's towards the base. Notice how both wires are now spinning in the counterclockwise direction. That's a major no-no, okay? This is one of the ways that I know. I entered the wrong side of the shoulder, I changed my rotation of turn. I violated two of my checkpoints and these two wires are spinning in the same direction. That's an ineffective combination, okay? And so this is where when I said the goal and the rule is not to maintain this wire against this wire. If I start turning in the clockwise direction, I maintain turning in the clockwise direction. Notice how that pushes me into the correct side of the shoulder, that shoulder towards the trunk or that backside or the farthest side of the shoulder. I've got an effective combination here. And you'll notice that my wire starts to function far more effectively. I don't get that see-saw or that teeter-totter when I enter the correct side of the shoulder right against the base there, pop, pop. Leave those small pads on both of those pieces. Those two are wired effectively. Now I've got these two guys to be placing in combination and we'll go on to the next set after we set or adjust the shape of these branches, okay? I'm gonna be following that turn. I'm gonna be following that turn of the structural wire. I'm gonna be spinning opposite, entering the far side of that shoulder. I'm gonna go ahead and use my hand. Notice how I've got a slight sideways cant to this. Ideally, I would have that there. I'm gonna use that offhand to go ahead and start that rotation so that I'm very gentle on that branch right against the base. Now notice how we've sort of reoriented that so it's got the same foyer position as these other pieces. This is effective wiring. This took me a long time to learn in Japan. Mr. Kimura would constantly be in the beginning. I'm gonna say first three years of wiring. He was always fixing these pieces. Very interesting to learn, okay? In towards the main, out towards the sunlight. Now this piece here is significantly shorter than what's coming. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna leave that piece. When I bend this in, I'm gonna take this back out but I'm gonna flirt that diagonally so that I create some body to this where I have no interior pieces. That's where I'm gonna use that. In towards the main, out towards the sun. In towards the main, out towards the sun. In towards the main, out towards the sun. Okay, notice that fan-shaped pad starting to form. Okay, here I've got these two. I've got that structural wire in between them. I can effectively wire those together. That's my next combo. Okay, spinning with the structural, spinning opposite of the structural. Notice where I'm entering that shoulder on that far side of the shoulder. Gonna have to roll this slightly to get that orientation. Notice that slight roll over several turns on that wire gets me to that proper positioning. Now I've got that same orientation into that shoulder. Go ahead and I'm gonna support that. Notice how I've got this slightly a cant to here. Watch this. I'm just gonna apply a little bit of pressure. Notice how that little a pressure where I pull that branch back into that secondary tertiary. My thumb is here on the wire. My finger is here and I just roll that, okay? That allows me to hold that reverse roll against the base there. Now I've corrected that orientation of that foliage. It shares the same orientation. Pop, pop, I leave my two pads there to support that tip. Push with my index, pull with my thumb. Push with my index, pull with my thumb. Into the main, out towards sun. Into the main, out towards sun. It's like clockwork. Like clockwork. Okay, now I'm here. I've got one, two branches here, three, four branches here. Both of these pieces are gonna have to move on to this section. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna execute that right now so that you guys can see that happen. Okay, following the turn of my structural, entering the far side of that shoulder, spinning opposite. Oop, I don't wanna trap that guy because we said we're gonna cultivate that to potentially tighten up and replace this really long leggy branch in the future. It's got a ways to go before we make that transition. Now I'm gonna come all the way over to here, enter that shoulder. I'm good there. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna wire this guy, supporting. Got a slight rotation just to change that position. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna wire this guy, supporting. Got a slight rotation just to change that position. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna wire this guy, supporting. So there's that orientation there. I'm gonna go ahead, I'm gonna come underneath this piece. I'm gonna clean that section out, come underneath this. Now I've got that tip. Push with my index, pull with my thumb, unifies that. Go ahead and pop that off into the main out towards the sun, starting to get that unification of those foilier pieces here. Look at that pad forming, it's beautiful. It's like a little bit formulaic, but formulaic from the perspective of being able to be consistent. Okay, now I'm here, and I've got to decide where do I want to carry this wire. Now, if I carry this wire onto this one, then I only get a half turn on my combination of this piece to this piece, okay? So let's just see what that looks like. I'll set my wire up so that you guys have clarity in terms of what I'm talking about, and then we'll talk about what the best way to go about that is, okay? So if I carry that, if I carry this wire here onto this piece, I only get a half turn and get that in that shoulder, because we know we're going to wire this this way anyways, okay? I only get a half turn on those two, but if I choose to carry this over the crotch, now I get a full turn. This wire that was going to be on this one, all the way underneath, and I get a full turn on that more structural piece. It gives me far more function and a better hold there. I've got that stability of my 16 running here, utilizing that structure. So if I'm going to have a structural wire, that's going to be the most effective combination at the tip there to be able to have total control, integrity structurally, and be able to maintain all of the functionality that we're looking for in our wire. I would have killed for a wiring video that looked like this when I was learning how to wire. Never have I seen anybody really break down the nuances of wiring, okay? In towards the main and down, out towards the sun, and we may say out towards the sun, but you're pulling it back into the pad. Well, yes, out towards the sun, meaning giving its own space to be able to photosynthesize efficiently, okay? I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to carry this wire out so that I have control of this piece, and my hands are going to be in the way just for a second here to be able to properly execute this. And what that does, pop, pop, got my pad here, got my pad there. Now, watch what's going to happen. I'm going to take both of these, and I'm just going to roll that just a little bit. I'm going to put my index here to support that shoulder so I don't put too much torque on that really fine branch, and then I'm going to go ahead, I'm going to straighten up my pad here, push with my index, pull with my thumb, orient that foliage mass up, give it a little bit of a slight rotation so that I make sure in towards the main, out towards the sun, in towards the main, out towards the sun. I'm going to adjust that tip just a little bit, even out that distribution of foliage mass. If I feel like this is too tall, go ahead and take it off. Go ahead and take it off and really maximize the quality of that. Okay? Now you see how beautiful the orientation is of this. If we want, in the future as these evolve, they can lay down and sort of fill in this space, but this is a really, really, really effective distribution of foliar mass, creates an even uniform distribution and sort of density in terms of this positive space. There's no one area that looks denser than another one. And when you guys look at this from the front, from the profile of both of these branches, you'll see exactly what I'm talking about in terms of being able to achieve some of these aesthetic considerations that we're trying to execute in the wiring process to be able to give that continued refinement to the branch without stripping it, flattening it all out, and stripping it of the age that it's going to be able to achieve. That it's achieved over its course of being bonsai, right? Two very beautiful, effective branches in terms of bonsai pad formation. Now we're starting to approach a pine branch, which again is another deviation from the way that we handle that juniper foliage mass in terms of having this extensive amount of needles and needing to be controlling the angle and the orientation of these needles. Again, it's a mature branch, not necessarily a raw branch. And when we come to wiring pines, that placement of that final turn of wire along that base of that needle mass so that we have total control of that orientation is paramount to quality pine work and quality pine secondary tertiary ramification, styling, and design, okay? So we talked about first the combination of these two branches. Let's start there so that we begin to execute the original concept, concept for how this branch is going to be pieced together. So I'm going to back off of some of the broken record following the structural spinning opposite. I'm assuming at this point you guys have had enough of that. I'm going to start to move into some of the other conversations that we can have regarding wiring so that we're able to execute and discuss several different things as we work, okay? Now one of the things as I've been looking at this branch that I noticed is it is a branch that is not a branch. It is very dense, okay? And we did the original sort of removal, but in looking at this and noticing how dense it is, I see that this branch that is supposed to exist out here at the tip is slightly shorter than some of the longer pieces that I have in these other regions of the tree. I do have this valuable ramification back here, so I don't want to fully remove this because I would be cutting off a fork in my ramification and I would be creating a very long branch before I get to here without having any sort of bifurcation, bifurcation, excuse me, of that branching ramification moving out. We don't want to remove any bifurcation if we can avoid it, but this is where when we start coming back we can make some of these decisions to remove some of these pieces which will allow us to further compress, distribute foliage, and get a little bit more balance, a little less density so that we maintain that sunlight, that air movement, and all of the things that give this branch health and the ability to continue moving. So I'm going to start in the same way again, following that structural spinning opposite, spinning opposite here, following my structural here. You're going to watch how my hand, particularly with pines, we want to have our hands really sort of operating from the bottom of the tree so that we're not crushing or breaking needles. Broken needles on pine work is an absolute no-no. It's a faux pas. If we can avoid it based on the way that our hands are positioned in this wiring process, we're going to have a far greater final quality of product, okay? Now here again, we reach one of these sort of middle grounds where we've got to decide which direction do we take our structural wire. If I take it out onto this, I have the ability to wire this singular branch out in combination with one of the two pieces that exist here after carrying this out to here. However, there's a little bit of a pitfall here because I have this very thick piece that I'm assuming I'm going to want to drop out of. I'm assuming I'm going to want to drop down and make a part of this exterior silhouette or potentially utilize in a different way. And so in order to be able to merge these two and mesh this wiring so that we effectively have control of all pieces, let me think here for just a minute. Yeah. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to go across the top here, okay? This allows me to have total control of all pieces of the branch. And I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to end that wire right there because I know I'm going to have control of all pieces of the branch. And I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to end that wire right there because I know I'm going to have control of all pieces of the branch. I don't really have to carry one from here out to here. I don't need to carry that any farther. I'm going to stop that right across the bottom. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to rotate this branch with that wire. Notice how I changed the orientation there. Okay, now there's potential to be shortening this as well. We've got these really beautiful back buds, we've got this longer piece. We could shorten here and flex some of this forward. We'll decide how we want to handle that. Let's go ahead and move onto these other pieces and we'll set sort of this original really long component of the branching design first and come back and answer our questions as it pertains to those second. Now notice how we have a difference of level here, this branch being far higher than this branch. This is beautifully set up to be able to fill in this void. We're going to have to work around these interior buds. We'll make some decisions on those. This piece is probably going to need to flare in this direction to open the door for these to be able to move into that open space. So although I have wire scars, my goal and my priority is not necessarily to spin opposite of wire scars. I just need to stay outside of them. So if I dive into those wire scars, what's going to happen? I'm going to perpetuate those. So I'm going to try to just sort of hop over some of those gaps so that we're able to effectively manipulate the foliage mass in a way that doesn't continue to compromise or contribute to some of the flaws that have already been created. And wire scars, if you're wiring appropriately and allowing the tree to establish health, will become a consistent end-to-end solution. I'm going to carry this out to here, and I'm not so sure that I'm not going to remove this and really try to reduce this branch that exists in the upper portion. So I'm going to go ahead and just stop, leave myself a little bit of grace, but I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to stop my structural, or at least that second tier of wire right there, knowing that I may choose to remove this and flex this piece over into here, flex this piece over into here, and reduce that to create that space for these exterior pieces. And in fact, I'm going to go ahead and just stop and I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to make an educated choice to say that's going to have to happen regardless. I'm going to cut back to that interior bud, and we're going to be pushing that back to improve the quality of the overall branch. Now, I'm going to lay these pieces out. These are going to give me my exterior profile of the branch. And it's interesting when we get into branches and we start approaching all of these different decision-making processes, how we choose to handle those and build that branch that's going to be a good continuation for the future. Now, if we wanted that kind of width, we could have made different decisions, but it did feel like this branch, maybe more than the juniper branches, had some more foliage mass, had further evolution and sort of that building process that created more decision-making. This is what happens when our trees really start to perform and function and build that ramification and those components of a mature branch. And so we've got to be able to tackle those. Now, notice I kept this piece out of that wire scar. That's really important. I had to work hard to do so. Okay, so I'm going to carry this all the way out onto this tip. Notice I'm approaching from the bottom. I'm making sure to protect these smaller buds that I have along the branch. And watch this last turn. I come down right along the base of those needles. That gives me total control of that tip and that orientation. This is quality pine work. And you saw it on the juniper, but when we talk about pines, this is paramount to good pine work in terms of being able to change the orientation of that needle mass, okay? Now, we're dealing with significantly shorter, stronger, thicker, stouter branches on this tree. So I'm going to be changing up a little bit of my wiring practices to address the nuances of this branch. For example, we removed a bottom growing branch right here where my wire sits right now, okay? I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to stop this thicker wire here because my next combination is going to be for these two. I've got my turn and a half to here. I stop across the bottom. I now come back with a gauge that allows me to pair those two, and it'll give me a better capacity in transitioning to a finer piece of wire. And you'll notice as I get to the tips, I'm trying to transition wherever the opportunity arises, assuming that I need to control the tips or assuming that I do have a combination where both need wire. Instead of carrying that thicker wire out to here and wiring this with a single wire, I always stop the thicker wire and transition to a thinner wire using that turn and a half of that thicker wire. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to use this wire as the backbone to be able to support this movement. But this transition where we go thick to here, and then we transition to thinner to here, and then we transition to thinner to here, this is the natural step down and sort of scaffolding that we apply to our secondary tertiary wire to give us the finest wire that is suitable for the gauge of branch at that point where we contact that tip because the finer the wire, the better the control that we have. Now, inside of that, we're looking at the tip. Okay. We're looking at this and we're saying, well, finer wire, couldn't you have gone with a different gauge? I have to still use the gauge that allows me to move these branches at the base. So I'm using that thickest point as my reference for what gauge I'm applying to any of these secondary and tertiary pieces. But in all sort of relationship to whether I go with a 12 gauge all the way to this tip or I go with a 14, the 14 is softer and it's going to give me better control. If you guys reference back or if you remember the discussion of this piece, this branch has this beautiful angle of inclination up. All of the needles are at least horizontal but not hanging down below or they're facing up. This tip, however, sort of drops down like this. Instead of being this nice smooth inclination up, the tip kind of drops down like that, which means we've got to carry our wire through these needles just slightly to get control. And we said we carry it as far as we need. To get control. Now notice how I sort of fish those needles out of the way and then I use that position of fishing those needles out of the way. And I'll come back in and I'll remove any needles that get trapped underneath that wire. Notice how I move through those and none of those are constricted. None of them are smashed and none of them are broken. And I still have control of this tip. This is good pine work. This is proficient pine work at its highest level when we start trying to get through this. Now ideally, we won't be weaving too much of this. We'll be weaving too much of our wire through the needles. We'll have cleaned the needles effectively. You'll notice here I've got this guy trapped. I'll take that off. You'll notice here it's right at the base. Right at the base of those needles gives me control of the tip and control of that angle. But in this one, based on the fact that instead of having that control of the tip source from back here, we had to go one more turn to be able to pick that tip up right there. And that's that point where we really hit that sort of nuance of wiring. How far do we go? Why do we go that far? And how do we handle that? In towards the main, out towards the sun. Notice how we're starting to now take this out into this region where we created that space. In towards the main, out towards the sun. Now you're starting to see that distribution. In towards the main, out towards the sun. Notice how that flexed and flared that finer piece of foliage into its own space right here between these two major buds. This is really nice execution. Now I notice I have this piece here hanging down. This kind of finer piece that exists right here. I may choose to go ahead and take that off or I may choose to wire it up. We'll see what happens with this branch in terms of its final position. I can already tell though that I think it's going to be more effective to flex this branch all the way over into this region. It gives me space. It gives me some direction and sunlight. I can go into the main. I can change my index. I can flex that over there. Then I can pull this back into sunlight. Notice how that moved those buds. I'm going to say that this is going to be unnecessary and go ahead and take that out just to buy myself a little bit more sunlight and space. When I lay this down, I've got this finer bud here and I lay these guys down right over here. Notice how this interior piece is going to be getting that sunlight so that it can gain strength. That's appropriate management of sort of this multi-layered effect when we start getting into pine branching. I'm going to go ahead and pair these two guys together so I'll be done with that exterior portion. I love pines. Pines were my most favorite species and continue to be. Ponderosa pines in particular. This right here is a Mugo pine. I love pine work because of the nuances that it takes to be able to wire them effectively. It's not something that everybody can do. The technique to wire a beautiful pine and have control of those tips and be able to change that orientation. Based on that technical proficiency. They're quiet. They have a wonderful aesthetic. I love every aspect of pine work in terms of what it demands from the practitioner to be able to execute technically and aesthetically. It's really, really an interesting and challenging variety of bonsai cultivation. I got that control at that tip. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to separate that bud so that I protect that bud. Notice I have this guy on top. I'm going to clean out. In between these buds. Just a little bit more here. Just a little bit more to be able to open this up so that I've got space for my wire. I don't crush any needles. I don't compromise that same angle. Same spacing. No gaps. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to fish through there. That allows me to avoid breaking any of the needles. I've got that guy that's going to be trapped. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to remove that. Open up some of that space. You saw how that tip. I just kind of pulled that tip together. I'm able to drop that down. In towards the main. Out towards the sun. Establishing that same angle. I'm going to drop this down a little bit more so that I've got that nice flat bottom to create that definition across the bottom of my pad. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take this off. Flat across the bottom. Bing. Now I've got bottom here. Bottom here. All of that. Notice that foyer distribution really coming together. Okay. So now I've got this situation here where I've got kind of a rambunctious little pair right here. I've got my structural coming all the way out to there. This is a situation where when I look at this I say, Boy, did I carry my structure out too far? I think I did. And if I'm going to go ahead and wire this to any of these guys then I probably need to either pull my structure back or change up my strategy in terms of wiring. And this is totally acceptable to be making adjustments on the fly based on what we recognize as potentially being an issue in the quality of our wire. So if I say I'm going to carry this piece to this guy then I would need this structural here to be able to combine these two. If I say I'm going to combine these two together then I would need to leave my structural here so that I could combine these two in tandem. It all hinges on what my strategy is. I'm going to say because we cut back to such a fine small branch right here I don't really want to change that. So I'm trying to work out how are we going to effectively wire these guys together and still get the kind of product that we're looking for. Hmm. Hmm, hmm, hmm, hmm, hmm. Okay. All right. And I'm going to go ahead and make just a small change. I'm going to take this structural wire right back to here so that I'm not impacting that really fine bud too far. I'm going to carry these guys together and these guys together. And that should be a good solution that will actually give me more control of this tip by graduating to a finer piece of wire. So watch how I go ahead and do this. Very common to have to go back and make these decisions after we apply that thicker gauge potentially too far down the branch. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to cross over. Because I only have a half turn. Notice how I have a half turn of my structural. I'm going to cross over to get the support of that structural wire. And I'm going to get that on there. Notice I'm on the backside here. So then I can just come up and underneath, around and over to the top. I'm going to support that pinch method I showed you guys with the juniper. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to apply that. Notice how much more control I have of this finer bud on the tip. That allows me to seek and sort of strike that organization that I've been looking for. Now ideally, I want to take this piece. And I want to shift this piece right over into this space. This already has beautiful orientation. In order to do that, I've got to sort of tighten up. I've got to choke up on my wire a little bit. So that I can come underneath this here. And I can go ahead and enter this shoulder. Now watch how I handle this. I'm going to push this branch down into that secondary piece of wire. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to handle those needles effectively without breaking. I'm going to make that rotation. And you'll see now. That I've changed all of the orientation there. And now this is directly facing the direction that I want. Sitting right over the top here. I've shifted that to the back. We've got better foyer distribution as a result of that decision that was made. Obviously when we crossed over this thicker wire to gain that structural support. I have a little bit of a gap there. There's not much that I can do about that. But I do still have the effect of that wire hitting that very firm immobile location on that. I feel comfortable with where that wire is. I feel comfortable with where that wiring has taken place based on the compacted nature of that space that we're working in. Okay. Now I've got these two guys together. I'll go ahead and finish these off. And then we'll work on this far side. Okay. So notice that this branch is not up against this piece of wire. But farther forward. Sort of in the middle of these two turns. And this one is also farther forward than up against here. It's closer to here. So as long as I maintain same angle. And same spacing. Then I'm going to be able to effectively combine these. Without trying to necessarily butt up against that. If I don't use this strategy. Okay. What's going to happen. If I don't use this strategy. Is I'm going to have to cross over that thicker structural wire. And again. If we can avoid it. We don't want to. If we need it to provide structure and support like we did here. Then that is okay. But the goal isn't to be crossing. Of the mechanism of crossing. Right. Which is to load up on that structural wire. And create that continuity. In terms of that scaffolding. That allows us to have control. Okay. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to manipulate the foliage mass here. I'm going to carry this over. I want a little bit of a reverse roll on this. Just in order to be able to distribute these. Decrease the height of this. And the thickness of this pad just a little bit. Gives me control of both of these. Lay them down. Notice how both tips are now facing up. Okay. Really nice nuanced handling. And again. We've got this smaller bud right here. Now based on how we've organized all of that. It gets sunlight. It continues to flourish. These are laid out. We've reduced sort of the thickness of this pad. We're starting to bring this back into a proportion. That makes it a quality bonsai piece of foliar mass. Okay. We talked about the potential. We talked about pruning. To potentially remove this big thick guy right here. And we've got these little buds right there. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to do that. And you're going to see how this is going to benefit. Sort of the shaping and styling. Now if I do that. I can carry this piece all the way over onto this. I can have control. I'm going to take one of these two small buds out. So that I create the space for that one bud to really flourish. Okay. I'm going to be very gentle with that. So that I don't disrupt or damage that in the wiring process. I'm going to go ahead. And I'm going to take those that are in the path. And I'm going to come across the bottom of that. Have total control. Maintaining orientation of that shoot. So that it fits right into that space. That it's been given in this mature branch pad. Okay. And I'm going to wait to style that. Or position it in terms of finality. Until I've given a lot more definition and shape to this piece. So I'm going to rotate. Notice how I rotate. And that brings these to the same level. Now we're starting to see how this branch is going to actually lay out. And behave. Find these. This piece. And this piece. And leave those two for the finality. And we should be good in terms of our layout. Distribution. Etc. When we were in Japan. And we were wiring. We were wiring Japanese black pine. This is a very, very common occurrence with Japanese black pine. To be in these tight spaces. With these short branching distances. And really having to work hard. This is a nuance of pines. That's different than any other species. Because they occur. They've got a lot of angles in their branches. Very, very significant technique. To be able to conduct your secondary tertiary. In these tighter spaces. Mr. Kimura used to say. This is college level bonsai work. When you're talking about really simple trees. That have a lot of space. That's elementary or middle school level. This is a collegiate level of wiring now. To be able to cleanly wire this branch. Based on that space. And getting to show you guys. Each of these different pieces and nuances. Is so fun. Because we start to recognize the depth. That we approach wiring with. On the secondary tertiary level. Now I originally called to combine this to this. But I see a problem with that now. Because if I combine this. Now I've got these two branches. That are going to have to either cross over here. Or I'm going to have to go directly over the top. And see saw. So let me show you what that would look like. Okay. So I'm going to cross right here. Cross right here. And come over to combine those two. Or to avoid crossing. We would just have to see saw like this. And I don't think that's going to be a very good structural hold. So the way that I get around that. And the way that I can adjust some of this. Is I can pull back this original turn. Just tighten up. Notice how I just tighten up on that original piece right there. And I can hit this piece. Coming in at that angle. Allows me control. Want to avoid trapping those needles of that smaller piece. Allows me control. I can come in here. One of the two buds is going to be wired. I'm going to pick the one that I want to control the most. Okay. Now I can combine these two. Get a full turn. Give myself better structural hold and support. Now I get a full turn. A full turn. And a full piece of rotation. Which gives me a much better hold. And a much better application of wire. To have more control over the shape. And position of these branches. Go ahead and eliminate a few of these interior pieces. Allows me to get just to the base of that. And take off some of these needles. Hanging off the bottom. Come back in. Boom. Now notice how I can get a little bit more control. Boom. Now notice how this is sort of cockeyed. And these are facing this way. I want to roll that. I want to make sure that those are presenting themselves laterally. As opposed to vertically. Roll there. And then we notice that this is really kind of long. Boy that's almost unsightly isn't it. It sticks outside of the silhouette. In these situations. We've got buds forming on the inside. We'll reduce that. Now typically we would want to save that piece of ramification. Where we get that division. From one to two. But if it's causing a major issue. In terms of being able to pull this branch. Into an acceptable size and proportion. Then we're going to take it off. And I'm going to go ahead. And I'm going to carry this one more rotation. Sort of through these needles. In order to be able to. Have control of this tip. Very similar to the one over here. Where we had sort of that tip that was down. And we wanted it up. I've got to find that point that gives me control of that. Okay. Into the main. Out towards the sun. Slight roll to pull that up. Boom. Slight incline to pull that up. Now I've got those on the same plane. Into the main. Out towards the sun. Forms that exterior portion. Into the main. And then I'm going to pull this out towards the sun. I've got a little bit of a conglomeration here. Of finer branches. And I'm going to see if I can just sort of finagle. To being a little bit more compatible. Into the main. Out towards the sun. We find that space. Find that space. Again. Lateral, lateral overlap. Totally okay. The fact that this is here and this is here. Bothers me not at all. Okay. We want to really make sure that foyer distribution. And photosynthetic efficiency is our priority. That allows me to drop this down. Got a little bit of a reverse roll. Just to get that right where we need it. I'm going to prop that up. So that builds that interior. Allows me to flirt these pieces over. Just a little bit more. For better foyer distribution. Notice how clean. Clean, nice flat bottom for definition. Notice how well the spacing occurs. In terms of that branch. This is a beautiful pine branch. Well executed in terms of its layout. And when you guys see this from this profile view. You're going to understand so much more. About the aesthetic decisions that I'm making. We'll come back to that at the end. And talk about those nuances. This is a beautiful pine branch. Secondary tertiary wiring complete. Okay. Our elongating species branch. Now we had some nuances on this elongating species branch. In terms of having all of these branches. Loaded up on the right side of the branch. And so when we're looking at this. And the movement that we put in. We put these branches on the exterior. Exterior portion of the movement. That we placed in the structure. This is a paramount thing to understand. To set ourselves up for a beautiful pad. And we talked about the size discrepancy. In terms of this smaller and this larger. We're going to go ahead. And we're going to strike that balance right now. In terms of placing the appropriate wire. Now 16 would be an appropriate gauge for this. 14 is necessary for this. So we're going to go 14. And we're just going to be very diligent. In our handwork. So that we take the pressure off of the finer branch. Now notice how I'm always using multiple fingers. I get that locked in. What that allows me to do. Is to come back here. Support that finer branch. So that I have total contact. Total control. I'm going to come in through here. And I'm going to go ahead. And I'm going to be buffering each one of those. Now we know that we've aggressively wired a branch. If we see the wire looking relatively straight. And we see the tissue of the branch. Sort of moving in and out of the wire. The branch maintains a really nice clean straight line. And our wire is working around the branch. It means we use the off hand correctly. To be able to support. And this is really where it starts to come in. To be significant. When we get into the finest portions of these. Now whether it's a spruce. A hemlock or a fir. We've got all of these needles. And there are some nuances to being able to get the wire through these needles. Without crushing too many of these needles. And you'll notice. That I'm going to be kind of finagling. And working my wire through this. To carry this out to the tip. And again the tips are wilting. Because we cut this branch off. I just need control of that tip. I'm going to stop here. Just short of the tip of that branch. Now that I've got that wire completed. I'm going to be taking a lot of the pressure. That could be exerted. Because these are wired together. And this is smaller. It's hard for this to bear the weight of this. So my off hand has to be particularly effective. In supporting and taking away a lot of that pressure. And you'll see. I'm just going to be maneuvering that wire. Through those pieces of growth. Now I've got to a point. Where I've got a fork at the tip. I'm going to go ahead. And I'm going to carry this wire onto the one piece of the fork. That is sort of an outlier. Or has the most length. Or has a little bit more droop to it. So that I can create a really nice lateral. Sort of distribution. On the same level of these two pieces at the tip. I don't want to wire that. I don't want to set myself up for having to wire that. So I'm going to go ahead and wire the one. That doesn't support its weight. That one sticks straight out. That's beautiful. That's exactly what we want. I'm going to avoid cutting that foliar mass. Now I can come back here. And I can wire these smaller pieces. And I'm going to go fairly fine. Now it's a very fine line. When we start choosing wire gauges. With elongating species. Because elongating species in particular. Have such a strong phototropic response. Which means they grow. Up towards the light. They grow bigger. But the other aspect of this. That you should be noticing. As you're looking at this. Is you should be saying. Gosh those are awful long and slender. And all of the weight is out here at the tip. On the foliar mass. That means that we need to use a slightly heavier gauge. Or else with rain. With wind. Over the course of the season. We'll see those tips drop. And if they drop. We're losing strength in phototropic. They really need. In these long branches. They really need to be propped up. It's why I chose this fur. As the example for the elongating species. Because without wiring this appropriately. We're going to be doing more harm than good. Not getting those branches up. To where the tip is facing the sun. And when we look at that too. The lowest branches. Are obviously always going to be the weakest. Because we're talking about very vertical. Apically dominant trees. Redwoods would be another. species that we've got to be very careful in terms of the wiring practice to keep the tips up on the lowest branches this is a big part of getting those lower branches to be able to hold their position and hold their strength when the apex is going to become so overly dominant let's organize this so i can see it you'll notice how much more my fingers are working on this to be able to maintain these really slender branches take the pressure off the branches working between the needles a lot of people get into elongating species thinking it's going to be less work quite the opposite if you're going to be wiring elongating species you're going to be doing a lot more work because you've got to really be careful these are species that hinge on a lot of water transport they utilize a lot of water They're geared towards the alpine. That water is a big cooling mechanism, particularly when we bring them down to lower elevations where we experience higher heat. They are geared towards intense sun, so that's not necessarily an issue, but we do need to maintain the tips up in order for the lower branches to be a part of the eventual bonsai design in that confined environment, okay? Still across the bottom, boom. My pads, boom, holding that foliage mass where it needs to exist, okay? And if we see that starting to loosen, we knock those off, it means we didn't give it enough of a pad. We can just add a little bit more bend to create that distance so that we can't dislodge that tip off of that pad, okay? I'm gonna leave this right here. I'll just give these sort of a generic layout into the main out, into the main out, into the main out, into the main out, okay? Give a little bit of a little something-something at the tip there just to get us. You can see we're already starting to create that pad. I'm gonna move into this next section. Okay, we've got this small fine guy. We've got this piece that needs to be picked up. We've got all of these sections. So I wanna really strategize in terms of close proximity while also looking at the ability for myself to be able to provide the sort of support that these need to face up and really gain that strength. Right now, I'm looking at this slender guy and this slender guy, knowing that I'm gonna have to use a little bit heavier gauge. This might be okay with an 18. We're gonna have to go with a 16 if we're gonna hold this length, okay? If we do that, then I start to look at these two guys, these two guys, and then this tip feels as though I'm not gonna need to necessarily wire it. It feels like it's gonna be a-okay as it is. I can organize these around it. So I'm gonna go here to here, here to here, and here to here. That's gonna be my combo, okay? Let's go ahead and execute that, see how that goes for us. All right, now, if I look at this, technically, technically, from the perspective of my combinations, this is far enough towards this piece, this is far enough towards this piece. I don't need to necessarily cross over. But I'm guessing that that is gonna be a struggle to lift this up because this is so slender and flimsy. This isn't gonna be able to support the weight of this when they're wired in tandem. So what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna create an extra loop and I'm gonna be looking at where along this branching do I have the opportunity to cross or, more appropriately, to disguise our work, where can I feed it through? Just a little piece like this, watch closely how I do this. I'm gonna be backing up the branch. This is very advanced, but I'm not trying to skimp you guys in terms of under-assuming what you're capable of. You still need to follow correct principles. Following the structural, spinning opposite. I've given myself that extra loop. When I'm turning clockwise, I continue turning clockwise, which means I actually have to go straight across the branch to intersect that shoulder. This is one of those exceptions in that same way. This is one of those exceptions in that same way. Same angle, same spacing, no gaps, where I definitely need to divert from that in terms of creating the function to be able to support my branches. This is maybe one in a hundred times that we're gonna actually have to violate those pieces. If we're gonna violate it, though, it needs to happen at a direct perpendicular. Notice how I came straight across. There's not some random angle in there. It's a direct perpendicular. In doing so, a lot of times it becomes not as noticeable to the visual cues of our eye. I hope I'm not setting you guys up to have all kinds of excuses to wire poorly. The whole design of this is to teach you guys the nuances of wiring properly, but it is tough. And this is where I feel like sort of the concrete, never cross, never do this, never do that. You can always, always find a situation where the function will outweigh and trump that aesthetic discussion. It's the long-term discipline, not giving yourself shortcuts, executing the correct application of structural wire in the process of applying it so that you plan out all of your different moves to be able to effectively wire any species of bonsai over the course of time. And you guys will see, the more strict you are with yourselves, the less of these exceptions you have to give yourself. But when you do have to give yourself these exceptions, you can make these exceptions look as though it was intentional or it should be intentional, but it won't be a noticeable error in terms of the final product of the tree if we're functioning with that kind of consistency and commitment to proper wiring practices, okay? So again, we talk about establishing that flat bottom. I'm gonna come up, because this is hanging off. I'm gonna hold that. Notice my index. I'm gonna hold that in and then out, in towards the main and then out. And I'm gonna do that on this level and on this level where this pair exists, okay? In towards the main and then out. All right, and you see what's happening here. Now, if I wanna just take this another step further. In towards the main and then out. In towards the main, out. In towards the main, out. I had already done that to those. Now we'll kind of finalize that. Feels really good. In towards the main, out. In towards the main, out. In towards the main, out. Ooh, sexy branch, sexy branch. Okay, now we're gonna go here, okay? I'm gonna cross over this, because this is so flimsy. Look at that. It doesn't ever support any of the weight of another branch wired in tandem. This is where we use that structural piece of wire to really benefit us. And notice where I cross, okay? So a lot of times when people start crossing wire, you say, okay, there is some function and benefit in specific strategic situations to crossing. And what'll happen is if we run this wire down this structural, if we carry it down here and we cross right here, it doesn't support this branch. By crossing right here, that creates the support for this branch. Where this shoulder is susceptible, if we cross right there, we're using that structural wire right there to reinforce the flimsier of the two shoulders. That's the appropriate technique and the appropriate way to utilize that deviation. Now again, spinning in clockwise, continuing in clockwise, I enter the side of the shoulder closest to the trunk here, maintaining that clockwise direction of turn, following that structural, maintaining that direction of turn, entering the appropriate angle, and continuing to carry forward in the same direction. As I started, all three of my checkpoints being hit, okay? I'm gonna be feeding it through these finer needles here, trying to avoid crushing. Now if you crush, you overlap these needles in here, what's gonna happen is they're gonna turn a putrid brown. This'll happen for spruce, this'll happen for doug fir, this'll happen for hemlock. You're crushing, you're killing those needles, and then you're trapping them underneath that wire. And a lot of people will say, well, why don't we go through and clean out all of the needles? Well, you have a lot of tools. You have a lot of spaces between these needles that naturally exist. If you can just be delicate and patient and find that space between them. Whoa, okay. Now we're to here, our last combination that we're gonna need to be hitting in order to give function to this. Let's go ahead and maximize the quality of this branch, wiring that effectively. I'm gonna gauge up. This is 16 here. I'm gonna go 14 here because there's so much weight on the tip of this that I wanna make sure I have the wire gauge to support that. Not only now, but also as it develops and adds more foliage mass. Okay, spinning opposite of that. Feeding through those needles. Not trapping those needles. Working hard, working hard. Good, solid technique. Okay, I've got an area of three here. I'm gonna go ahead and take the one off where I have foliage closer to it. Now I can carry this, and this becomes interesting. I can carry this onto the smaller of these two knowing I'm gonna have to support both. I'll carry that to the smaller one. I'll hit across the bottom. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna wire this guy out and then we'll be able to finish off that piece when I come back after I've got this 14 properly applied and I've got my anchor set in terms of my tandem branch combination. There we go. Always funny, whenever we were wiring Taxus, you know, a lot of the techniques that we've built at Mirai for our native material come from similar growth habits in Japanese material. And Taxus, the U, Taxus cuspidata in Japan, Bacata in Europe, has a very similar sort of layout of needles. We used to have to do this. It was always such a pain in the butt to wire Taxus down and in towards the main, out towards the sun. In towards the main, out towards the sun. Notice how dramatic that is. We may choose to pull this back over the top here and in fact, I think I'll go ahead and I'll make that commitment. What that would mean is holding that back by pinching that tip. We see how that gets us really nice foliar distribution. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna go in towards the main. Now notice, even with that cross, this is so weak that it's not really willing so I'm gonna support. See how I'm gonna support this? I'm gonna roll this branch up so that I get some elevation. I'm gonna roll this branch up in towards the main, out towards the sun, in towards the main, out towards the sun and see how I found that space? See how I found that space and that distribution? That's good wiring. That's good wiring, that's good styling. So what that allows us to do, I'm gonna go ahead, I'm gonna apply 18 gauge to that to pick those up. I'll be able to find that position that I need these to be right in here and you're gonna see a really beautiful dense, extremely dense, this was the sparsest looking branch that we were working on today and you're gonna find that this is gonna finish off as one of the densest foliar pads. This is elongating species in a nutshell from secondary tertiary wiring. You can carry them to a point of very beautiful aesthetic finality if you're just wiring correctly and hitting all of the marked points that allow them to really, really reach that beautiful branch formation. So happy I picked a Doug fir. Makes even the most proficient wiring people look like little kids. It's a wonderful species. Absolutely love Doug fir. One of the most untapped, underutilized species in North America. And I have no doubt, when I think about this and I think about the species in Europe that are dominant, I have no doubt there's species across the world. When you talk about all the leptospermum that exist in Australia down on Tasmania and you talk about some of the other really prominent species that exist in South Africa and some of the Mediterranean regions of the world, there's no doubt there's species that are not being used as bonsai that need to be used as bonsai or have the potential to be tremendous bonsai subjects. Okay, so I'm gonna come up. Into the main, out to the sun, dropping this down. Into the main, out to the sun, roll that over. Okay, notice how clean that is. Look at that pad formation, it's beautiful. I'm gonna pick this up just a little bit. Now I see the opportunity to roll in, carry that over the top, roll out. Notice that foyer distribution that we're starting to achieve there, really beautiful. Really, really beautiful pad, okay? Really nice, notice how clean that is now. I can start to carry that over the top. I can start to carry this to the interior. I'm gonna take off some of these weeping tips just so that we clean up the aesthetic for this stream. This would not be the time to be wiring an elongating species. But when we start to clean all of that up and you start to look at that aesthetic, I mean, that is an absolutely outstanding, stunning pad. Now one of the pieces of attention I wanna draw your eye to is the fact that they're all flat. Inevitably, spruce, hemlock, fir, redwood, we're laying them down flat, flat, flat, flat, flat, large, flat. Bald cypress, flat. We're laying all of these down flat. They're gonna phototropically be moving up. We pinch to create that contour. If we lay it down flat, even as they progress in age, a lot of times they'll either stay flat or they'll just have that slight curve and we may even continue to move those down flat so that we maintain control. Taxus or yew would also be the same in terms of its approach, okay? Clean that up so you guys can get a good look at that. That's a beautiful elongating species pad. Last but not least, our very sort of wilty, sad, cut-off pomegranate branch, feeling the impact of the lights in the studio. We put this major, thick piece of wire on. It allowed us to control. We said we wanted more freedom in a deciduous tree. We can have more levels. We can create a little more informality than we do with the conifers because the overall canopy is not these super-defined pads. It's choice portions, it's the size of the tree, it's the size of the tree. It's the size of the tree. It's the size of the tree. It's the size of the tree. It's the size of the tree. It's the size of the tree. It's the size of the tree. It's the size of the tree. So we've got a lot of choice portions of negative space distributed through that canopy, creating that informality. So we've got our structural piece on. We've got this beautiful dog leg right here. We're gonna start to create some multiple levels, and we're really looking for sort of this upright, sort of perched expression to the way that we form our deciduous tree. We still have to set the tone, though, for this tree to have the right kind of structure, which is two thicker pieces. Let's go ahead and start there, and we'll work our way through a deciduous branch secondary tertiary ramification. Now, or secondary tertiary wiring. Now, notice that I'm using aluminum on this. I'm using aluminum to avoid damaging the softer, thinner bark of the deciduous branch, okay? Aluminum tends to be smoother in terms of its texture under a microscope, has a lot less abrasion to the bark of the branch, which allows it to be applied. The problem with aluminum is it takes a thicker piece of aluminum wire to enable us to be able to handle this real thick structural setting, so we tend to get an appearance of a lot more wire on the branch than actually we would see if we use copper, which would allow us to apply a thinner gauge and would give us the appearance of less wire on the branch, okay? Nevertheless, we follow the same thought process, the same fundamentals, following our structural spinning opposite, entering the correct side of the shoulder. We talked about the fact that, in these pieces, we have the ability. Now, watch how I handle this rotation to get this branch down. I'm gonna go in towards the main and I'm gonna go out, but notice how I rotated that bend right there and it moved this branch laterally in terms of its place in the overall design. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna hit right in front of that shoulder as opposed to trying to get into this dog leg, and this is where wiring deciduous trees really starts to pull on your skillset. If we hit that point, we come across this dog leg very smoothly, and these dog legs are great. They're wonderful character in terms of deciduous branches. We've gotta know how to wire those correctly. That's one way that we avoid creating a total wire mess by trying to lunge across this in front of that shoulder. We hit behind it and it allows us to have a lot more control. Now, when we deal with deciduous branches, we don't necessarily need to be finishing our wire across the bottom because, in all actuality, we said, we're creating this kind of a tip. We want that upward, okay? We might choose to lower it a little bit to have control. That's up to us when we start the styling process. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna extend, and I'm gonna create a little bit more dramatic movement in this really rough first iteration of this pomegranate branch to be able to give us some interest that will continue to evolve as we build ramification on it. And again, this is a different approach than what we're taking to conifers, different nuance, and deciduous trees in order to create an interesting branch structure that starts to mature into a very natural feel over the course of time, okay? Still entering, still following same rotation, right side of shoulder, following the structural, okay, in towards the main, and I'm gonna come up and start to elevate that piece up into its own space, okay? And if these were still perky from having been severed from the original piece, then we would have a lot easier time fishing this wire through here. Not the ideal time to be wiring deciduous, just like not with our elongating species, but an ideal time to be discussing the secondary tertiary wiring so you guys, as your season goes on, growth starts to harden, you have the ability to handle that growth, execute the creation of beautiful branches with another level of the ability to wire, okay? So notice that I'm sort of bringing them in, out, but instead of trying to bring this branch down to this level that varied sort of level and those pads, little pad here, little pad here, that creates beautiful interest in a deciduous tree. We're really fostering and facilitating that kind of creation. Now once I'm here, I notice that I have sort of a conglomeration of branches, this one occurring at a point where if I remove it, I can combine these two now and create some interest in terms of how I'm gonna be styling this. We'll come back to that, let's go ahead and form this. I'm gonna come up first with my first movement in towards the main. As I go up, out towards the sunlight, I can create a little bit more interest in that structure of that deciduous tree. I'm gonna finish this one across the bottom, you can finish it across the top. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna finish off by combining these two tips, having control of that orientation of the ramification, not vertical but lateral, giving myself all of the different tools to be able to effectively create that finished pad on this tree over the course of time. Now with deciduous development, when we start talking about wiring and creating these pads, it's not like a conifer where we're gonna have to come back and continue wiring over and over and over again over the course of this tree's life. If we put in a really good solid structural wiring, we make the prunes where we've decided on pruning these back, creating these branches, and then we allow the response to that reduction of auxin at the tip of the branch. We allow that to sort of process through and provide that next push of ramification where there was one, there is two. This is true for broad-leaved evergreens as well. If we allow that to happen, we take that push out of all of these pieces, we get the push out from these interior pieces, and we wire that elongated growth down to create our secondary ramification, we wire once for structure, twice for secondary ramification, and then we move to clip and grow to be able to develop all of the nuanced, finer pieces of, development and shaping on our deciduous branches. That means that we can get away with two dedicated applications of wire. Okay, so now you start to see some of that interesting structure. Notice how much more jagged, a little bit less formal, a little bit less organized. This is good deciduous work. This is beautiful deciduous work. Okay, I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna wire these two pieces together. We're gonna wrap this deciduous branch up, and we're gonna come back and we're gonna talk about it. A few more nuances of secondary tertiary wiring that are gonna make a big difference for you guys in terms of your bone side practice and approach. Okay, so I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna go into the main, up, out towards the sun. Into the main, up, out towards the sun, and I'm gonna give just a little bit more, just a little bit more. Notice how this has come together now. You have these differing levels, you've got these areas where we're gonna have sort of, boom, boom, we're gonna have these differing pads with this level here, level here, level here, level here. This is an interesting deciduous pad. Notice how clean the wire is, how well it comes together, following all of the same concepts, changing our styling approach slightly to the deciduous model, changing our wiring approach to the elongating species model, changing our strategy to the pine model, handling the raw juniper versus the refined juniper in nuanced ways to be able to maintain that development. All right, so now that we've broken down that barrier, like that's a big wall that we just deconstructed in terms of how do we make a branch pad, right? And really simplifying it and distilling it down to those fundamental moves that you guys can all take and be disciplined in addressing when you're styling opens your mind to being able to, right? And like I said, it took me a long time to filter through all the information coming my way with Mr. Kimura. As I was able to do it, I was able to do it, right? I was able to understand different components. I could focus on more and more of the intricacies of bonsai. And now that I've taken that off of your plate, we can come back to some of the nuances of our branch design that allow us to truly convey in this secondary tertiary pad formation, the characteristics that we're seeing in the tree that we want to relay and convey to the viewer. And one of the big ones, when we start to talk about this is whether we're dealing with a masculine or a feminine tree and how we form the branch pads. Now that we know how to make a branch pad technically, how we artistically alter the nuances of that pad to meet a masculine tree with a masculine design or a feminine tree with a feminine design. Okay, and there are three major ways that we start to illustrate and convey masculine or feminine in the way that we design those pads with the moves. Still, those moves are a part of this, okay? But these are the ways that we can start to manipulate, right? We can start to manipulate that foliage mass to convey design, okay? Number one is width of the pad, right? Now when we start to look at the girth of a tree, a very slender tree that has a pad that is over 50% of its width, this is now a tale of two different stories. You have a slender trunk and this extremely wide foliage pad on it that says masculine in its design. Now we're starting to miss the boat in terms of design continuity for the viewer to interpret our work, okay? So when we talk about width of the pad, now we start to say how wide do we choose to make this pad be proportional to the nuances of the tree that give it its value and quality, okay? Feminine branch design, narrower pad. Masculine branch design, wider pad, okay? We talk about unify or dividing a pad. So we have a single structural component. Here's our trunk line. We have a single structural component. Do we form one very expansive wide pad on that that says masculine? I'm gonna unify all branches into this singular pad to make this very large singular foliar mass, okay? Or do we choose to take those branches and look at those points where we can separate those into two, into three, into four foliar masses if appropriate, to create a single structural component? To carry forward the nuances of the trunk and the characteristics of the tree into the branching to create that totality of design continuity, right? So that unification or that division to be able to build masculine or feminine foliar masses on your tree, okay? And the last one is the height or the thickness of the pad. So when we look at the profile of a pad, okay, and we've got our branch here, we have this sort of outward, length, and we have this upward silhouette when we look down, but we also have this top to bottom height. What is the thickness of that pad that feels and anchors that nuance of design that that tree's trunk and design is establishing for us to interpret, okay? So we have, in terms of the nuances of branch design to create masculine versus feminine, the width of the pad. Wide is masculine, narrow is feminine. The unification or division of a pad, unified is masculine, divided is more feminine. And the height or the thickness of the pad, thick is masculine, thinner is more feminine. Now we're starting to really tap into artistic concepts of design on the secondary tertiary level that allow us to truly execute design at a higher level. Okay, when we come back to the final product of all of our secondary tertiary wiring, we really need to discuss sort of the nuances of branch design. We talked about the nuts and bolts. We talked about the aesthetic creation of the fan-shaped pad. Inside of all of these, though, we have the nuances to be able to start to dictate the masculine versus feminine feel of a tree, as well as how we handle a raw versus a refined branch. Now, we have a very raw juniper branch here, and inside of this raw juniper branch, we also have what I would consider to be a very feminine-based design. And as we discussed on the whiteboard, feminine versus masculine, when we talk masculine, we're talking about big, wide expanses in terms of the width of our pads, okay? And notice how wide this is, how wide this is. Notice how much more narrow and individualized, structured. Another piece of that division of masculine versus feminine is where there's one creating two, okay? So seeing those multiple pads in a deciduous, deciduous lend themselves to a little bit more of a feminine pad design. So we talk about the width. Wide is masculine, narrow is feminine. So we see this. When we talk masculine, we see this narrowness. Feels very, very feminine. This is more of an elegant tree, a slender trunk that would hold this branch. Even when we compare our two refined juniper branches, notice how masculine and wide this feels. Notice how this has a little bit more of a narrow structure. Even inside of this, if we wanted to form two different pads so that we broke this up and we had two different masses, a pad here and a pad here, we would start to create more feminine design with that space in between the positive and the negative. So we talk about that in terms of mass, masculine, feminine, okay? So we talk about that in terms of the width. We talk about that in terms of unifying as a singular masculine mass versus dividing as two smaller feminine masses. And we also talk about that in terms of the thickness, okay? So when I roll this over and I start to show you guys that vertical, notice the flat bottom that gives us definition. Notice the tips on the raw tree are relatively flat with a slight inclination, but not dramatic, compared to what I'm going to show you on the pond. And notice how thin and sleek that branch is compared to what you're going to see in the more masculine pieces that I show you. This is a raw juniper handled in a feminine way with a narrowness in terms of the pad and a thinness in terms of its height, okay? And notice, too, how the tips are handled and the nuances of the design flat in that raw form. You'll see that tip start to increase in its inclination as we move towards more evolved and advanced branch shape. So let's go to that evolved and advanced branch shape now. Here we have the Hollywood juniper, the masculine pad that we've formed. I'm going to roll this up on its side, and now all of a sudden, you get to see that greater amount of height. You get to see that inclination of these tips, okay? This is carrying that maturity of that evolution and development as a bonsai branch over the course of time, carrying that maturity forward. And I'm going to just kind of roll this for you. Now, notice that we still have definition. We still have definition in the flat bottom, but the tips are not flat. They're definitely curved up to give us that nuance of age, right, that also increases the height and can create a little bit more of a masculine design, all right? So we have masculine and we have mature as compared to feminine and raw in the way that we've secondary-tertiary wired and designed these branch pads. I'm going to get rid of these, okay? And I'm going to come back to this guy here. Now, when we start to look at this from the side, we're talking about separation. We're talking about multiple ways that we divide, okay? If we want to break one massive pad into two, we can do so by changing the elevation of the two major structural pieces, changing the front to back of the two major structural pieces, or changing their spread. When we start to look down onto this, changing their spread. Now, notice that we still have... Oh, this got bumped a little bit. Let me just clean that up for you, folks. Okay, notice that we still have a nice flat, flat bottom with those tips up, but we've got those two different pieces that are starting to insinuate. Change in elevation, change in length gives us a definitive shift and spread, okay? This is a feminine branch design. And I'm going to bring the masculine of the same Hollywood back up, okay? When we look at these two, now you have masculine again. Now you've got feminine with those separate, okay? Now you see that division. This is drawing definitive differences and nuances of branch design based on where we're trying to go feminine or masculine in the design of our branching, okay? Let's take a look at another piece of masculine design and really pull on the nuances of the pine branch, okay? So I'm going to show you this pine branch. Now, notice we have a nice, thick, wide pad, very masculine in terms of its spread. When I roll to the side here, and let me just clean up a few of these needles. First time I'm seeing this, just the same as you guys, okay? We've got that beautiful bottom, nice, flat, even distribution. I'm going to roll this over. Notice the thickness that we get here with the body of those branches up top, that wide distribution around here. We start to see that masculine nature in terms of that thickness. Also notice that slight inclination to each tip. We really tried hard to give all of those tips that uniform inclination, create that beautiful, mature branch that we start to look at and value as a pine branch. I'm going to roll this around. I'm going to show you guys again. Now let's come back to the elongating species pad, right? Elongating species, masculine in terms of its width. Notice how we shifted, though, in terms of the thickness of the pad. A lot of elongating species, that nice, sleek pad. This starts to reference more to the environment. Snow load, talking about wind influence, very much an alpine concept and consideration. These are all things that, and when we talk about nuances of branch design, we're able to accomplish and manipulate the viewer's interpretation of our work based on the style that we put into, the way that we handle the ramification on the secondary and tertiary level. This is where we create the style, the dialogue, the environmental influences. All of those pieces, the trunk, and then the way that we utilize these branches to create thematic hints and discussions with that trunk and the style that that trunk gives us. And I'm going to rotate this around here as well. And we see that sort of real sleek, flat, masculine, wide, but thinner in terms of its profile nuance of elongating species. Pad formation. Okay, and last but not least, we'll come back to this deciduous tree. This is one of my favorites, all right? I'm going to roll this over, and you can see now the change in the elevations of that pad. You see this being here, this being here, this being here. We really start to create those different sections of foliage mass. More feminine in nature. When we look at the width, wide but separate. We've got spacing. We've got lateral separation. We've got some vertical separation when we look here. Very much a nuance of deciduous branch design and formation. I'm going to roll this over. Very much a nuance of deciduous design and branch formation. Really interesting to see all of the different ways that we can handle secondary, tertiary, wiring mechanics, consistent, styling shifts based on the nuances of design that we're trying to accomplish. I hope you guys have had a wonderful time. I hope this has been tremendously educational. We very much value your contribution to this program. We look forward to seeing your bonsai practice improve with the information we're giving you guys. Thank you very much. Have a great night. 
