John, everybody, hello, happy Friday. I believe Eve is in the chat with you today. Josh is producing the stream and the mothership. I've got Lonnie in studio. I think dothostroma as a pine issue that we all experience potentially, right? And maybe misdiagnosed, but we need to know when it is an issue and we need to know how to deal with it. And we need to know how we diagnose it to understand that for sure we are dealing with something that is an actual fungal issue, fungal-related problem, and all of the nuances of that. And that is why we are here today. Now, let me just refresh your memory. The last mini stream, excuse me, two mini streams ago, we did the spruce last week, which, mm, that tree is coming along beautifully. I can't wait to photograph that for social. So the spruce coming along beautifully. The week prior, though, we talked about abiotic issues. We talked about problem identification. We set some parameters around how we identify problems, okay? Now, this is a ponderosa pine, relatively rare ponderosa pine in terms of the mother-daughter style. Been at Mirai for a long time. This is part of Randy Knight's personal collection. It's been shown in the national show. And this is a tree that we did a full sheen changeover and really kind of thrived the first year. And then we started, over the course of really wet, warm winter last year and this spring, started to see some nuances and fungal issues. My guess is repotted and then treated with the compost extract, which was just a little bit too much biology, put the good and the bad in, and now the tree inside of the root system having a little bit of a tussle. I think the tree is coming out of it, but I do want to talk about Dothostroma because this is a textbook opportunity and a textbook moment. Repotted in a very susceptible state, recovery from repotting. We treat with this compost extract, a lot of biology, good and bad, but you had a tree that didn't have all of its defense mechanisms up. And that was the entry point for Dothostroma. Do I repot? Do I go back and do these other things? Let's first talk about identification. Let's talk about how the susceptibility is created and then let's talk about how we remedy Dothostroma. So first and foremost, when we looked two weeks ago, we had a very similar kind of yellowing tips. We had banding on the tree and we're looking at that tree and we're saying, hey, this definitely has what we would typically identify. And go ahead and come in tighter, Lonnie. This definitely has what we would typically identify and you can see that discoloration. Very, very similar to last week's tree, right? And we're saying, or two weeks ago, right? And you can say, ah, this is fungal. Now what we walked our through, what we walked ourselves through last time was that in fact, there were no fruiting bodies. There were no sexual reproduction, et cetera. And consequently, we recognized over the course of that time that that was actually a nutrient deficiency when we broke it down to the utmost degree of analysis, right? Now I want to come back in tight. Go ahead and bring me back in tight here. So when we start to see these needle discolorations, we immediately want to be looking at it. And there's just a little bit of a shimmer of light that you see happening right here at that brown band where we start to see some of that damage. You see that whiteness. That is sap. And that is sap emerging from that region. Now just because we have a band and we have sap does not mean we have disease. This needle could have been broken at that region, okay? But when I test the flexibility of that needle, notice that it doesn't fold at that region where the sap is coming out. So that's not a break, to be sure. And that sap on that band with this needle discoloration, I'm automatically thinking, ooh, I've got banding, which means I have some sort of health issue. It could be a nutrient deficiency, right? But when I look at the immediate indication or the immediate symptom, I am seeing something that is indicating that reproduction is taking place or the needle itself has ruptured, okay? I'm just going to tuck that into the bank. Now I'm going to look at the entirety of the crown. And here's what's interesting about dothostroma. When I look at the upper canopy, although we have a few needles that are coming off, when I look at the upper portion of the canopy, I don't see nearly as much of that infection. I don't really see it when I get into the side of the canopy here. You'll notice there's two and three-year needles on the upper portion of this tree. There's a lot of density in the upper portion of this tree. As I continue to rotate, though, we start to see the areas that become sparser. And as we kind of move down the tree, we get to this point in this secondary trunk where we literally have an entire section that's virtually lost all of its needles. Now when we talk about needle cast, okay? Or excuse me, let me pull back. Now when we talk about identification of a pathogen, right? Last time, two weeks ago, we recognized that the symptom of the tree, the needle banding, and the discoloration was widespread across the entire tree. Same in the canopy as the lowest branch, same on the interior and the exterior, same on the front as in the back, left as in the right. So we recognize that apical region of the tree was impacted. When we look at this ponderosa pine, we recognize, hey, apical region of the tree looks really good. Are there infected needles up there? There are definitely some brown tips and there are definitely some needles with banding that have sap emerging from them. But definitively, not a heavy infestation of dophostroma in the upper canopy of this tree. So we have one region that is growing with literal normal health, right? Few discolored needles here and there. Do I panic about that? Absolutely not. But when we start to step down through the layers of this tree, we start to see more and more needle shed. We see more and more needles that have browned, more and more needles that are banded, more and more needles that have sap emerging from them. And we recognize, oh, wow, we have an uneven distribution of the symptom. Automatically, when we start to see an uneven distribution of the system and an irregularity to the pattern, right, now we are talking about an insect or a fungal issue. This is the moment where instead of an exposure, right, southern exposure, northern exposure, this was shaded all year and it got weak, that's definitely not what happened here, right? Because this side of the tree would also have to be weak. This side of the tree would also have to be weak and we have total photosynthetic efficiency here. Notice that. There's no impediment, no branches above it that is completely inside of or outside of being shaded out. So it can't be an exposure thing because this side, right, we have sunlight penetration. This side is healthy. This side is healthy. Okay, cool. What about maybe chemical overspray? Did somebody miss with the Roundup? You know, did we don't really spray Roundup, but if we did, did somebody overfertilize? Did we miss watering one portion of the container, right? These are all the things that we kind of start to think about, but Roundup would leave a definitive pattern. You would see the spray pattern of an herbicide on the tree. You would see the overspray pattern on the tree and all of a sudden, instead of irregular distribution, you now have a consistency. You have a defined line. You have dieback that is definitively related to a geometric or regularity of application, right? And we can start to take that out of that irregular pattern and put it into a regular predictable exposure-related concept, right? And automatically, we move from fungal issues and pest and disease issues and we start to look towards more of those abiotic issues. Human blight, human error, some sort of chemical misapplication, et cetera, right? But again, as we continue to kind of rotate and we continue to kind of look here, we notice, well, these lower branches are pretty sparse too, okay? But the upper pieces are relatively healthy. So we have a similar pattern here on the kind of opposite side of the tree, you know, and when we continue to rotate, oh, look, this major branch down here is doing okay because there's so many pieces of ramification, but it's virtually lost all of its secondary needles. It continues to lose secondary needles. And when I look at those secondary needles, I see the loss of color, but most importantly, I see that sap. I see that banding. I see that brown banding right there. I see that brown tip. Look at that white sap, right? That is an immediate indication that we have had sexual reproduction and spore production out of that infected region of the tree. When we start to notice this irregular distribution and we start to notice that irregular distribution, but it is fungal, it is following a little bit of a theme. Upper branches seem to be strong. Lower branches seem to be a little bit weak. Noticing and acknowledging that those pieces of the puzzle are in play, we start to think, how is that happening? What is causing this? And here's what we know, right? If we are getting infection in the upper canopy of the tree and there is distribution that is occurring, naturally the water droplets from the upper portion of the tree are going to be percolating and moving through the foliar canopy and they're going to be deposited on the bottom portions of the tree. Now, how are spores distributed throughout a tree? They're distributed by wind. They're distributed by, potentially, human beings touching the tree while it's wet and distributing the spores as a vector of spread. Or, they're distributed through rain. Rain splatter, rain drops, runoff, etc. And we see that definitive pattern of the lower portions of the tree accumulating a greater fungal load of spores and therefore shedding, needle casting, more needles than the other regions of the tree. Irregular distribution was the kickoff. The acknowledgement of where the banding occurred and the irregularity of the banding, really high down low, not so much population of banding up high, we have an irregular distribution. And when we see those lower areas more greatly infected and we see that sap spec at that band, all of a sudden we start to say dothostroma. Now, dothostroma is an interesting disease. They call it red band, right? It's a needle cast. There's also Lophodermia, which we do typically deal with. And you see that there's still needles falling off. Now, the fascinating thing about fungal issues with a plant is that fungal issues don't necessarily mean that the plant is going to die. They don't necessarily mean that these branches that have lost a majority of their needles are even going to die. Because one of the great things about fungal issues is fungal issues are simply attacking that needle mass. They're simply attacking that infected piece that has that protein, that has those amino acids, that has all of those nitrogen, magnesium, iron, phosphorus, potassium, all of that. They're feeding off of those resources. The pathogen, the spore, lands on that needle in the springtime while it doesn't have a cuticle. As it's emerging from the tree, right, you get rain, you get spore distribution, you have population incrementally increasing. It lands on that soft, supple needle, right? We have this situation where the root system when we have that spore germinate its little roots, its little hyphae that infect that tissue that has no cuticle or no protection, we don't have a response mechanism set up in the roots because we had just repotted this tree and then we applied a compost extract last year. And so we have a weakness. We have a lack of capacity for the tree to protect itself. And we get a continued trickle-down effect of that spore population over the course of a wet, warm spring that's in the wheelhouse for those spores to germinate, typically when we talk Dothostroma, 50 to 65 degrees is your wheelhouse. This is the basic average temperature of Bonsai Murai over the spring season, and we also had rain all the way into July. These things make sense. As I'm going through and I'm saying, oh my gosh, do I need to repot? How do I handle this? What's going on? I've got Dothostroma, irregular distribution, I've got sap on the banding, which means that it's gone through its sexual maturity and produced spores, and that explosion of spores is what caused that sap to bleed out. The lower branches and the lower pieces are so weak, they've lost all their needles. Do I repot? What do I do here? Now this is where we have to understand the knee-jerk reaction. Once we identify something like this, spray it. Chemicals, chemicals, chemicals. That's not going to help anything. Let's just be really, really honest about this. Any of our pine-related diseases, Diplodia, Lophodermia, and Dothostroma, are three major. Diplodia being pine tip blight, Lophodermia being yellow needle cast, and Dothostroma being red needle cast. Any of these three pathogens, once we see the tissue infected, we are already too late to solve that issue. We are already too late. It is past the time that tip is infected. You don't get to fix it. But what we can do is we can start to look at ways that we can adjust the health of the tree to number one, raise its tolerance. We say ultimate health is sourced from the container. Balance of water and oxygen is what gives us ultimate health. We recognize in our pines specifically and especially, microbial activity in addition to and as a result of the balance of water and oxygen is what gives us that source of immunity. Mycorrhizal relationships, beneficial fungi in the container, increased surface area for water and nutrient uptake, which gives more resources to fight off this disease. In addition to that, the junction where the fungi enters the root and forms that mycorrhizal relationship, when the tree experiences stress, produces an amino acid that then is transported to those regions, helps compartmentalize, helps kind of sterilize and isolate that unit and prevent that fungal issue from spreading. Why is the top not more diseased? It goes beyond. This goes beyond when we start to talk about the trickle-down effect of the fungal issue. The top is not as diseased because it's not getting the continual load of spores, but the top is also not as diseased because it has a greater exposure to sunlight, a greater exposure to airflow, and in those two things, a greater transpirational rate. Now when we say a greater transpirational rate, what does that mean? It means it's losing water faster with its exposure here than down here in the lower portions of the tree where it was more heavily hit. And if it's losing more water, it's moving more nutrition and resources with that water. It's moving auxin with that water, which is what forms the apical dominance. And it's also moving whatever kind of fungal symbiotic relationships we have in the container, the areas that are strong and with needle mass are also moving those amino acid response mechanisms at that mycorrhizal junction in that root system to that portion to be able to compartmentalize and wall off that infection. Top got taken care of. There is disease in the top, definitely not as pronounced. Second and first year needles are both intact. But as we move back down the tree again, coming back, we look at these smaller pieces and we zoom in here and you're going to notice that all that is left on these pieces is the very small weak amount of growth that occurred this year. All of our second needles, all of our second year needles, all of our third year needles, which we would expect third year needles to be shedded now, all of our second year needles are gone. Those are the most greatly impacted by the ophiostroma. And you can even see there's still a few needles that are in that attrition sort of pattern right now that are brown, that are banded and that are probably going to be shed. But for the most part, the first year needles do tend to have a little bit more resistance and this is why the first year needles still remain on a majority of these really weak damaged branches. What do we do then? You're saying if we see it, it's too late, right? We need to improve balance of water and oxygen which gives more fungal content. The apex is strong. The bottom is weak. We need to prune the apex. Do we pluck off all the infected needles? How do we go about remedying this? Number one, don't pluck off all the infected needles. This pine needs as many needles as it can possibly get. It needs to move water. It needs to move the resources that allow it to defend itself. First and foremost, our priority when we started seeing this, tilt the tree up on an angle, get a rapid exchange of water. Water out of the system, oxygen in. Once it dries out, we set it down. We thoroughly saturate that. Once it's thoroughly soaked through, we tilt it back up, water out, oxygen in. Balance of water and oxygen, we've got to re-achieve balance of water and oxygen. What does achieving the balance of water and oxygen do? Well, it creates the opportunity for new fine roots to grow. Oh, okay. A new fine roots to grow. Don't we want beneficial fungi to occupy the container? Should we be fertilizing them? Hold off on fertilizer. Because when we talk about beneficial fungi, by creating the kind of oxygen rich environment, that encourages new roots to grow, those new roots that are growing are going to be producing those sugary root exudates upon which the spores of the beneficial fungi grow. So if we're not getting new root growth and we just keep fertilizing, fertilizer does not solve this problem for us. Watering a ton does not solve this problem for us. Generating new roots is where the baseline recovery system begins. Okay, up on an angle, oxygen in, water out. Thoroughly saturated, water in, oxygen out. Up on an angle, water out, oxygen in. And that's the cycle that we start to engage with to assist in recovery. Okay? When do we know that we can stop that? When we get to a point where this tree is starting to produce a robust amount of new needle mass. And that might be something that we practice for 12 to 18 months to triage a tree through the dothostroma issue. That's okay, right? This is a part of bonsai. You signed up for a highly labor-intensive activity. All right? In addition to that, we do need to be very cautious because we do not know when the roots are no longer susceptible. We do not know when we've started to accumulate the kind of microbial activity that's going to give that immunity response to the infection that's attempting to penetrate those new needles. And so come next spring, when we get to next spring and new needles are emerging, we had eradicated dothostroma at Mirai for five years. We have not seen dothostroma. This is the first year that I've seen dothostroma, which means it had to have started last year, right? And we've had two consecutive springs that are long, wet, and warm. And this is perfect breeding ground for dothostroma, right? We also had the weakening of the compost extract application. We underfed our trees after that because we didn't know physiologically how to respond. And this created this chain reaction and this susceptibility, okay? So come next spring, as those new needles begin to emerge, this is when we start to lean on. Something like a copper fungicide or probably more importantly and more effectively, a daconil fungicide. Daconil being the best protectant coating for those needles to stop the growth of dothostroma. And we're protecting the new growth. Now next fall, are we gonna see the second year needles of this tree, the first year needles this year, second year needles next year fall off because they're infected with dothostroma? Yes, they will fall off. The infection of dothostroma is two years, okay? We will get another spore production next year. Well, don't we have spore production this year? Yes, we do. And this is where dormant spray comes in. To understand that a tree dealing with fungal issues would very much benefit from the treatment of a dormant spray that would knock down and suppress those spore populations. And then to protect that new growth next spring would be the double whammy to starting to treat this issue. But what I want you to all digest is that coming back in after the tree is in this state, plucking off all of the infected needles and saying, this is how I'm gonna fix this problem. Touching it while it's wet or hammering it with chemicals is not going to get you anywhere. And in fact, will probably be more detrimental than good, right? And so we start to build our knowledge of how we recover from something like this with a very slow and steady and methodical educated approach to the treatment of dothostroma, okay? I'm gonna do a recap for you because there's not much to see here, right? There's a tree that's suffering. We look at this and we very quickly recognize we've got pitch that's emerging from the needle sites. We've got irregular distribution throughout the canopy of the tree. We have a very intelligent mechanism in terms of apex versus lower branches and rate of infection. All things say, yo, you got dothostroma. Last year, we had the compost extract. This tree had been repotted in addition to that. Boom, boom, double whammy, weak root system. Can't respond. Okay. And how are we going to treat this now? We're gonna continue to improve the root health by increasing the balance of water and oxygen on the oxygen side of that balance system, tilting up after we water, setting down to thoroughly soak when we do choose to water, and going right back up so that we increase the rate of oxygen penetration into the soil system. Come this winter, we're gonna be applying a dormant spray, knock down spore populations because we do have an expanding issue within this tree and across, I would say, a handful of trees at Mirai are really suffering to this degree. We have about 900 trees. I can deal with a handful. There's always a handful of crises at Mirai. All times of the year, 900 trees, you've got a handful of crisis all the time. Okay. So this is nothing new. It's just how do you respond. That dormant spray is gonna suppress those populations and come next spring, still up on an angle and then down, up on an angle and then down. Balance of water and oxygen is gonna continue to be this theme until we build this tree back up into a really strong, really strong, durable resistant system. And we'll be treating with Daconil every seven to 10 days as long as those new needles are emerging when they're very, very soft, lime green, susceptible, no cuticle formation, right? And we will be focusing on the weaker areas of the tree having that southern orientation to give them the best opportunity to grow, to stimulate the movement of water and resources and to recover their needle mass so that they can start to regain that strength, regain that energy and once again contribute to the aesthetic of the tree, right? This is one of the diseases inside of bonsai and we talked about this two weeks ago, is most misidentified and even if it is correctly identified, is most mishandled, okay? Because there is not a strong understanding about when infection occurs, what needles it's infecting and how we handle that infection. And to understand this about pines, especially our native pines, you see this in Europe, you see this in Japan, you see this in North America, right? This is an issue that exists everywhere on pines, dothostroma. It is eradicating native stands of pines in the natural environment. It impacts nursery culture to a very significant degree. It's a landscape issue throughout North America and the Northern Hemisphere and when we have it in bonsai, we have to understand how we respond. Number one, how we got here. Number two, how we identify and number three, how we respond. And now you have all of those tools to be able to make those decisions and accurately address your tree's issue to give it the best chance of recovery. Okay? We're going to come back and we're going to do this with several more pathogens over the course of this winter because these things, when we try to talk to bonsai professionals about them, when we try to find information on the internet about them, when you WebMD the health of your tree, the resources and the reasoning behind a lot of the solutions that are offered in that conversation are not related to bonsai, do not understand the precarious nature of bonsai cultivation or are coming from homeopathic or I would say unsupported methodologies that people have used in the past to deal with it, right? And that's really where understanding the mechanism, understanding how it got started and understanding how we finish this to once again set Mariah up to be void of Dothostroma for another five to seven years stretch. This is a paramount thing to be able to save your bonsai and get them back to a state of health because no matter who you are, where you are and how good you are, you are always going to have a tree that can get sick and being able to respond in an educated fashion and to not fear, to not fear that happening. I'm not afraid that this tree had Dothostroma as it was shedding needles this fall and I'm talking three quarters of the needles on the tree are shedding. I'm looking at it and I'm saying, I see what's happening here. I see, let me think about the previous two years of growth. Yes, I see where this probably started and, you know, what are my responses going to be? Yeah, we'll fix this. I'm not worried about it. We'll deal with it. We'll deal with it. No fear, education, lack of reactivity, just slow and steady. Slow, steady, intentional and deliberate actions to get this tree back to health. Okay? You've got the tools. We'll continue to hammer on some of these disease related issues. So that you have a very thorough knowledge and you expand your toolkit to respond to them. But Dothostroma, check that one off the list. You're now prepared to deal with it. You have the information that you need and we'll be able to respond favorably. Okay. Thank you everybody. Have a great weekend. Thank goodness it's Friday. I'm happy it's Friday. And we'll see you next week. Okay, bye. Subtitles by the Amara.org community 
