All right, here we have a Bucita Espinosa, more commonly known as a dwarf black olive. Does not produce olives. I bet you can't even tell right now that this thing is nearly in full flower because the flowers are literally the size of George Washington's nose on a quarter. That's my story. I'm sticking to it. As far as the design of these, you really have a lot of leeway. You will see these in a magnitude of designs. These are native to the Caribbean areas, more specifically like Bahamas and Cuba. A big reason they come to Florida, a lot of people think that they are an old school native to Florida. Maybe there has been evidence of them here at one time, but when I asked some of the people like Mary Madison, who did bonsai up until 91, she had never seen one naturally growing in the Florida environment. Mary. To add to this. Mary had a permit to collect these from the Bahamian government. A lot of the ones that she brought in, some of the bigger ones, she collected right there in the Bahamas. Brought them back on a boat. Once other early startup businesses began decades ago, they got wind of what she was doing. They went down there and they started collecting them illegally. The Bahamian government caught it. They took everybody's opportunity away. No one was allowed to collect them from that point on. It literally took one instance. It was a huge incident to ruin what could have been a more powerful presence of these for bonsai. If you're in one of the Caribbean areas, this is something you're probably really excited to see because this is a tree that you identify in your native environment. In Florida, we can only dream of what these are based on photographs or if we see someone come from the Caribbean areas. But as far as if you're there and you're tuning in right now, this is something that I've been wanting to give to you for a long time. This particular tree is owned by us here at D&L. This was started from a very young, underdeveloped, not much bigger than what we consider a cutting. Speaking of that, in terms of propagation, these do not propagate well. Cuttings are very difficult. Air layers are very difficult. When I was in my early stages and just seeing like, well, they told me I couldn't air layer, but I'm going to try. That's what you do when you're learning. It would take me 12 to nearly 15 months to get something to root where it had enough roots where I could actually remove it from its mother. At that point, even still, maybe four out of 12 took. They are not easy to propagate. This is one of the few things that we actually grow from seed. How we accomplish that is we will leave the trees. Yes. one spot, protected from the wind, protected from the elements. We'll put a tray underneath it, a very shallow tray with just an organic soil base, typically in a higher peak content that way you have a better draining, less fully saturated soil. We'll just allow the seeds to drop and to sprout. Once they get big enough to remove, we separate them out and we grow them out from there. Most everything else is done from a cutting, especially when you're talking a tropical. This is one of the ones from seed. They are slow to develop. As far as where you're going to get one, if you're in one of the Caribbean areas, you can probably go and collect one. If you're not, if you're in Florida or other parts of the country or even not in the United States, you almost have to find a supplier for them. If we ever put out, say, just a dozen of them at the nursery, as soon as somebody gets wind of them, they're gone. It may take me years to produce more to get them to a decent enough supply. We actually can work on them for bonsai. Highly desirable. You can hopefully tell just by looking at it how unique they can become. This adds to that desire. This particular tree started by David Van Buskirk. This is a ... We'll be conservative and say probably like a 25-year project. It's not so long, but if you think about some of the tropicals that you've seen me do in videos before, 25 years would be trunk size. I mean, it would be four or five times this size. This, because it grows slow, it's more about the unique character that you utilize more so than create. These will kind of zigzag out. It has almost a small Brazilian rain tree type character where they kind of zigzag and they create patterns. You're really just wiring to create planes for the branches. They're not so much going to thicken this way, they're going to elongate. It's really that downward appearance. Or those almost like blade-like nature of the actual branches. Some of this, I'll do a very small amount of trimming. It doesn't need very much right now. As far as pests, they don't really have them. Maybe in some parts of the world, there might be something that specifically thrives off this. Here in Florida, I don't have an issue with anything. If you ever have an issue with trees, typically it's right when that new growth pops out. There's no cuticle. There's nothing to protect it. So it's an easy target for an aphid. As soon as that thing hardens off, it's done. Aphids, there's nothing they can do to get into it. This has a very hard tissue. As far as clip and grow, that's going to be the way to go with these. You might wire, like we have up here, an apical area where it's still a fairly juvenile, but we need to kind of directionally move it. So small branches, you can get away with it. But as far as the general structure, you're not going to go crazy on wiring for it. Okay. Okay. So that's a good one for a stylistic approach or just for feasibility for the species. So what I'm going to do this tree real quick is just a little bit of maintenance, nothing crazy. And then we're going to show you a pre-bonsai form, and then a completely different style that if you're in the Caribbean areas, you might identify with. So as far as this, because we're talking about like almost like a blade-like appearance, a very flat kind of elongated branch, I'm going to look at bottoms first. And then if there is an opportunity to cut something off, I'm going to go with the bottom. Okay. And then if there's something on the top of the pad, I will. But generally, I think from a simple two-dimensional view, you can get a pretty good understanding about the thinness of these branches. So downward stuff like here, here, I'll pop that off. Right here, we have a little bit of elongation of this branch. So we want to take that one back just a little bit. So this one's not shaded out. Yeah. There's one of these over here over there. Yeah. So you're going to go in and you're going to put the three times over there. Right. Oh, I'm sorry. Okay. . Are you ready? Yeah. So I think I'll do the back now. Yeah. Okay. And then there's a little bit of these two of these. Yeah. So I'm going to go ahead and take that one. Yeah. And then one of the other branches, the ones that are in the middle here, so we're going to go ahead and I'll take the top out. Okay. . Yes. So we're going to pull this down. Okay. Alright, guys. Perfect. All right. Thanks. Thanks, guys. Have a good day. that's a flower right there so tiny it's small enough where I can literally put a flower in his hair there you got a flower in his hair you you okay so just to do a recap real quick this is a Bucita Espinosa it is a dwarf black olive these originate as far as for us here in America closest thing is the Bahamas Puerto Rico Cuba these do very well in Florida a lot of times people think that they are a Florida speaking species we don't have any direct evidence of that some of the oldest collectors in Florida have never seen them in the wild but because of the relationship to the Bahamas and stuff like that it's not impossible to think that maybe they resided here at one time on the coast and the development got rid of them it's not one of those trees that's like amazing out in the yard because it grows with such a unique character there is a different variety of this that has much larger leaves that is used for landscaping but it is almost never used for bonsai itself the species it's a Bucita Espinosa it's a Bucita Espinosa it's a Bucita Espinosa it's a tropical a tropical broadleaf which means it does need protection from the cold you figure 40 45 degrees is kind of the limit as far as what it can take from there it's going to need protection when it comes to working on them each year you really need the night temperatures to exceed 60 65 that way your days are warm enough to begin work they look the best when they get to that closer to peak heat of wherever you are in Florida you go central Florida up it is a four-month year four months a year that you're going to have to protect the tree but if you're further south you're in more of a tropical environment you can pretty much roll with these all year long they're difficult to propagate your best ways from seed cuttings and air layers do not do very well at all or if you do get lucky they take a significant amount of time as far as trimming you know work with the pattern that the tree has naturally set out your primary branches wire them out allow the natural structure of the tree to develop from there by using clip and grow overall the species does very well for bonsai this is a this is a hot one for our island nations it's very unique character that that puts a different twist on what we know as far as styles from from Japanese culture so this is one of those trees that we you know where they come from there are not these perfect representations that of bonsai that you can do with the Japanese aesthetic because they simply some of them don't have a soft very curved nature at all until they reach a certain level of maturation in bonsai that takes time so yeah you set your initial structure you can put an initial curve or something in a primary branch but as the tree continues to develop maybe gets about pencil size you're kind of limited at that point as far as flexibility so overall it's great tree if you can find one they are very difficult to find because of the rate at which they glow grow if you're in one of the island nations and you're able to find one of these keep it forever because you'd be one of the lucky ones so as far as the species goes I hope all this helps and I hope you're able to take the species in a completely different route similar to what some of the island nations have on their take for bonsai here is another version of a dwarf black olive boseida espinosa this tree is again its native to areas of the Caribbean Cuba the Bahamas and stuff like that anywhere in those island regions you should be able to find this tree this is a unique example to Florida, you're going to see many trees styled in this way. This is an interesting conversation for me because oftentimes when this is described, we think of it as literati, but typically a literati is going to be a very soft, almost feminine-like appearance, but this particular tree, in the way that it naturally grows, there is no such thing as soft. So is that to say that you cannot have a literati because the species cannot grow in such a manner, or is this the best representation and what literati is to them because that's based on the material that they have? So I just wanted to show this one to kind of showcase that South Florida flavor that I think is very important. I think it's very unique, and I think it kind of encompasses what Florida is and where Florida is moving. To go a little further on this particular tree, I wanted to show this in a transitional point. What I mean by that is the old leaves are naturally falling away from the new leaves, and so they're not growing in such a manner. They're just falling off as the new leaves emerge. Could you go in and potentially remove the old leaves, even the ones that are still green? You could. Right now, they're still collecting energy, so it's better to allow them to remain, fall off naturally, because that helps the new leaves establish. It helps them grow quicker. So the old yellow leaves, they'll basically just fall off. You can just touch them with your hand, and the other ones, they'll come off within the next couple weeks. Probably within the next two weeks, this tree will be completely bare except for new foliage. All right, so now what we're going to do is we're going to look at a pre-bonsai, just a grown-out form of an olive, dwarf black olive, a Buceta espinosa. I mentioned earlier that these are incredibly difficult to propagate. The best way to capture these is seeds by putting a tray directly under them. After they flower, they'll create these little seeds that are very small, less than a quarter of an inch, and they kind of look like a plant, but they're not. And the key to doing this is to allow them to just root right there in the organic matter, and that is literally the easiest way to propagate these. I did also mention, too, that I did several air layers, and I had a very small percentage of success, and it took over a year to do. This is one of those air layers. It was originally, when it was air layered, it was about this tall. And it is, over the course of three years, this is all I've gotten out of it. leaves so there's not a high impact of growth happening there because there's only so much that they can do I'm gonna make some cuts on this it's a not a depressing act but it is kind of a bummer to spend so much time growing it out and then have to take it back but we're still creating taper you know we want the bonsai to look like a tree not to treat it like a bonsai so I want to be able to work with this species as best as it grows in a refined manner as much as I can so I'm gonna go ahead and make some cuts to get started this is a very flexible branch when they're in this stage so this one I will wire but I'm gonna go ahead and make some cuts now for taper I'm gonna cut it high and work my way down to see what looks best on the tree as I go I don't like to make any long-term decisions on the tree until I start working it back for taper and see what I have I don't like to style a tree here before I ever touch it ever clean it or ever taper it so and go ahead and make some cuts I'm gonna start right here the reason I'm deciding here is simple taper this is this is the fastest route to taper this is a long branch plus if I'm making the decision going forward that the front is gonna be concentrated over here then that branch is definitely going to go because this is something I can work with this particular branch in the back it would be in quite a leap to bring it all the way forward so i'm gonna make this first cut here bucidas heal fairly well it is good to protect the cut once the cuts made I would say that across the board on anything I would still групп with aME conterer if this weren't good enough for the mount especially on this, because it is a denser, harder wood, I would cover it. I'd go the extra step and put the duct seal on top. The bonsai paste is antibacterial, antifungal, but then also too, the duct seal that you find in the electrical department comes in a one pound block. That is just for shedding water. And if it holds up in the fluorescent environment, wherever you are, it should hold up there as well. My next cut, I'm gonna start high. I'm gonna come up here. There's still not a great deal of taper. We may very well end up on a lower branch, but I don't like to cut off a plan B. So I'm gonna go ahead and start at the top. Brace yourself. Two years, gone. But as you can see, you take it down. You can go ahead and imagine some wire here. We start creating that unique shape that really goes with the natural structure of the tree. This isn't one of those things you grow straight up and then you see the natural structure branching out. When you look at this and some of the photos and your still shots, it's very much looks like a, almost like a chemical pattern. So we don't want perfectly straight anything on this because there's nothing straight about it. From here, I'm just gonna kind of reevaluate. You know, I've got a little bit of an old cut here. It was not wound sealed. So it immediately slowed this branch because too much rot was being, it basically made access right here. So this would have to be cleaned back, touched up with a razor blade and wound seal would have to be reapplied. I'm gonna go ahead. I'm gonna go ahead and put structural wire on. I'm not concerned with secondary tertiary branches. I'm just gonna go ahead and get some wire on these. That way we can kind of lay them out. Once I get to there and see where these fall on either side of the tree, I'll make a final decision about where the apical area will be going forward. So, you can see here, the کہ이 액쇤 액쇤 액쇤 액쇤 액쇤 액쇤 액쇤 액쇤, which looks like this one, that's more than five inches along the wire. I'm gonna make a final decision on where these fall. And if it falls, then we're gonna speed it back up and you can see that it's more than five inches. So, this is just not gonna be a very good cut. And again, I'm not gonna make a final decision on where these fall. I'm just gonna put this in this middle part and then we'll just go with it. But anyway, I did get some work done. So there's a lot that we need to do on this plant. So please respect us. Thank you. Thank you. We made some reduction to the overall tree. I wired out the primary branches. I haven't really moved them yet. I pulled one down just to, it was going down anyway, but I haven't really directionally put it anywhere. So this is kind of where we've ended up. As far as right here, like I said, I haven't moved anything yet. It would be really awesome to get some budding back here. The best chance for this to heal and for that to bud back is to allow growth to exist past it. That way there's energy being pulled up to it. I'm going to clean this back, and I'm going to clean this old wound right here, and then we're going to go ahead and move these down. The reason I haven't moved them yet is because it's good to go ahead and do your razor blade cuts, do your wound sealing. That way you don't move a branch, accidentally hit the branch, and then you have to remove it again. So I'm going to clean these up real quick. And then we'll lay her down. And then we'll lay her down. Okay, so what we've done, we just did a little bit of wound seal here, and right here where we made some cuts. What we're going to do now, you know, as far as where is the top of the tree, we know where the top of the tree is. As far as how is it going to be styled, I do imagine this to be more upright. I don't want these to be perfectly level. I want this to be lower. It is lower. So I want that to be very obvious. And plus, the more you turn it, the more you kind of get that zigzagging pattern, which is perfect for this species because that's what it does anyway. So I'm going to leave this right here, and hopefully I can bend this while you guys are watching. This isn't an extreme bend right here. This is initial structure. We're setting the initial structure. We're not going for a completed tree in one get-go. These things, because they can create that very, very chemical-like structure, as they get older, that zigzagging gets a little softer. So on those initial branches, and there's one on the very mature version that we've shown where the branches do curl in a very smooth pattern, but that takes age. So what I want to do with this initial branch is I want to put that smooth curve in. That way we kind of start that mature look. Since it's the lowest branch, as the tree goes on, that will become softer and softer, and then we'll reach that maturized look sooner than we would. Because then we really only have to worry about secondary and tertiary branches. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. So, coming back to the tree, we've moved some of the branches down. We're just orientating them to encourage growth in those areas, so we start developing pads. We'll turn the tree slightly upright. It's hard for me to see kind of where it is right there. Ideally, I want the apex to be in here. This is too far of a stretch for taper, but if I want the best opportunity for good, strong back-butting here, I need something to drive growth into that region. So, I'm going to let this ride. All I did was lean it over with a piece of wire. So, the buds that I really want get full exposure to the sun. This is setting the initial structure for a Bucita Espinosa. It's very basic. You're just primarily doing the primaries, as I mentioned, and then set it out for sun, start tweaking it out from there. What I would do with this tree going forward is nothing but clip and grow. If it came to finer wiring, like tertiaries or even secondaries, I would do that when it was far more developed. I would probably do a little more than this. As you saw in some earlier photos, they developed that really cool chemical pattern so that will happen naturally across these branches. You really only need to maintain the bottoms and the tops where you want the two branches to fall as far as different levels of pad structure. Do you need several levels of pad structure on these? No, you don't. You can grow them where they're almost like blades coming off the tree. It's really what you're into. Whatever you go with on your design on these, always take into consideration has that interesting pattern to it. It's not a straight tree. So, incorporate that into the trunk and the branches will fall right in suit and be real perfect for that design. 
