When we talk about this idea of elongating species, and I know this is, you know, for everybody to try and grab onto this idea of elongating species. What is elongating species? Does anybody else call it elongating species besides Ryan? And how do you quantify this? And it's this big, murky area, right? And so I really wanted to wait until we sort of had a little bit more opportunity to talk about their nuances before we went back into this. But basically what we're saying here is we're dealing with species, whether they're coastal in origin, like a redwood, like a bald cypress, or foothills, like a dawn redwood, or alpine, like a larch, like a hemlock, like a spruce, like a fir. Okay, when we start to talk about this species, they have an epicenter of strength that is stored in their vascular tissue. It means over the course of the fall season, that tree, via all of the solar panels it created that year, creates a lot of sugars and starches, and it stores them primarily in the trunk of the tree, right? And I just heard an interesting thing from a student who is here for pine class that does a lot of work with hemlocks, and he used to work with the Forest Service, and he was saying that they did a study on the durability of Aves laciocarpa, subalpine fir roots, to the mountain hemlock roots, Pseudotsugum and Zecii, right? Or, no, what am I talking about? Suga mertensiana, right? What are you saying? Mountain hemlock, Suga mertensiana. Yeah, I'm sorry, Pseudotsuga, I was thinking Doug fir. Anyways, subalpine fir and mountain hemlock. And they found that mountain hemlock roots, even though they're adapted to the alpine, are super susceptible to really cold temperatures, subalpine fir didn't blink an eye, right? And so that goes to show you, like, that snow as an insulator, all of these different things, it's not necessarily the roots that are the epicenter of strength. And we know this, too, because we start to say, well, we can do fairly significant and heavy work on the root system of an elongating species if we leave the foliage mass big, robust, and relatively untouched. And we can come in and we can do a very heavy reduction of the foliage mass on an elongating species if we leave the root system untouched, okay? So what that's telling us is this is not the epicenter of strength, and this is not the epicenter of strength. This is the battery of strength. It's to be able to build the thing that facilitates the transport. But this is where your strength exists. And one of the things we see across elongating species, rapid thickening in the fall, massive thickening in the fall. We always see our hemlock, wire scars, spruce, wire scars, larch, wire scars. And we're like, oh, my gosh, these things grow so fast. That's because that's where their battery is that drives all growth, okay? Here's why it's important to understand that. This tree we've had at Mirai for three years now. This came from... This is from Todd Schlafer, First Branch Bonsai. And this is an old Jerry Morris tree. I don't believe Todd collected this. I believe it was residing with Todd sort of as an intermediate between Jerry and Mirai. And the tree always needed a little bit more of a battery and a little bit more of a foliage. And we styled it. This has been wired once by a Mirai student. Really enjoyed the design. This is the proposed angle. We'll come back and we'll sort of dive more into that design in a minute. But over the past two years, the one thing that this tree has lacked is interior budding. Now, a lot of times when we start talking about elongating species, we feel like pinching is the technique that gets us budding, right? And that's not true. Just the same as we feel like decandling on a multi-flush pine is what gets us interior budding. And that, too, is not true, okay? The only way that we get interior budding to occur... And we successfully... The only way that we successfully get a pushback of growth into the interior of the tree is to allow the solar panels or the foliage mass to expand, to harden off, to reaccumulate sugars and starches. And for those sugars and starches to load up into that vascular system over the course of fall. And with the growth of that vascular system, we get the presentation of adventitious buds. This is the opportunity, okay? Now, the only way to get those adventitious buds, once we do generate those buds... The only way to get those... The only way to get those to actually become foliage mass, right? And this is the same for every species. This is universal across bonsai when we get into the coniferous realm, okay? The only way to get those buds to actually turn into growth is to, once again, elongate, harden, allow that energy reaccumulation. But now, this time that the buds are present, we can come back, remove that tip of that auxin, and stimulate all of that accumulated energy from the... From the post-flush hardening, and push that back into the interior. And this is our big goal tonight. So, we've lacked those interior buds. We had it wired. It was long. It was leggy. It didn't have the foliage mass that we needed. For two years, we built this last year. We got back budding. We let it run again this year and accumulate a tremendous amount of strength. And now, tonight, we're going to come back in, take that strength buildup, and we're going to make that first prune to be pushing the energy... The tips of these elongating shoots back into what we built on the interior, because of those two years of growth, to start the transition of refinement. We're literally moving from development into refinement tonight with this Colorado Blue Spruce. Yeah, Picea pungens. Picea pungens, okay? So, as with any big pruning operation, whenever we dive in, we've, first of all, got to look at aesthetics, because pruning horticultural, pruning also very much aesthetic. I'm going to shift this guy so that we can... We can take a look at the front here, let's see. Okay, so, one of the things that really appeals to me, and let me just sort of play with this slightly, I want to make sure we maximize that angle and see the movement of that root. One of the things that appeals to me about this is this, there's a big root that runs uphill, there's a big root that runs downhill. These are both opportunities, we don't know which one of those is going to be more significant. When we go about the repot, one will definitively become a feature. One will become the core of the root system. However, when we have this kind of slanting, very major transition of visual mass, utilizing that length and playing on that thematic sort of alpine environment has always appealed to me as an interesting design opportunity. And so, when we come back and we start to look at this, I really want to set the tone for this entire design by compressing on the left, elongating on the right. Now, how far do I elongate? The way I elongate on the right, I don't have a super big trunk. The trunk is not super girthy, relatively slender. That slenderness is going to play a role in how wide are my pads, how long are my pads, how thick are my pads, and how many pads do I have, okay? And the only way when we start pruning like this to move from this big period of growth and push it back into the interior to really start developing that interior strength and starting to process and create those branches, the only way that we can set that tone is by starting from the inside. The only way we can set that tone is by starting with that branch that really defines sort of the shape and movement, that defining branch, that longest point of asymmetry, okay? So, this is where I'm going to be basically starting my experiment here and playing to see what is this stylistically going to look like, all right? Now, I'm going to rotate this around, and Josh is going to bring you guys in close here for a minute. And I just want to kind of show you the dynamics of at least picea pungent. But this is very universal for almost every spruce. When we get to this elongation, harden, prune phase, okay? So, when I'm looking here, you can see this shoulder right here where we have last year's tissue. And then this is where the bud existed that produced this year's elongated piece of growth. And we say, oh man, that is why I call it an elongating species. One singular, you don't see multiple pieces here. One singular elongated piece of growth. Most other species don't. Most other species, juniper, pine, would be branching inside of this. They would have multiple buds at the base. There are a few in here that have some multiples. But mainly, we've got to manage that to maximize the best of our ability to develop over the course of the season. And when we get that health, because we've built up that strength, if you can see right here, you get the presence of back buds along this stem. So, when we're pruning, if we decide to prune and maintain any portion of this new growth, that is to say, if we decide to not prune back the full branch back to another sort of smaller piece of ramification, our pruning decisions have to be made at these locations where we always have an adventitious bud that can take over. There's one near the tip. There's one in the interim. And that's all that we have on this big long stock. But cutting that down by 50% is a big major move towards that transition. We're always cutting to a bud or dropping back to a branch. We're never cutting in the middle. We're never cutting in the middle of something on an elongating species. We're always cutting to a bud or cutting back to a branch to ease that transition. So, I'm going to dive into this area here, sort of tweak some of these branches, and see if I can't get some organization. Now, at this point, when we start to come back and do this pruning, because the whole idea of the pruning is to be designing with that, we're transitioning from the developmental process, but we're also designing. We've got to consistently be looking at the other factors that play a role in sort of that design. So, we're looking at older needles. We're looking at retweaking the branches that had been wired in a part of the design to this point to start to formulate some of that structure that we can build from when we start the pruning process. Isaac wants to know if viable buds on spruce always have that caramel color, or is there ever a point in the development where they appear tiny and white, like on a larch? They will appear tiny and white, for sure. The caramel color is, well, I mean, so right now when we look at, we've got, I guess you're talking about this kind of caramel color here, and they can have, you know, different spruce will have sort of a different nuance to the buds that they form depending on the spruce, but this is very characteristic of spruce in general. Engelmann have a much smaller bud. You know, Blackhill spruce have a much smaller bud. Sitka spruce have a much smaller bud. They have a much larger bud, so it's dependent on the species, but yeah, it's pretty universal. They have a very strong similarity. Wayne wants to know if what spruce do well in Zone 8. Would spruce do well in Zone 8? I don't think Zone 8 would... Are there certain types of spruce that do well in Zone 8? So we're Zone 7b right now, and there was a point where they wanted to re-quantify where we're at in the Pacific Northwest as a Zone 8, and then they had like two super gnarly winters, and they were like, oh, okay, all the species that would definitively be Zone 8 are dead, so we're going to leave you guys as Zone 7b. But spruce could absolutely handle Zone 8, and I would say whenever we start to talk about, in regards to spruce, what spruce would do better in warmer temperatures, what spruce would do better in cooler temperatures, size of the needle is such a massive indicator of how well spruce are going to do in any given region. We say size of the needle because the coarser the needle, the more durable to heat. The coarser the needle, the more durable to drought. The coarser the needle, the more durable to root work. The coarser the needle, the more durable to wiring they are. And that's why we see the Colorado spruce becoming such a major, major pivotal species of bonsai in the United States, because it is our coarsest spruce species that we have to work with, and it is very, very durable. It's extremely durable to all of those conditions, so much so that that's what creates the character in the mountains, is that durability in areas where you would see other spruce species maybe not capable of thriving and surviving. We see Colorado spruce be able to occupy those environments and develop the character that they have and that these trees are really prized for. Okay. So I'm sort of working through this process of kind of getting the idea how long is this going to be and what is this going to look like. I'll show you guys some nuances to wiring your spruce once we get into this a little bit more in depth, but I first just want to get this area really figured out. What is this going to be? Is it in fact going to be? There's a chance, and as I'm looking at it, I'm kind of saying, boy, I don't know if that's really the best defining branch for this design. Maybe I short this. Reduce this significantly, and maybe I use this upper piece because I've got so much interior stuff in all of here that I could really compress on the interior, extend in the upper canopy. Okay. I am going to come back to this initial shoot that we looked at, seeing that that's growing outside of this area, and also acknowledging when you guys look into the interior now, and we started to say we built up this foliage mass, we get this interior growth. What does that interior growth look like? It looks like all of these fine shoots on the interior of this tree. Boom, boom. Fine shoots all along this sort of growth. Fine shoots in here. So we've got three, four, five, six interior shoots all in very usable. Notice that they're not all originating from one junction. They're originating from locations where now this will form a fork, this will form a fork. We start to see them originating from locations where they contribute to density, where this will form a fork, where we've got, we've got a top and a side to be able to select from. We've got them running up the branch here, adventitiously popping from older wood all the way up on the shoulder. And then if I open this up and I show you even a little bit further, okay, and it's a little, maybe a little dark in here. Josh, is that too dark? I can see it. Okay. So we've even got brand new pieces of growth popping from the very, very interior of this shoulder of this branch. This is why we allow this tree to grow and generate those solar panels. And this is also why we need to come back and now transition so that we don't continue to generate bigger and bigger growth and we now push the energy back into these interior shoots that we were able to create. Okay. So I'm going to go ahead and throw a little bit of wire on this guy just to finish this off and give us the shape that we need to start forming some of our decisions and we'll start the pruning process. Isaac says, if you're trying to achieve bifurcation and cut back to two buds, will they usually both activate or is it normally just the closest bud to the pruning location? That activates. So they will both activate because here's what happens. The auxin at the tip of the branch is suppressing lateral bud growth behind it. When you remove that auxin, there is no sort of dictatorial control over the growth in that branch anymore. And so all of the buds that are in a close proximity, the strongest buds of the buds that are in the closest proximity to that pruning decision will all be stimulated to see who will be the one that is able to access the most sunlight to photosynthesize as well as access the most environmental extremes in terms of wind and transpiration to be able to move the most water. And the shoot that accesses the most sunlight and loses the most water and transpires or, excuse me, produces the most sugars and starches is going to be the one that accumulates the most auxin and takes over. But they're all going to have an equal shot when you make that prune to be able to elongate and start to participate in that race. And that's where we come in and that's where we get bifurcation via the pruning process, okay? So when I'm looking at this now, do I keep these interior pieces? I'm going to start off slow. I'm going to start, I'm going to make this a slow reveal. Okay, that's significantly shorter. Feels not so committed, doesn't it? Feels kind of like, eh, you kind of want to shorten it. I think we got to go a little bit longer or a little bit shorter. And when we go a little bit shorter, I think it brings a lot of interest to the upper portion. I'm not so sure that I want the upper portion to be nearly as long as it is though, right? And this is where we've built up so much of this energy to be able to prune so much of it back. So let's keep going on that. This, how's that? Feels a little bit, almost like it's a little bit right though. Hmm, I don't know. Let's see what happens when we reduce right here. This feels a little awkward to me. Feels awkward to me if we're going to be keeping these things and we've got this interior, I'm going to show you guys this, okay? So when we're looking in this section here, Josh, if you can just kind of show a blast into this structure right here. Can you see inside of that or is it just a mass of branches? Okay, so we've got this kind of big, long, leggy branch that's hanging off here. We've got this much better structural branch right here. And then we've got this other big, long, leggy branch hanging off the back. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take off these big, long, poor taper, poorly ramified. Even though they definitely did, you know, when we start to look at this, they definitely did back bud. They gave us growth in every way that we would expect for the developmental process of expanding this and building all of these interiors. It worked. The rest of the branch was not of a high quality. So we take that off. Come back here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take this big, long, leggy guy off, okay? And so when I rotate back to the Y, that creates a little bit more clarity and a little bit more space. So now we can start to see how are these branches actually interacting out here on the tip to give us that length. How is that branch right there on the lowest portion interacting? And I'm going to say now I feel a lot more confident in shortening that branch on the lower right because that branch on the upper right with that clarity and that reduction of visual noise does have a lot of interest and a lot of beautiful movement, okay? Now that I feel good about that, we're going to come all the way back into... Whoa. Yeah. Yeah, things are about ready to get wild. Okay. All right, we'll eventually gin that piece right there. Okay, so I'm going to roll this towards the detail cam now and we're going to just sort of spice up this little piece and keep the pruning... Spicy. Spicy. Keep it rocking and rolling. Okay, so here again now, we want to shorten this. We don't want this big section to be out here sort of intruding on this pad. Whenever we create this kind of length, we go out, we come back in, we push back out again. And in that out, in, out, we start to achieve a really interesting design nuance. So as I'm looking in here, I've clearly gotten a lot of strength and health on this interior smaller piece here. I've got a lot more ramification as a result of letting it grow. I've got a lot more budding to choose from and utilize to be able to build branches with. That means that I can take off some of these bigger, longer pieces that haven't necessarily performed in the same way and don't give me the same level of ability to compact and compress. And I can come back in here and if there's any of these that are overly long or overly strong, which currently in this branch there are not, okay, but if there were, I could come back in here and try to reduce those to interior pieces or to buds along the central sort of growth stem of this year's growth and really enable them to be a lot more contributing to the design with their selected length, okay? But notice how that starts to tighten up that design in that area. So now we're here, here, and here. We've done some selective pruning. We've done a little bit of elongation pruning. That gives us a really nice tone to start to be able to build that design from. See how compact that is. That's good. It's really good. Notice that this is still competing with us for length. Let's come back in here and see if we can't shorten this a little bit more. No interior growth there. But I've got a nice bud. I'm gonna go ahead and show you guys this. So, Josh, can you blast me into this branch here? Okay, so notice how when I look along this, I don't have any buds growing along this piece. I don't have any buds except for the two at the very tip. That's gonna be something that we could build if we gave it sunlight, but it's a long kind of leggy branch. And then notice that we've got these guys out here at the tip. One of them lacks a bud. One of them has a weak bud. But we've got this guy back at the base. Spruce are very, very good about maintaining energy transition so that this will take on the sap flow that was being allocated to the other pieces. That allows us to drop this branch back. And when I go back to the wide, to Hunter, now you start to see that push in and now that run out. So we go long here, in here, out here, and we start to create that beautiful transition that generates an interesting silhouette. Yes, that does look nice. Okay. What do you got, Kendall? Matt has a question. Okay. Matt says, so if you prune back as you're doing tonight and the new buds aren't quite back towards the trunk as you would hope, what's the process to get the buds even farther back into the interior? Let it continue growing. We had to do a battery change. So if you want buds even further into the interior, you have to let it continue to grow because here's the thing. Listen, this is what you guys have to continue to understand. And I'm going to illustrate this. I'm going to illustrate this on this. Josh, can you see that really? Can you see that really well? Okay. So notice on the interior here, I've got buds popping here, I've got buds popping here, and then I've got growth all the way out here at the tip, and there's nothing in the intermediate area, right? Now this growth out at the tip, these are the product of these elongating shoots having these lateral buds. That's what these small guys are. Otherwise, these are just singularly elongating pieces. The farther from this interior piece here that this tip gets though, the farther from these adventitious buds that are created when we generate vascular tissue, this auxin of this tip gets. So once the tree starts to move or once the auxin starts to move away from the adventitious buds on the interior that are created, that's when they're able to grow. Or if we come back in here and we start taking off, you know, cutting back to those buds, obviously not cutting needles, but cutting these back to the buds or dropping these back and then cutting these guys back to buds or potentially even reducing this to an interior branch like this, all of those things start to push the energy back into these interior pieces, which is where you're saying that you're wanting that growth, right? So the way to get these is to allow it to grow. And what we did over two years, we said, listen, we have a long-legged spruce. It's not giving us interior budding. The goal isn't or the objective is not prune to get budding. The objective was grow to get budding. We grew it. It gave us some budding. We grew it more. It generated even more. And now we're transitioning that energy to those interior pieces. That's the whole focus of tonight. This is the developmental process of getting ramification built and interior budding developed in a conifer in general, but particularly in our elongating species. Whoa. Yeah. Big. Big idea tonight. Big concept because people pinch and reduce and cut down on that solar panel. They cut down on... You can't deplete the tree of the ability to generate resources, which is exactly what that photosynthetic surface area is doing. And so once we start utilizing it and working with the tree, it starts to work. But then we've got to know when and why and how we transition that energy. Now that growth elongates, hardens, reaccumulates a ton of energy, more solar panels. It's pulled all of those resources through those interior buds. We prune and just dump all that energy on them. If we were pinching, while those buds were not actually turned to growing needles, right? If it was just a bud and we started pinching, it would actually probably sacrifice the bud. But if we drive that bud to needle count by driving that growth and driving that growth and then we prune to transition, take away that auxin, take away that tip dominance, push that energy back into the interior, this is where we see the creation of secondary and even tertiary ramification and the transition from development to the beginning of the refinement phase of build. So we have the structure set. We have the secondaries set on this. We got the back budding. We got the back budding driven to needle mass. We're in an energy positive. We've elongated. We've hardened. Now we transition. From this point forward, we'll move into refinement on as much of this tree as we possibly can. Okay? I just want to take a second and follow up. We have worked on Engelmann's purse in four different streams. Spring fundamentals, energy distribution, pinching to design, and growth perpetuation. I'm glad you looked that up because I never would have. Okay, cool. All right. Just wanted to make that known. Thanks for that. Okay, so now we've set the tone and we've set the style. We know that we want the length. We don't know how far we want the length, but here's what I do know. I do want to keep these branches here that are framing in this most interesting tree. These branches are going to be part of the trunk and are distracting your eye from some of the least, lesser pieces of the design or lesser interesting portions which are the areas that lack deadwood that have a little bit less movement or these branches stop. If I raise these and you create this negative space, when we take this box away from the back of this, that negative space, your eye is going to walk right out of the design. Okay, so these branches are very important. Now, if these branches are important based on the fact of what we've established there and the length going there, we know that we need to compress here, but in addition to that, we need to be working to open up sunlight and health in this area from this overgrown area here. And so I'm just going to start to get a little bit of a feel of how much flow am I going to push that way by reducing this area that clearly is impacting one of the more important places on the tree, okay? Now, this comes back to the pruning process again and it's in a very visible area, which is also why I want to hit this. Notice what we have here. We have this sort of trunk or triad of shoots that have originated here. Notice we have one strong dominant shoot and two subordinate shoots. Clearly, this shoot won the race to accumulate the auxin, all right? So if we're going to compress now, this is not a bad thing that this shoot ran out here, built up all of this needle mass and all of this strength, because what it did back on the interior here was create this massive amount of interior ramification. So I'm going to start off just by doing a very basic prune of that, these two really strong select tips right at that junction, leaving the three finest pieces, and I'll come back and select that down to two just to start the reduction process, okay? Now, when I look at this one, I don't have that same interior sort of subordinate pieces, so now I'm going to go to looking at the length of my shoots to see if I have any really nice, tight interiors. And what I notice here is I actually do have a few small, very small, fine pieces on the interior here, so I can cut back to that. With that big, strong guy, I've got a much finer piece of growth over here. Okay, and I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take off that one, and I'm going to leave these two just sort of as my temporary situation. Okay, now I'm going to come to this piece here. I'm going to look along the length of my shoot. No interior buds there to cut to. No interior, but look at this. I get this nice little guy here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to shorten to that, okay? And I'm going to look at this, and I might say, let me see these interior needles here if I just clean these out so that I know what I've got. I can open this to some sunlight and air circulation. Josh, can you see what I'm doing here? Okay. So if I just clean that out a little bit, now you start to see all of this stuff at the base of this shoot. This is all the growth that we've been cultivating. Now, I can selectively remove anything that's growing in the knuckle, anything that's growing on the top, save laterals, but definitively save these pieces that are growing in these spaces where branches don't exist because these are what create the density and really start to build the structure that you're looking for. Now, as we move out along this branch, because we're in an energy positive, I can be cleaning off some of these really old. Notice sort of these old, deformed needles here. This is last year. This is this year, okay? So we've got these older needles that are going to start to drop. Very, very realistic right now when we come back in to do this work since we're going to be doing the shape adjustment to be cleaning off all of these needles. The third years can go, assuming that they come off without doing any damage and if they're too stiff, go ahead and leave them. In another couple weeks, they'll start to really loosen up, okay? But we can take off those third years and what that helps us do is it opens it up for us to be able to wire, for us to be able to design, for the new buds that are existing on the interior like this small little piece right here. It's going to have a lot more access without all of this other competition for airflow holding some of that oxygen around the branch and not allowing carbon dioxide to get there. So these are the things that we can start to do in addition to the pruning process to really make this work for us, okay? So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to start to, I'm going to start to whittle this down, make some selections, okay? So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to select two. I'm going to choose my two laterals. I have this piece off of the bottom. If I can choose two laterals, that saves me the necessity to wire them into a lateral position, okay? I've got another branch right here that's coming off the bottom. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take that off, all right? And then I've got this other tighter branch on the interior here, okay? So I'm going to turn this up. Now notice I've got these big, long, strong shoots at the very tip. I've got this nice transition right here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take out, okay? Got these two beauties here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take out that big, strong tip. We worked hard to build these interior pieces. Now we get to transition the energy to them. Rafi says, do you selectively leave needles in strategic positions for the new buds to appear there with a higher probability? So not on spruce. It matters not on spruce. On pines, I definitely do and have seen it be wildly successful on pines. Spruce actually produce, almost produce better buds after, they produce buds on tissue that's mature enough that they, the tissue rarely has third year needles and they actually have a much better opportunity to sort of get this sort of sunlight stimulation and hormonal movement that they need once the needles are clean. You'll actually see them bud far better after the needle mass is clean than when it's there. And then Nissan says, asked if this tree was pinched in the spring before this pruning or since you're intending to get back budding, do you skip the pinching to get more? That's right. That's right. That's the kind of knowledge I want you to have. So because I wanted the, because I wanted the back budding and because I wanted not only just to get the back budding but I wanted that back budding to become actualized needle mass. What you guys are seeing me cut back to, again, come back in here close, Josh. Okay, what you guys are seeing developing is not a potential bud. It's a bud that's actualized as needle mass now. Once it actualizes as needle mass, that's when we can take the tips back, stop that robust expansion of foyer mass and push that energy back into them. If these were just little buds that were potentials and we cut back, there's a strong chance that they would never grow and never open because it wouldn't have the battery to drive that maturation of the bud, okay? And this is the big fundamental point that you guys really need to take home, okay? So in letting it grow so vigorously, this spring, we had buds last fall. Those buds in letting it grow this spring were driven into needle mass, small but driven into needle mass and as a result, we come back in, rebuild the energy, energy positive, prune and it transitions all the energy to the interior and now those are going to become the ramification that creates your tree, okay? Okay, so that already feels better. We can clearly see that this is going to be a little bit too long. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to continue to shorten here and just try to reduce this branch as much as I possibly can. We've got some interior pieces on the inside of that built up. That feels a lot better and then we need to look at this now because we've got this. We need to look at what we want here. Do we want this outside of the trunk? Do we want this this long or do we want to pull this in and really compress this so that it's a much smaller mass in there in terms of, the style and the feel. We see how small these pads are here and how delicate they are on the right. We see this one on the front that we know we want to push back but this is a pad on the front that didn't give us the back budding that we wanted. So this guy right here, we're going to have to allow that to continue to grow this year to build the buds that we can prune back to next year. So we know on this left side we want to be compressing. How far do we want to compress? I don't want to be rivaling the movement of that branch moving off to the right and I also don't want the foliage. When you guys look here at the potential front, I don't want the foliage being in the same line as the edge of the trunk. It either needs to be longer or it needs to be shorter. Now if we're going to be running out to the right, I don't want this to be longer. Now all of a sudden design is educating us that we need to shorten this. So now I'm going to come back to the process. I want to shorten this from the design perspective. How do I go about shortening it? Well first and foremost, let's look at our options. Okay, as I look along the bottom of this, and you guys are going to find more often than not that you are not going to have a plethora of options. Are you in tight here, Hunter? Yep. Okay, so you're going to find that you're not going to have a plethora of options on this elongated shoot to cut back to. You see here, I've got a strong terminal there and I've got this guy right near the top. Well if I come back in here and I just take off that little terminal, right, to transition, and now all of a sudden I just cut off a millimeter, I didn't really do a whole heck of a lot here, right? But what I do have on the interior, ah ha ha, is I've got my fine pieces in here built. And this is actually what I'm trying to capture and what I'm trying to utilize. I'm going to take back that big strong long dominant. Notice that I have this fine interior on this big long guy right here. You see that? Okay. I'm going to cut back to there. I'm going to transition that energy to there. I'm going to take out the length on this piece. And then when I get over to this one, because it's not impacting the length, right, it's not playing into it, if I want to just take out that terminal shoot and transition to those ones at the tip, I can do so and that can still engage in that branch without really being a detriment to the shape. I'm cool with that, okay? I'm going to continue to reduce here. I've got these buds on the, I've got these branches on the interior. Notice I've got this piece growing off of the bottom. I'm in an energy positive state. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take that out. I'm going to explore all my possibilities. Shortest this can possibly get is right here where there's a bud. I'll go ahead and cut that right there. Now as I look down through the interior though, I've got magic yet again, okay? I've got this beautiful new shoot right here at the base. I can take that all the way back. That's awesome, okay? I can start to look at this one. Do I have anything to shorten to? No. I've got sort of two buds at the tip here. What do I have back on the interior? I don't have anything. Okay. This isn't so strong and long that I can't go ahead and leave that in the composition and just wait for it to continue to produce something a little bit better. Okay. I can come in here and I can clean out some of these pieces, some of these third-year needles, open up some space, see my structure, get rid of any of the sort of entangled garbage that gets caught in all of the needle mass of the spruce. Okay. Now I get into this area. I look at this shoot. I don't have anything to reduce to. I get to the interior. I've got two smaller pieces. Excellent. Boom. I'm taking that back. I've got a bottom growing one. Good. I don't want it. Okay. Now we're compacting. I look here. I've got these two pieces at the tip. I see that now. I have the option. Do I want to fully remove this bottom piece and really shorten or do I just want to moderately shorten and save this longer, coarser tip? This is a big part of the improvement of your branch structure on a tree because this tip, when we start to look at the structure of this, very thick, very long, very singular line, we will be able to get, here's a shoot, here's these shoots that have formed, but look at the ramification. Look at what we're building right here. Look at all of these shoots that we have on these pieces right in here. This is good branch structure. This is really, really beautiful branch structure. I'm of a mind to say that this is the best branch structure in the world. Now that we've built this interior, we may be best to go ahead and pull all the way back to here and I just want to make sure that lengthwise, yeah, yeah, that's what we're doing. Okay, so I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to pull all the way back in and transition to those interior pieces. Now, I may have lost a little ground. I may have wasted some time sort of deciding on those longer shoots and pruning back to the interior, but in doing so, I was able to form out of this branch. That's not wasted time. That's not wasted effort. That's the process of working through pruning. So often when we start pruning, we get this momentum behind us where we just start cutting and it feels good to cut and it looks good, right? That branch looks better now. I'm going to cut more. That branch looks better. I'm going to cut more and cut more and cut more and we get this momentum built up that we literally can't shut down. We can't put the brakes on it and you want to check that and the way that you check that is by going through the process. What do I have here? What can I cut back to here? What is my objective in this portion of the tree? Right? And because we're in an energy positive state and because this growth was allowed to elongate last year to build buds, this year to push those buds to needle mass, we have all of those options that we can effectively transition to. We've got every option in the world because of the way that we built it in the developmental process to be at this post-flush hardened pruning and have this kind of option and success. All right. So I am going to thin out in this plethora of amazing growth. I am going to thin out much like I would with a pine. I've got five shoots coming from this area. I'm going to take off my tops. Take off my tops. Okay? And when I look at which ones do I want to save here, I'm going to say ideally I would save the finer ones if I'm trying to get more compact. So I'm going to take out the longer, coarser one. I love the fact that I just got to thin a spruce branch as if it were a pine. That's pretty freaking impressive results. Okay? Josh wants to know how this tree got so sideways in the way that it grew. Got so sideways? Yeah. I think maybe it's... Oh, like the trunk? Right. So for those of you guys that, you know, don't know about Jerry Morris, Jerry Morris is this legendary. And I'm going to work on this area when I finish this because I've given you guys the info. You can watch me apply it now. Jerry Morris is this legendary collector in Colorado. And Jerry Morris found this very special place. And it's Jerry's... It's definitively Jerry's place that has a condition where there was a slide of soil over a river or a stream. And the soil kind of covered it, but the water flow underneath the soil continued. It wasn't enough to wash the soil away. And the soil wasn't enough to impede and redirect the water flow. So this sort of magic happened where there's this underground stream of sorts. And the spruce, these spruce grow on this very thin layer of topsoil. And below the topsoil, the water is moving through river rock. And the spruce roots in the summertime grow into the river rock to access the water. Well, because it's so shallow, in the wintertime, when it freezes and the water freezes, it shears all of the roots off, and the roots are confined to this very limited amount of topsoil. So you see these trees with these crawling roots creeping along this underground river with this very shallow amount of topsoil on it. And it creates an aesthetic that you cannot duplicate. Now, this is a branch that's given us literally more than we ever could have bargained for. And Rene, coming back to what you asked, this kind of productivity of interior growth, all of this stuff, this is exactly why I've gone to the model of elongating, building solar panels, building vascular tissue, and then getting those buds, and then further growing to drive those buds to needle count. This is what you get, and this is magic. Because now, where we had just a few very long, very coarse pieces of growth, we've got this Disneyland of interior pieces, okay? So coming back into this, we have to be able to manage this and set this up for success. If we leave it all growing ramshackle, we're not going to have control. Pieces that we don't want are going to gain strength. Pieces that we do want are going to lose strength, okay? So let's go through the process again now that we're in this energy-positive state, post-flush hardened pruning. I look along this stem. I don't have anything. I have this beautiful piece here. I don't want this to get longer and longer towards the back. I'm going to keep this relatively compact, so I'm going to come back into here. I'm going to take off some of these pieces off of the bottom. I don't want the shoots on the bottom developing unless I'm trying to shorten and change the direction of growth. I'm not trying to do that here, okay? And I'm going to take off anywhere where I've got this much vigor. If I have shoots... Let me just show you this. If I have shoots that don't have a growth tip on it in an area that is very healthy, I'm going to go ahead and be taking those off, okay? Because these are couch potatoes. These are freeloaders. They're not producing as much as they're consuming, and the tree is investing energy in them. Once a tree has recovered, which means that it's developing a lot of growth and back budding and new pieces of foliage mass, you can take these off. Until that point, these are still contributing, okay? So I'm looking at those, and then when I'm getting into these big sort of clusters, I just need to be organizing so that at any singular junction, I've only got two branches, the continuation of my main line and a piece of ramification. So here, this fork of these buds occurs at the same junction as this smaller, weaker piece. Obviously, I'm going to take off the smaller, weaker piece right at the base of that. Obviously, I'm going to take that off and keep that stronger branch. And now, all of a sudden, we've got sort of this really nice, structurally sound, clean system here, okay? I've got a little bit of work that I need to do in here. Let me go ahead and pull this forward. I do think that I need to use this length here. I prune this guy back. This length is going to help me form this pad. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to leave the stronger piece on. I'm going to shed the branch that's growing closer to this one, leave this other piece to be occupying that open space. Bam, I'm going to be taking that off, okay? Let me see if I can finagle that into a position where it looks good. There we go. All right, I'm going to have to wire this guy down. This guy, I don't have any interior buds to cut back to, but I do want this interior branching, so I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to shine it on. I'm going to keep that, okay? Obviously, I've got this big piece coming off the top. Top is not awesome, right? Top is going to get super-duper strong. I would much rather have laterals, okay? Now, this one is laterally emerging and I do have a bud halfway down or maybe 30% of the way down. I'm going to take that off and I'm going to see if I can just get enough wire to sort of drop that tip down so it's not facing vertically and it contributes to that pad. And since it does, I'm going to go ahead and say, you know what? Because of that, I can go ahead and lose that vertical piece. I can lose that vertical piece. And now we start to see that branch pad formation starting to develop as a result of all of these buds and that pruning. Look at how dense this piece just got, right? Yes, unrefined. Yes, totally in a transition from development to refinement. Lacks all of the finesse. Do we come back in and wire all of these pieces? We could. We could, but we would probably do more damage right now. Best to let go at the energy transition this year, come back either before bud push next year or when you do this work next year and these have all matured and hardened off a little bit more. Okay, I'm going to have to lay this one down and into this area. Oh, I have wire on it. Oh, that's great. It's like Christmas. Oh, I get to lay it down. And I get to transition from the tip to the interior. Bam! Bam! Love it. Moon wants to know how long this tree has been in the collection box. Uh, long enough that I'm getting concerned if I don't do something about it, we're going to start to suffer. It's been in the collection box for probably four years now. And we intended to repot it this spring. This is going to be a very special composition at Mirai. It's not going to go into a bonsai pot, actually. And so the composition and timing and everything... Oh, yeah, people are asking about potting. Huh? People are asking about potting this beast. What's it going to look like? Yeah, yeah. You'll see next year. This is going to be a lot of fun. All right. So I'm going to continue working in this area. Now, again, I have this really beautiful strong shoot here. I've got this big, long... And let me rotate so you guys can see this head-on, okay? I've got this big, long, no interior buds. Could I get interior buds? Yes. If I let this grow, if I let this get healthy, if I gave this sunlight priority, I could get budding in here. But I notice that I have tons of budding and ramification here. And I've got this piece that in one year will elongate to a point that it'll fill that. And I've got this piece that in one year will point that it'll fill that. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to transition right there. And I'm going to go ahead and start controlling the tips of this. Now, I want to be cognizant. I don't want that back to continue to elongate. This is still the very rear of the tree here. Okay? So I'm going to be looking to reduce these to interior pieces just the same as I have been trying to compact and compress and really shrink down this space, okay? So I can look at this length of stem. Nothing there. I do have a little gem right there that I can cut back to just to work into the process. I've got another beauty right there. So I can go ahead and take off that other piece. That gives me a really nice, really nice sort of fine tip to the branch, fine terminus, great length. I'm glad that I kept that. I actually was tempted to remove that and then all of a sudden in the pruning process I found those two pieces. This happens over and over again. You're never above the process of exploring and taking your time. Okay? I've got this growing off of the very top here and I've got this beautiful bud originating. There's nothing spectacular about this. It doesn't have any ramification or any reason that I would keep this if I can grow a better, more compact piece from a bud originating at a better position. So I'm going to take that vertical off right there. Okay? And I'm going to go ahead and just make sure that this is dropped down into the pad where I want it to be. Again, this is all the way in the back. Now you'll notice that this proportion fits together with this branch in that same region and we also have that we can drop down. So when we start looking at these guys, we need to seriously be considering do we keep these or do we get rid of these? Now I'm going to rotate to the front here and just show you where that consideration is. So I'm looking right over in here and I don't know if you guys can even see that. Let me take a look. So it would be just a little bit of foliage mass right through here that we would be sort of looking at trying to maintain and keep. This decision hinges on two other components. We've got this branch that's kind of awkwardly originating from the trunk on the back side here. Let me show that to you guys close up. Okay, Josh, can you show them this junction here? So it's a bar branch to this much bigger structural piece. The reason we left it obviously is because we have no branches on this side of the trunk, but if we've got this piece that we can utilize some of these stronger pieces to occupy and it's going to give us a tighter, more compact branch than this one, then I would say let's go ahead and do that. And I think that's a good decision to go ahead and take the higher quality branch now that we're starting to move from that period of raw development into a phase of refinement. So I'm going to take that off and what that does in making that decision, all of a sudden now these branches matter where they didn't matter as much before we started having that conversation about removing that piece. Ah, such a dangerous world pruning is. Mel asked how long ago this tree was wired. This tree was wired, let's see, two years ago. Two years ago and for a Colorado spruce to have been wired two years ago and not to have the wire biting in to a detrimental degree tells you that there was a limited amount of foliage mass creating vascular tissue. Over the past two years of growth, however, it has developed that foliage mass, it has started to create vascular tissue to create that battery. That's exactly what we wanted and now we're going to have to probably unwire this this fall. It's still holding, still offering function. This was wired by Bill Cadman, a very long-term student at Mirai whose skills are extremely proficient. Bill? Yeah, Bill. Shout out to Bill. And so, you know, the fact that we're still using Bill's wire literally three years later is a testament to the wire decisions and all that stuff. You know, like, we want to see wire still function three years later. It means we did a great, it means we did something really right. It also means that the tree itself had to have sort of that period of time to build all of the things that it lacked that led that wire to be capable of staying on for three years, right? So there's multiple components to sort of that process. But now we're here. Now we're here and it's going to be, this is going to be a spectacular change by the end of the stream. What time do we have? It's, it's been about an hour and 15. Oh, sweet. Okay. Matt wants to know, what's the scope of work after hardening off for spruce that have been pinched in the spring? Sure. Great question. Yeah. So had this been pinched and we just had all these beautiful, you know, branches like this and they were all tight and stuff, what the scope would be is once we start to see the older needles drop to come back in and clean those older needles off, right, like I've been doing here, you'll wait a little bit longer in the season, but you also can be going back in and correcting because when we pinch in an area, we might get two or three or four buds produced from the same junction in areas back behind that point that we pinched. So we've got to go in and we've really got to prune to improve the structure and fix any structural flaws that are created by the pinching process. That's the biggest scope that we would be doing. Here we're pruning to transition from tip to interior. After we pinch, we're, we're pruning to improve structure because of the stimulation of all of that interior growth, okay? So I've left this little pad here now, right? So when we look from the front, you'll see just the slightest, just the slightest amount of a little, little bit of room right here, okay? And this starts to carry me to a point where we're really able to now even look at or think about this as a design component. Now I have, I have a few more things over here that are sort of distracting me from being able to make that decision and a lot of it hinges on how long this piece is right here. And I don't know if you guys, when you're pruning a tree, you have these areas that just don't look right and like, that big decision in terms of design, you've got to eradicate a lot of the other confusions. This big piece right here coming so far at us, we know our apical region is up here. So we have a pad right here. We've got this major area right here that's contributing to that defining branch. I want to really dig into this before we push out to there and figure out what that's going to be. Okay? So I'm going to come in here and I'm going to start the reductive process again. I don't want this growing towards the front. I don't want it covering these branches that we say are so valuable. I don't want it pushing me out of the design. I want to get into this tree. So I'm going to be reducing heavily here. Right? I have buds near the tip. I'm coming back to the interior. I see these finer buds here. I'm going to be cutting back to those. Okay? Those transitions. Right? I'm going to be looking here. I've got a little bit of opportunity. Not much along this shoot, but I'm going to rotate just a little bit, Josh, and pick you back up. I've got one, two, three buds all along this. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take that length out of that and really get that compression. Okay? I've got this big, long, strong shoot here. Big, long, strong shoot here. Really fine. Really fine. Great. Let's take that strength out. Let's start that reductive process. Okay? Now that we've got those interior pieces, the motor's built, we're getting what we want, we start to shed those big, long, coarse pieces that we've had to show any sort of affection for to this point. And the whole thing, when this whole thing is developing, we have no idea what is going to develop where. So we let the whole thing grow, do its thing, and come back and make these decisions after we get what we want. Okay? All right. I'm looking to reduce here. This is about as far as I can reduce there. I've got a little bit undergunned and underserved. When I look at this, now, I've got this piece right here. And I want to look and see. I don't have any reduction there. Oh, that sucks. Let me rotate and take a look at this. So that's got to come into here. Okay. All right. So if this is going to have to exist in that space, I obviously want to give myself some room. And in the reduction of that central strongest shoot, it's actually shorter to that bud than either one of, notice how it's shorter than either one of the laterals. And if I have to pick one lateral, I'm going to pick the lateral that fills this space because I've got this beautiful, tight, compact branch right here. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take this off. Okay? And we've got some interior pieces in here developing. They're just not quite ready yet. So we'll continue to let those build a little bit as this produces some more foliage mass and gives us that transition of energy. Okay. So, you know, just like we said, this branch below is still a little bit in development. We've got a little section here that's a little bit nuanced that we're going to be wanting to get more interior strength and budding developed before we fully prune it back to those interior shoots. So that's easy enough. Right? And in leaving this, if I come back to this tree, why did I leave that? Why did I leave that? Why did I leave that? I should have confidence that it was very intentional based on how thorough we are about the work and the strategy that we put into it. I'm going to go ahead and pull this big long piece back to here. Okay. And if we have that kind of confidence and we know what we're trying to accomplish and we're making the moves to accomplish those things, then it becomes very, very easy for us to say, okay, right now, even if I don't like it, I'm going to go ahead and leave it because I'm sure I left it for a reason. Right? I'm sure I left it for a reason. Leonard says, so when all you have are long, leggy branches and not that many, how do you stimulate back budding to fill in the leggy branches that you have or the leggy branch? You've got to grow the tips. And that's the whole, that question, right, that question is the mystery of bonsai. I have, and this piece was just, if you look up at the top here, this piece, when it was first wired, was one single shoot from here to here. And by letting that grow now, we're starting to create interior pieces of ramification that we can reduce to. But you have to increase the amount of foliage mass. The amount of foliage mass then creates photosynthetic resources that it uses to build its vascular tissue. Its vascular tissue for our elongating species is where all of those resources are stored over the winter. It's also where the adventitious budding with the building of the vascular tissue, where that adventitious budding or back budding that you're looking for, that's where it originates. So the more of that tissue you build, the more budding you get. And to build more of that tissue, you have to have more needles. So the more needles you, the more the tree grows, the more you build, the more back budding you get. And this is the battery of plant life across the globe. Sam wants to know... Whoa. Whoa. Sam wants to know if we're still pinching in the stream, or in the spring, sorry, in the same way that Todd did when he did that stream last year. So this tree right here and this is where you guys have to draw a firm line, and I apologize if I'm not being clear enough about this, okay? Pinching is a technique for refinement. That technique says we've already transitioned the strength from the tip of these big, long, coarse branches to interior, finer branches. Right? We've already done that. Okay? But this, where we're at right now, this tree has been in development. Development says we're getting elongation and we're getting thickening, expansion of needle mass, development of vascular tissue, production of back buds. Right? Production of back buds is generally the biggest one. But to get production of back buds, you have to create vascular mass, and to get vascular mass, you've got to expand needle mass. To expand needle mass, you have to elongate. In order to do all of those, you have to thicken. Right? So this is, it all says the very same thing, which is development means let it grow. Okay? Once we let it grow, right, that's not saying we didn't wire out the structure, because clearly it's wired. We even wired out all the ramification that existed on the tree. And now that we're here, where we let it grow, we got the expansion, we got the needle mass, we got the vascular, we got the back buds, and we used the growth this year to drive those back buds into actual shoots that occur on the tree, we can prune back. So guess what? In this pruning this year, to transition it from the development that it's been in up to this point, bing, we basically just went, now you're in refinement. And next season, when these buds start to grow, we'll be looking to pinch. Do I want to hold back here? Do I want to transition there? I'm going to pinch here, I'm going to pinch here, I'm going to manage here, I'm going to manage here, and that's going to help this get tight and nice and ramified and control the strength and evenly distribute the energy. But we can't start pinching on shoots that are this long and strong and healthy. It wouldn't do anything because all of the energy is out here at the tip. We can't start pinching. We have to make sure that we transition that energy to those interior pieces. We build the interior buds, we transition from the tip to the interior, and then we start directing the growth with pinching. This is the process of building an elongating species tree, okay? All right, so let's focus on this area here and just see if we can kind of develop a little bit more of a nuanced style to this. Now, when we get to this point, okay, we're starting to encroach on a little bit of too many branches in one area, and we will continue to thin these out over the course of this tree's development. We already took out some of those laggier pieces. We may take out another piece or two tonight, but for the most part, I feel like we're probably going to want to save. I shouldn't even say that. Let me just get into it here. Okay, if I've got a lower branch right here, and let me show you guys this, if I've got a lower branch right here, I've got these branches above it, I want to try to reduce these if these lower branches are valuable. I'm going to say they're valuable. I'm going to say in reducing these upper branches, I'm not doing any harm. So let's see what that looks like. And do I feel that the upper branches have any value? No. I'm actually going to go ahead and take these upper branches off. Now, let me tell you why I'm going to take these off. Josh, come in close here, okay? So if you'll notice, any time that I'm sort of assessing the branches that I want to build or utilize as my structure, I'm always looking at good transitions. Notice how this goes from this big, thick stump, and we cut back to these interior pieces. This is a big, long, leggy piece. That's what's existing on this. If I cut that out, what I get in exchange for removing that is a far, far, far superior replacement of much more highly ramified, developable, smoother transitions, better taper quality branches. So that's going to be the move that I make to further the development with that technique in this process, okay? So I take this out now. Right now, when we look at this, I've got this beautiful bud back here. I've got this beautiful ramification that can work in here. I've now allocated strength to a really beautifully ramified branch here. That is a solid advancement. When we start to look at some of this branch pruning, we're talking about transitioning from the tip to the interior. We're talking about pruning long back to interior shorts that we've built. We're also talking about taking away parts of the structure that existed when the tree didn't have a lot of foliage mass, and now we've built all this foliage mass and we can take that crappy stuff out that we couldn't cut off the first time. This is all a part of this whole system, right, which is a second working of a tree. First working focuses on structure. Second focuses on working and establishment of secondary branching. And then, third is on tertiary refinement and development, right? So we set the structure. Now we're setting the secondary, pruning back, really laying it out. Then we'll come back and start pinching for tertiary, and voila, you start to have a bonsai. Yeah, definitely check out that blog we made that really lays, sort of lays those ideas out. The blog that's on the... It's called Pinching vs. Pruning. Yeah, the blog that's there right now will be able to very easily do very, it's very organized. Kendall did a great job of being able to take my sort of stream of conscious, rambunctious explanations and just like, boom, boom, boom. And it's really beautiful the way it's laid out. Okay. So I want to try as much as I can to push in these interiors and compact this area. So I'm going to be looking at these big, long shoots. I don't anticipate having much of an opportunity to transition out of these pieces, unfortunately, because they are kind of weaker having been buried underneath this. Yeah, there's just nothing. I mean, there's no buds anywhere along that. It's just one big, long piece of growth. I can cut this back to an interior piece here just to shorten it to make a little bit of space. But I really, I really don't have much that I'm going to be able to do with this piece of growth. So let's just see if in fact I want it to be this long or if I want it to be a little bit shorter so that we can at least get it right. Okay, I can take off this bottom growing piece right there. I obviously need to clean up this junction of threes right here. Okay, and when I look at this, I really, I really would like to create as much even distribution of foliage mass as I possibly can. I have this piece here. I'm going to actually pull this over and close that space to help distribute that foliage a little bit better so that that's pulled into the pad right there. Chris has a question What do you got? Chris says, so in addressing the tree initially, would you consider working the shortest branch, the windblown sort of left side that would allow you to set the primary branch length a bit more tailored to the tree's unique aspect of the design? No. I think that you have to create the defining branch first, right? And that defining branch doesn't necessarily mean it's the bottom branch, okay? Now we obviously had a big long bottom branch. We set the tone with that. We carried that tone up through the tree and we saw opportunity in the apex. This is what gave rise to this upper long and this lower long. And we knew we were going to have to come back and we were going to have to decide. But when you set the tone for the tree, your style, your length, the patch form, thickness, width, density, all of that is set by that defining branch because that's the branch that guides your eye in terms of the longest point of asymmetry in the design. The defining branch is the longest point of asymmetry. It is the guiding light for your design. That's really where you've got to start dictating the style of your tree because that defining branch says, are we going feminine? Are we going masculine? Right? Are we going to be a big pad? Are we going to be several small pads? It sets all of those tones that allow you to work with the branches that now help you visually balance and distribute that asymmetry. And that really, you know, for Mr. Kimura, he would sit down with a tree and he might spend three or four hours on the defining branch and then it might take him three or four hours to finish the entire rest of the tree. That defining branch, that style, that character, that nuance that it carried with it was the thing that he had to invest the most in, way more than any apex, was the defining branch for him, which was really, really cool to learn about and also has become a pretty impressive design opportunity that we're still really working hard to explore. Okay. So I like what's happening here. I like the organization. Obviously, there's a little bit of an issue on here on the upper left and we'll come back to that. We now see where we're starting to get this movement coming out here. So I'm gonna go ahead. I've got some wonderful pieces that are being taken over. So we had some branches die back, but we had some really strong shoots occur at the base of those pieces of growth. So I'm gonna take those dead shoots out. I'm gonna take that wire and I'm gonna reclaim that wire and utilize it to give shape and position to these pieces. Okay. Now, obviously, this wire is gonna be slightly work hardened, so I'm gonna have to be a little bit more delicate with it. But this is where, you know, if we know how to and understand wiring fundamentals and all of the things that we're gonna, you know, be doing to protect and give our branches the success, the best chance of success they could possibly have, then coming back and repurposing a piece of wire that's been applied well, which means it's not super hard because we applied it very, in a very technically proficient way, which means it didn't work harden, then it becomes a very significant tool if we do lose branches to take advantage of sort of the stimulus for that branch loss, which is generally new bud production in the area where that branch was in fact lost. Okay. Here we don't have anything around that, so I'll take that guy out and then let me see what we got here. Okay. So we got a lot of strong growth. Let's see what we want to do with this. I'm gonna say, I'm gonna say the more, the merrier. The longer, the merrier. The more, the merrier. Let's go ahead and pump this out. But there's a nuance to pushing this out. So when we come back wide here and we look at this, right, if we're gonna push this out long like this and we're talking alpine in nature, we've gotta decrease the width and the size of this pad. So now we come back to some of that very strategic pruning where we're gonna take out some of that big width that we would see in the more traditional bonsai form in order to be able to accommodate the aesthetic of this sort of more wild upper defining branch reminiscent of that alpine landscape. We gotta make some nuanced changes to facilitate that being a valid design decision. In addition to that, I want to say I want to be balancing some of the strength up here as well so that I'm not just letting the apex become this big, huge, massive, powerful, sort of out of control animal of location on the tree. So I am gonna be taking some of the strength out of some of the pieces but leaving length on other selected pieces as well so that we get that. I'm gonna show you guys what that means. Now if we come in tight here, the way that I was pruning, right, anything that has buds at the base, has a big, long inner node before it starts to get to any ramification, I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna shorten that and take the strength out. Notice that this piece, shorter piece of ramification to get to this first little tertiary branch, that's already a higher quality piece of growth. So if I'm choosing which one is gonna be the one that gives me length, I'm gonna choose the better structure. Which one would be the one I might sacrifice eventually? The one with the poorer structure. So I'm gonna take the strength out of that one. Now alls I have to do is wire these two guys together and it's gonna start to create a really beautiful defining branch up in that upper canopy that gives us a lot of asymmetrical flow. Ryan, could you talk a little bit about why you use your fingers to pinch and not your scissors? And then additionally, in terms of the tissue, Sam brought up an interesting point that we know you're against pinching on junipers but that their actual tissue is segmented and maybe better suited, like not just damaged by pinching, whereas like a spruce tissue seems like it would be more damaged by the pinching process. Not at all. Not at all. So number one, all of your needles, when you have a bud and a shoot that's emerging, all of the needles are laid up along the central stem, okay? Now when we're pinching, those needles are still very close to the central stem. If you come in and you try to cut that, what's gonna happen is you're gonna damage or cut all of the new needles and you're gonna see that those needles are still very close to the central stem. If you come in and you try to cut that, what's gonna happen is you're gonna see that pinching on your tree every single year that you choose to cut instead of pinch in that state. Now if you let those needles start to expand off of that central stem, that shoot starts to increase its surface area. Now you've got more needles, now you've got more transpiration. The vascular backbone that has to supply those needles with the water that they need and now that those needles are out and they're photosynthesizing, developing the phloem in the vascular bundle creates too solid of a vascular bundle and we can make them no longer pinch. But when we look at the purpose of pinching, the purpose of pinching is to transition from the stronger areas of the tree to the medium areas of the tree and the medium areas of the tree to the weaker areas of the tree as we're aggressively fertilizing to bring all of those areas up to the same strength at the desired areas to create really dense, beautiful, tight, refined pads. This is why we pinch. Okay? So if you let that open up and start to do all of its things and you can't pinch and then you can't pinch, you try to go back in there and prune but that vascular bundle has already been established and it's already spent that strength and you don't have as much energy to transition to the medium shoots because of that or if you go in and cut and every single needle looks really crappy, right, so that you always have a refined tree with cut needles at the tips when all you have to do is just take it and pop when it's still together and that vascular bundle isn't established, I'm going to say we're going to pinch every time. There's actually way more tearing if you look at pinching a juniper, way more tearing and damage which is probably one of the reasons why they respond with juvenile growth and that response of juvenile growth is why we don't pinch junipers. Even if they lend themselves with a segmented style which is not actually true, there's a lot of damage that occurs there. Even if they did, the response with juvenile says it's not a valid technique. When we pinch an elongating species in one year we can get a branch like what I have created right here and next season when we pinch it'll virtually look like a finished branch if we do it correctly and we fertilize correctly and all of the systems are working. That's why we do it. It advances the development of your branch so fast if you're able to transition that energy. Right, so you're saying if your growth looks like it does right now you missed the pinching window. Oh, I mean it's already, we're already in a growth positive, we're already in an energy positive state. When you're pinching a branch you're able to elongate. Yeah, no, we're way, way, way, way, way, way, we're not. So if you quote unquote pinch right now you would cause damage. Oh yeah, tear the whole shoot off. Yeah. And that's where we say when those needles start to open off and that vascular bundle becomes very solid if you try to pinch at that point you're going to tear that thing off. So what we're saying is you would have to pinch at least once a week. That's the thing to understand. That's the nuanced thing. Pinching happens for your ability to pinch a piece of growth lasts less than a week for every single shoot that you may want to pinch. That shoot has a week long window where you could pinch it before that vascular bundle is established. So when you're going through the spring season and pinching to transition and refine it's a daily observation of your trees. I mean it is a daily observation of your trees because if you miss it you missed it. If you miss it you miss it. If you decide to go on vacation you don't get to pinch. You lose that whole year of refinement you can come back and you can at least salvage through the pruning process once you get into an energy positive but you lose that transition of strength. Strong at strong weak at weaker. You try to salvage what you can but you missed your opportunity. And then in terms of you use your when it's at the right moment and you're pinching you use your fingers because it's just faster or is it actually better? Because to use scissors at the point where you actually would be pinching to move the energy from strong to medium or medium to weak you have this candle that if you cut you'll damage all of the needles that you're going to leave behind because they fold up over the central stem. So you'll have to cut the tips of the needles. You can't get in there and not damage these primordial needles to cut that central stem when the time is right to pinch. Instead what you do is you just walk up to it and go bink and it just breaks right off. The base is preserved. Small portion of new growth. You take off that and all of a sudden all the buds behind it go booyah and start growing. Nice. Yeah. Yeah, it's a mother. When we start talking about I'm just going to take this crappy branch off now. When we start talking about you know pinching I think pinching is probably the best thing to do. Pinching is probably the most misunderstood aspect of growth management in bonsai. Matter of fact I'm going to go bigger and bolder. Pinching is the most misunderstood aspect of growth management in bonsai. Not I think. It is. It is. Because there aren't a lot of, you know, where we're at right now in bonsai, honestly, like, you guys are, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know, you guys are literally at a point with me in Mirai Live where I'm just recognizing how effective these techniques are. Like I know they work in Japan. I know we've had to tweak a lot of them to our North American species. We're eight years into the tweaking process. You're just starting to get the really accurate, dialed in, concise information that, I mean, it's happening now. And this is the first time that anybody's had this information. Nobody's created it and nobody's created a facility like Mirai and worked on natives like this and tried out all of these with extensive, sort of, really heavily monitored projects to see what the product is. And that's where the pinching and the pruning and the understanding of the horticulture and the physiology and the design all at once, these are all things that are, it's hard to understand because it's still, it's just brand new. It's just brand new right now. Not brand new in terms of our understanding of our bonsai, right? Pretty freaking cool. Okay, let me take you back. How we doing on time? About an hour and 40 in. Okay, cool. We're right up near the apex. All right, I love, I love that elongating branch so much. I just, I adore it. That was, that was a great call. I'm so happy. I'm gonna break up the size of this pad here. It just feels a little bit aggressive. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna tweak some of these branches here just to have a little bit more distribution and I'm gonna shorten this big strong guy back to an interior bud. That gives me sort of all of the density that I want right there. Now, one of the issues that I have, and I apologize for continuing to walk in front of the camera. It's kind of light play is throwing me off. This, this left side, notice how each of these, boom, boom, boom, are all the same length. You see that, Kendall? All of these, like, it's like a, it's like a square, right? Let me get out of the way here. Literally like we've got this sort of protractor out that we're drawing that line with. We need to create some separation right here. Okay? Now, I love the density that's been created in this area, but I don't love it so much that I'm attached to this. My thought process is maybe we transition this big thick branch right here. And Josh, can you see that? Let me roll this around so you can see this. Can you see this junction here? Okay. So maybe we can go ahead and we cut off this big thick branch, transition to this, lay this piece down in here, maybe flare a little bit of that around and potentially eliminate the length here. And then we would have to do a little bit more something, something to get the length differentiated there. But that feels like if we want to be pushing that way, that we need to take the length out of this upper canopy, which is literally on the same plane as that defining line. We've got length here and length here. So we're creating a lot of width at the widest point of the tree. I just talked myself into it. All right. Did you guys literally just watch the tree just go because that's what, like, just happened in case you missed it. Okay. And I'm going to move this piece in just a little bit, bring it right around this interesting gin just to keep it away from this so that we don't have that rival of counter length. Now that this is on a different level than that defining branch that's going out that way, changes the whole nuance and feel of the tree. Okay. I'll flare these around a little bit. I don't want to put these back into this branch that I just eliminated. I love the asymmetry that we created with that decision. And what that means for this piece right here is, again, some of the same pruning decisions. If we come in close here, obviously we've got these really beautiful fine guys. Pop these big tips off. Boom. If I don't have anything to reduce to here, nothing to reduce to, pop that baby off. Boom. Okay. And when I'm in here on the interior, I'm going to go ahead and pull out this big elongating piece. This really nice, nice interior shoot right here. Drop back to that. I'm going to lay that right in, right in that little sort of nook and call it a ball. That's from Top Gun, just in case. I didn't get that one. Call it a ball. Maverick. Okay. All right. So now we're up into this piece. Now we really need to define how far is that apex going to be pushing with that defining branch. So let's take a look at that really quickly. Obviously we made some very, I would say, strategic decisions with that, with this elongating piece. And this gin moving up through that canopy with all these lateral lines, oh my gosh. It goes against every single bonsai aesthetic ever taught and it is so characteristic and quintessentially spruce that we're just going to eat it up and love it. Okay. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to pop some of these big strong guys just to get this visual pollution out of the way. Obviously these upper pieces need to be reduced. Okay. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to get these out of the way. Now here's an interesting situation that I haven't seen very much tonight and I want to show you guys. Okay. Right at the base, this big strong shoot, do you see those two buds right at the base? Yeah. Can you see those clearly, Josh? Can you turn it a bit more this way? Yeah. Show, let's take a look at this because this would be an excessively strong shoot and we'll show that. Okay. So we've got these two buds right here at the base, right at the tip of both of the blades. Do you see that? Okay. And then if we come up, we've got another beautiful bud here. And then if we come up even further, we've got multiple buds at the top. This is a situation where if I don't want that length, I can go ahead and I can cut right at the base and these two buds at the base here will give me two shoots where I had one. That kind of bifurcation pruning is very, very rare and is only with the strongest pieces on the tree and with the most, say, malleable or cellularly rich in terms of the capacity to divide that meristematic tissue at the base. So, if you look at where this bud originated, it has a lot of adventitious buds set up. It says it's a very active cellular division site. Okay? All right. So, that reduces there. Whew. I'm literally full on just, like, limping through the design process on this because it's so overgrown. It's hard to, um, it's hard to get a really clear idea of what's going on. Okay. So, I'm going to cut this and I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to pull some of this stuff back. This feels very aggressive to me here, much like we've been talking with a lot of our other, um, pieces that we've been trying to work. But the problem is, is we don't have a ton of interior shoots. Let me rotate this so Josh can see. We don't have a ton of interior shoots in here. I've got some halves I can have. That's, that's cool. That's like a consolation prize or something. Uh, I can take this all the way back and I do have, notice that I do have some strong interior pieces here. If I take this piece back to there and I'm able to shorten some of the tips of these longer pieces that might be, might have been slightly weak, you know, that can start to give me a nice drop and a nice pushback that allows me to get that reduction without losing the visual quality. I've got those same buds at the base of these two shoots which means I can go ahead, I've got the majority of that growth. If it's too long and we used it to generate interior pieces anyways, then this guy's got it too. Now that we're at the apex, we're gonna start seeing more of that kind of vigor. Okay, I'm gonna get bifurcation at those tips so we're starting to get some of that reduction that we're really looking for. Now that I'm in here, you see that I start to get some of those interior shoots so we take bottoms off, take that big piece off, this can drop down. I'm also gonna take this big long piece off. Okay, straight off the top, gotta come out. Don't like you, sir. And what do we got here? Gimme, gimme, gimme, gimme. Okay, cool. All right. So we don't have anything along the stem. We've got them right at the base, right at the base, and this guy doesn't have it at the base but it's got that interior shoot, boom, right there. Oh! Okay. That feels like that's really starting to set up a nice transition. What to do with the apex? What to do with the apex? So we want to really compress here and somehow we want to form an apical region that plays with flow. We want to have that flow being executed with this branch. But we also sort of have to think about how do we turn this very flat area into an apical region. Let's just continue to kind of work through that process. I've got these lower pieces that have started to grow up and in. We can allow these to either occupy those spaces and shorten here, which I like that. It gives me a little bit better transition. So now I've got this longer piece in the back branch. Let me go ahead and I'm gonna leave that. That's really nice there. But I need to be reducing this stuff here because this is not gonna be any portion of my apex. So let's get in here and let's really start this reductive process. So we've got at the base here and notice again where we have at the base we've got these intermediate buds here. You're gonna see that become a common thematic thing. Even the shorter one has a base bud as does this one. So we're able to just reduce to that point. Now it's interesting as healthy as these are that they didn't produce interior buds. Maybe those will come this year. I can't leave these out extended beyond the current foliar mass though because I will start to lose strength in these areas. So this is kind of one of those things where I've got to sacrifice for the greater of the good some of the developmental capacity of the foliar mass. I've got to open this up and make it photosynthetically efficient. Okay? All right. So now we're there and I'm gonna say when I start to look at this I don't think I need let me point this to you guys and go wide. I don't think I need this big massive tail right here. It's another one of those big coarse areas that sort of was there to occupy space and now everything's grown up around it. And when I take it off it starts to create a lot more negative space on this side and further push that but it also shrinks down that apex which is very alpine in terms of the way that we are trying to form it. Notice how small this whole tree has gotten and how much interior growth how developed the branches look from that big wild bush that we started with. This is the most beautiful part of this pruning process. What you're seeing right now this transition from that developmental to that big first prune that's gonna let us into the world of refinement. This is one of the best times best moments in a bonsai. Kim wants to know how applicable this everything that was discussed tonight is to dawn redwood or sort of just I'll add all the other elongating species. To dawn redwood. Okay. So dawn redwood is gonna be more of dawn redwood is gonna be way more similar to a deciduous elongating species like bald cypress. And I would recommend really digging into bald cypress knowledge when we start trying to work out the nuances of the species and the nuances of dawn redwood. But if we're talking about hemlock if we're talking about you know fur and dug fur I mean we can do this kind of pruning and in reality we can do this kind of pruning on a spruce all the way through the fall. But if this is a Douglas fir you have to be have this pruning done inside of the month of June first week of July or it won't produce the buds that you cut back to will not produce foliage next year. Very interesting nuance you can watch the tier three video about that. It's a complex one but it's worth knowing. Okay. Subalpine fir. You know we're gonna be cutting back to these kinds of situations to transition from development to refinement. And in general when we set that first structure on a tree and we grow that tree out get all of that back bud to form get those interior pieces of growth and we get to that second working where we're gonna be setting up secondary ramification we gotta prune it back and utilize not necessarily prune off but we've gotta strategically prune to get that secondary ramification that we've built into a position to be successful. Transition from the tip to the interior. This is fundamental bonsai. This really is a fundamental bonsai concept over sort of almost every species. Okay. So I'm actually just gonna take off this big leggy thing here. I can't. I can't. I can't do it. I can't. I can't do it. Just can't do it. That was a horrible branch. And I know it probably tried its best but it just wasn't gonna be one of our branches. Alright. So now we've got some pieces here. Okay. Let me see if I can lower this. I'm sure I can't. See that's what happens when you approach things with negativities. You just get proven wrong. You just get pleasantly surprised. Pleasantly surprised. I was not anticipating that. Look at how much more workable that is. Probably can't. Oh wow. Oh. Oh. Neat. Yeah. That's swell. Okay. So these tips. Now I'm gonna start to compress this apex. Even though I wanna leave length. What that means is I'm gonna leave a lot of the length that's on these immediate shoots. Now this longest point is a series of three. It's sort of that spruce trident form that you see so often. And when we start to look at alright well which ones do we keep of that? We obviously take off the central strongest one right? But that's not correct. Because when I come back and I prune the central strongest one back to those buds. When I come back and I prune one of the next ones back to those buds. What we'll recognize is I don't have a bud on the third one and now the third one is longer than these two. And both of these have two buds set up where this one only has one. I'm actually gonna take off the weakest one right now. This is a definite level of sort of bonsai savvy to be making avoiding those common pitfalls of generally accepted bonsai practice. Always take off the center one. Always take off the strongest one. Now use the strongest one in a spruce because it gives you the best ramification. That's the new sort of deviation of that knowledge. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna continue to reduce these as well because I wanna try and shorten this as much as I possibly can and we'll see if we keep all of these because we've got a whole heap load of shoots on the interior here that are just ready, absolutely ready to rage and start to contribute and we would love to facilitate these shoots really developing which this pruning, even pruning of these shoots now, the buds near these are gonna proliferate but when I rotate this, right, we've got seven buds right in that area that have gone not just from bud but to actually actual needle mass. We've got buds in this area. We've got buds in this area. We've got about seven buds on this branch right here. In the next year, this apex is going to erupt into a beautiful, beautiful structure that's gonna give us something really, really special to cap off this tree, okay? Alrighty. What, about what percentage of the foliage have you pruned off? David wants to know. Um, I would say I'm probably running at 30, 35, could be encroaching on 40%. But, but here's, here's, here's where this is important, right? The foliage that we pruned off did what we needed it to do which was it built vascular tissue that gave us back budding and then it further pulled that back budding into actualized needle count, okay? So it did its job, uh, and it, it, it sacrificed for the team and now we're getting rid of it when we're in an energy positive state which means that the tree has reaccumulated the energy from having produced all the growth and to reduce that now, uh, we're just getting all of the best parts of having utilized that growth. So they, it, it really is a, um, it really is a nice transition of the, of the growth to having fed the system and helped contribute to the evolution of the tree. Okay, I got another trident right here that I'm gonna get rid of. Just a few pieces of wire on the apex and I wanna show you guys how to start setting your apex on a spruce up to have success. So this is the most common opportunity we rarely get to do this. We're actually gonna be digging hardcore into apexes later this summer because apexes obviously are the thing that probably a majority of the world struggles with the most and because we struggle with apexes so much we can't really turn our attention to stylistically dictating design with that defining branch and so that's where I'm sitting up here like, dude, defining branch, Mr. Kimura spent three hours so that's cool come back to me when I actually can create that thing so that the defining branch so that I give a crap and that's how I was in Japan too defining branch, defining schmanch I couldn't have cared less all I wanted to know how to do was to make an apex and really that was a really empowering thing to learn so we're going to give you guys that capacity okay so I'm going to be spreading this out and looking to keep this as low profile oh that tastes so good I saw it there and I was like oh I definitely need that okay I'm going to try to keep this as low profile as the style that I've created all of the branches in and the reason why is I've already set up all of my buds that are going to give me sort of this more dome like or quasi dome like appearance now we want to keep a spruce apex very very small in the alpine spirit but if it's a windswept spruce apex now all of a sudden we start to look at the fact that maybe we're going to have a little bit of a broader apex than we typically would because the snow is not going to be accumulating with that wind influence and we're going to get that directional length and sort of broadness of that wind in the way that the apex is formed and because we went with the upper branch having that length we start to tap into that sort of stylistic apical formation had the lower branch been the length that might not necessarily have given us the same ability to insinuate those conditions that's where those decisions are so fun to make and they start to really be pivotal in terms of what we choose to do throughout the rest of the year we're just now starting to become empowered enough to design that intentionally on this level in the western world and it's freaking awesome it's awesome to be empowered to make those kinds of design decisions and know exactly why you're doing it is pretty badass so kudos to us way to be badass guys so I'm going to lay these down but I had those big long pieces so I take those big long pieces and I can sort of fan those into exposing a little bit more let me show Josh here from the front so just taking those a fork here and a fork here two and two I just took this I pulled this in and I sort of swooped it around into this open space now I have this other beautiful piece that's going to be sitting right here I've got this guy right here that's going to sit right there and that's going to form sort of that round domed crown in its most infant foil actually that's going to be the crown that's going to sit right there and that's going to form this is a secondary form it was even far more sparse the first time but this is that round domed crown in its simplest form right and the nuances of dictating length and direction and asymmetry and the apex those will come as we start to achieve higher levels of refinement and as far as building your guys understanding of that stuff trust me we've got we have literally five, six years of streaming that we could execute in order to teach you guys all of this it's a very deep well of information we're all going to be growing a lot in the interim and there's going to be a whole lot of new things that we had no idea we wanted to know and we're going to know but these types of I'm just getting into eight years into Mirai teaching my students these types of really refined sort of nuances of shaping and aesthetic and I think that's going to be a really important thing and I think that's going to be a really important thing to be able to do And we're going to break into those in the Mariah Live realm as well. And I'm excited about it. Takes a long time from raw material to build a place where you have the ability to explore all of these concepts of bonsai, right? Because we didn't buy, we don't have pre-made Japanese trees. We had to make all of our native trees this refined and get them to a point where we can start to do this more detailed understanding of the process. It's really been a pretty sweet thing to see Mariah grow in that way and evolve. Okay, let's take a look from the front. Again, don't get too caught up, right, on do we want it to be more domed? Do we want it to be, right? This is just sort. This is sort of the, this is the structure. This is like the platform. If you were 3D printing a human ear, this would be the wire mesh, right? Okay. Let's drop this down just a little bit. It feels a little too flat. It will occupy some of that negative space. We'll still play with some of our ideas of design. We don't want to just totally go super flat to the nth degree. We want to have. We want to have a little something, something. Mike has a question. Mike says, does maintaining a finished Spruce Apex involve more constant replacement of fine shoots than many other species? No. Involves really accurate pinching. Really accurate pinching. If you pinch correctly, a Spruce Apex is relatively, is a relatively effortless thing to maintain. Okay. Wow. Wow. Yeah. Wow. This feels like it's a little bit high here. Let's see if I can take that down and. Yeah. Yeah. Really, really nice. Really nice transition. Really nice. Second working really nice establishment and commitment to design. I love this drop branch here. I think that's amazing out, right? So we run out and then we come back in and then we come back out again. When those start to continue to develop and evolve. And next year we get fresh tips on those and ramification. We start pinching to transition, et cetera. This tree will be a very, very, very, very, very, very special tree. It's going to be an extremely unique composition. So just to kind of take you guys back, right? This tree was in a developmental stage to build interior pieces. Developmental didn't mean we, it wasn't wired. It was wired and styled. The structural, the second is wired and styled with what we had. We let it grow for two years. It built interior buds, right? That growth this year drove those buds into actual needle mass. Okay, and then we come back after that growth this year has hardened off and we're in an energy positive and there are multiple areas that we were pruning to depending on what we were trying to accomplish aesthetically in that region of the tree at the same time. We were advancing design consistently by removing pieces that we had to keep in the first styling that we don't necessarily need now. And through this whole process, we even went back to the idea of when do we pinch? How do we pinch and why do we pinch? And we understand that tonight's pruning was the transition from the developmental process of building that interior growth to now shifting the strength as far as this tree is concerned from producing longer growth to producing more tight interior compact pieces. Next year, we will be pinching to refine the shape on this tree. All right, we got any other questions? No. Super, super pumped that we got to do this tonight. I'm really happy with the tree, but I'm more happy to have that knowledge in your guys' hands. The more we do this, the more it's going to make sense, the more it's going to click, the more you're going to start to be able to bundle all of this sort of exploding can of worms knowledge and sort of organize it, color code it, make it work for your practice. But tonight was a biggie. So I hope you guys got a lot out of it. Thank you very much for the support as always. I apologize if I rambled. Or didn't make sense. I'm highly sleep deprived, but still very pumped with what we did tonight. Couldn't do it without you guys. Have a great week. We'll see you Thursday at 3 p.m. for the Q&A. If not, we'll catch you guys next week. And we got a big one for you next week. Looking forward to it. Have a great week. 
