What's up, everybody? Super Tuesday, Mirai Studios, Oregon. How is everybody? I hope you all had a very magical, safe, and hopefully uneventful, from the perspective of anything bad and nothing but good experience with the recent eclipse. As I mentioned, I was definitely watering during the eclipse, and that was not intentional. That's what happened, and Mirai turned purple, so that was a unique experience. Anyways, hope you guys had a good time. We got Kendall on the mic this evening. Arthur in the production mode, as always. Hello, hello. Mr. Lime Allen on the audio, and Ricardo on the detail cam tonight. Some exciting stuff happening at Bone Time Mirai. If any of you guys have checked out the Needle Juniper video, we're kind of moving into ... , or evolving our manner and method of educating on that tier three level for you guys by doing features of work that we feel and that we're practicing in the workshop on a continual basis, but aren't necessarily able to get to because we're limited to one night a week with you guys in the streams. Also, we're taking the questions that you guys are asking, both on the stream and in the live Q&As, and trying to give you pertinent information. That you can visually see and experience, looking over our shoulder and joining us in the workshop to help you guys design, grow, and understand Bonesite at another level to build your skills. There's more to come. We've got some scheduled for this week and next week as well. Keep an eye out for that. For all our tier one members, thank you guys for tuning in. For all our tier two members, the archive and hopefully the filter system is working for you guys. That's been a monumental project that we're super excited to see implemented, and for our tier three. You guys have been amazing. We love helping you guys innovate and seeing you guys grow the questions, the interactions, the one-on-one consultations, and then now being able to give you guys this feature content, which is going to cover techniques, horticulture, as well as aesthetics in Bonesite. We're really proud to be able to share more of our work that we do at Mirai with you guys. Thank you very much. You can access those features just in the main archive. You'll see them. They'll pop up and be new. They'll pop up and be new videos. Yeah. Are they tagged as features now? Yeah. They'll have a title now that says- Okay. We're still working on just setting up that searchable portion through the filtration system, but those will be tagged as features that you guys will be able to filter through and find very easily. Live Q&A, Thursday, 2 p.m. Pacific Standard Time. That's 5 p.m. Eastern. That is 5 p.m. Eastern. We're kind of trying to hit all targets and whatnot. We know you guys have a plethora. Our members have a plethora of times that you guys can access the live Q&As to get your questions answered. We had a brilliant live Q&A last week, mainly U.K.-focused. Also got a lot of people tuning in from all over the world. Got some Spanish love. A little Portuguese had some Philippine subscribers in there, so it's exciting to get to work with all of you guys across the world. Yeah. I'm just going to ... Do we have anything else? I think that's it. Feel pretty solid. All right. I have been waiting and super pumped to be doing this Fall Fundamentals because fall for us at Mirai means the time to take all of that growth, dial it in, work with it, add it, improve the tree with everything that we've done to distribute energy, strength, et cetera, that you guys have been watching over the course of the year. Fall is also a time where things really open up. Watering needs change. Fertilization, big important thing. How we handle our pines has been a big question. It's going to be the focus of tonight's stream. Most importantly, the refinement of pines in this pertinent season post-summer heat, and then also discussing some of the nuances of other pine species. There's an extended cut clip that'll be nested underneath this in the archive, underneath this Fall Fundamentals stream on multi-flush pines. Just to give you guys another insight into how we handle our pines. All right. Thank you. So, I'm going to give you guys a little bit of insight into how we handle those. And I think without further ado, I want to dive into this tree. This tree is a super important tree at Mirai. This is one of a handful of trees that are not for sale and are part of my personal private collection because I've learned so very much from this tree. And we'll talk a little bit more about that kind of as the stream gets going, but I just want to clue you guys into what we're doing now. So this tree fed aggressively and fertilized. It's a short needle, single flush pine. Definitely in the refinement process as a bonsai tree. And every year this tree gets a little bit better, a little bit better, a little bit better. I wanted to show you guys how do we manage that growth? How do we handle it? What do we do with the needles? How do we prune if we do in fact prune and why do we prune that way? I feel like this is one of the undiscussed aspects of bonsai that so many of us are asking questions on and trying to understand. Okay. I'm fertilizing, I'm watering, I'm getting this health in my trees. I'm distributing energy. I'm doing all of the things that I need to do. How do I actually take all of that work and raise the level of my tree after all of that work has been done? That is tonight's stream. Okay. And we're going to focus on a lot of fundamentals. I don't, I don't feel like I'm going to be breaking a lot of new ground in terms of like blowing your guy's mind with what's happening, but the fundamental understanding of how to take growth, right? And make that growth work for the tree. That is what we're after tonight. And as you can see, when you look at this, this tree has a fairly defined shape, but with every season of growth, we lose that definition. We've got to come back in. We've got to take that growth and we've got to use that growth to elevate the quality of the tree. All right. So without further ado, I'm going to blast off. Now, one of the big aspects of managing and maintaining that growth is learning how to, what to pluck, where to pluck, why to pluck, how we improve the aesthetics via needle removal and also shoot selection. So if you guys notice, every time that your tree adds a tremendous amount of growth over the course of the spring and the early summer, you start to lose that definition. You had these clean lines between these pads. You looked at it and you said, oh, that's so beautiful. I don't want to lose that definition. And then that tree grows and you're like, oh man, Ryan's telling us growth is good. And he's saying fertilize and we're supposed to be doing this, but I don't want to lose the quality of that tree. I don't want to lose where I had gotten it. And this is something that we've got to shed and let go of. So what I want you guys to recognize is this is that time of year or we're entering another time of year where we can come back in and we can take that growth and we can make it work for us. And a lot of that hinges around how we handle the needles, how we clean up the bottom of our branch lines to provide that definition and what we do with all of those odd pieces of growth to turn them into or remove them or prune back or just manipulate them into being a functional part of the aesthetic of the tree and to re-establish that really beautiful defined shape that we're after. Okay? So, you know, during my apprenticeship in Japan, one of the things that Mr. Kimura used to start every young apprentice with was cleaning the bottom portion of the branch up of needles that were hanging below the silhouette of the branch. And if we start to look at aesthetics and truly understand aesthetics, we recognize that this bottom portion of these pads is actually the only area that we can create definitive visual separation between our pads. So there's not a lot of teachers and there's not a lot of instructors who are going to teach us how to do that. And we're going to have a lot of instruction out there about how we handle that. And it just boggles my mind because this was the very first thing, the actual technical hands-on piece of work that Mr. Kimura started me out with when I got to his garden at the very end of August or early September. And it's ironic. We're almost at the point where I began my apprenticeship. Next week will mark the 13 years since I started my apprenticeship on the 24th, right? Kind of wild. And this is the work that he started me off doing, which was very, very cool. Okay? So if we can blast in here on the detail shot, I just want to show you guys kind of what I'm dealing with here. I've got a bunch of branches here where I've got sort of twiglets stacked on top of each other. Now these were branches that last year when I rewired this tree didn't need wire because the shape had advanced and evolved, and I was able to dictate the position of these branches via a thicker – this thicker structural wire, right? And And a lot of the times as our trees evolve, we use less and less wire. But then we know phototropism, right, the plant's tendency to grow towards the sun, always changes the angles of those branches that we didn't have to use wire to position in that whatever that last wiring was. So this is where a lot of times after we've experienced that growth, we need to come back. And any of these that are stacked on top of each other, we've got to make one of two decisions. Either we remove this upper branch or the lower branch and then lay this down as the new sort of exterior tip of the branch, or we take this and we rotate this so that instead of having them stacked on top of each other, we turn them into laterals. And this is a very fundamental aspect of pines in general. For this tree, I'm going for maximum density because this tree is starting to reach a really, really, really high level of refinement. So I'm going to be adding wire to the structure that I've already got. And this is, you know, when we start to talk about wiring, unwiring, wiring, unwiring, we will at Mirai leave wire on as long as we possibly can, and we'll just add to it each year in a very fundamentally sound way until we start to see that wire biting in too much. But we're going to add to it and utilize what wire we have on it and then continue to construct and add on top of it to define and position this new growth. And I just want to show you guys how I'm going to go about this. Now, the thing about learning how to wire. And why are well is when you see people wiring for the first time, you know, Mr. Kimura used to make us wire every single branch when he was teaching us initially as new apprentices how to wire. But then over the course of your apprenticeship, the skill in wiring that you start to evolve once you do it a lot is to be able to take less and less wire and manipulate more and more branches with less and less wire. And this is a real, really massive skill because you've got to learn how to reconceptualize the aesthetic of that branch. And what's your definition of, you know, refined or advanced bonsai is? And I feel like this is something that isn't necessarily being taught by a lot of instructors, probably because there aren't a lot of people that actually have experienced bonsai at that level in terms of the demand for bonsai being practiced at that level, as well as sort of the cumulative effect of being rewarded for practicing bonsai at that level. And in Japan, that was entry. Into the Kokufu exhibition, which every professional is striving to achieve so that they get more clientele that's paying them to enter trees and they build up their kind of their reputation as bonsai professionals. So I'm just rotating these. Now, one of the things about rotation is we always want to be extremely aware of the orientation of the buds. OK, so when we have buds, the last thing on a pine that we want to do if we're reaching a very high level of refinement is start to rotate those buds and display them at all different angles. Technically, all of those buds should be growing up towards the light. And when you guys look at this tree, you'll notice that all of the buds have the same orientation up. So if I take all of those and I change that or I lay them over on their side or I turn them upside down, it's going to ruin the aesthetic that says, man, there isn't a lot of contact from a human being with this. And we're striving for that natural representation in the way that we lay out these branches. So I'm going to kind of work on this branch here. I have a hard time holding back on plucking off the bottom. I'm going to hold back. I'm going to work this branch to get it into a position, and then I'm going to come back and I'm going to clean up this bottom of the branch line so that you guys can see the change and the shift in the aesthetics. It's going to require a little bit of control on my part, but hopefully we can get that done. I'll leave that. And while I'm doing this, you guys, fire away if you have any questions or any significant things that need to be asked, because as always, we're here for you guys to engage with you, let you interact. Thank you. And ask those questions that you need to build your skills and understand these subjects with a lot more proficiency. Can we go over what kind of tree this is and kind of the history of this tree? Yeah. Yeah. So this is a lodgepole pine that I collected myself when I was in, let's see, I would have been a sophomore in college. So this was collected in 2002 after I had already gone to Japan and met Mr. Kimura, not necessarily having secured my apprenticeship. It came from the Sierra Nevada. It's down in California. And this actually was a tree. I had maybe 30-some trees that I had set aside that I had collected myself in college. And those trees were kind of being put, saved and put aside so that I had inventory or stock to work on when I came back from my apprenticeship in Japan. And this tree, when I came home during kind of a break from Japan, of those 30 trees, there were maybe only eight that were alive. And this was, say, nine months before I finished my apprenticeship. And I was devastated, right? Because this is how I was going to start my career. And so what ended up happening is I packed them all up into a car and I drove them up to Oregon on my first trip to Oregon. And I left them with Randy Knight. And as I was leaving, I was looking at this and I was saying, gosh, this material that I collected in college or the stuff that's left, I was so devastated. I said, it's not really worth it. It's not really worth anything. And I told Randy, I said, hey, listen, man, you don't have to take care of these lodgepole pines. They're not a very high quality material, particularly compared to what he was collecting. I said, go ahead and throw them on the burn pile. You can burn them, right? And I had this real callous mentality about bonsai trees, having worked with Mr. Kimura, who I would say Mr. Kimura is very non-emotionally attached to the trees that he works on. Because for him, it's a business. And I'd come home. I kind of imbibed that mentality. And so Randy's like, really? You want me to burn these? And I said, yeah, don't waste your time taking care of them. Go ahead and just burn them. And so I finished my apprenticeship up. And I came back to Randy's place nine months later. And this pine was still there. And he said, it was just too good to burn. If you don't want it, I'll sell it. But I can't throw it on the burn pile. And I said, no. Why would I have wanted you to burn this? And I actually pulled this into Randy's very low roof ceiling garage. And this is the very first tree I worked after I had finished my apprenticeship. We have a picture of what it looked like. We got a picture of what it looked like. Raw. Yeah. Do you have the before picture? Yeah. So that was the untouched tree, right? That's so crazy. And then this is after the first working. And this was done in a very compulsive push over one evening. That's after the very first styling. And. I learned a very important lesson with this tree and that very important lesson was, man, if you're not able to take any piece of material and make the best of what that material has to offer, number one, you're not a bonsai professional. Number two, to think that there's a piece of material that is so worthless that you would have to burn it is to not be respecting and appreciating and valuing these living things, right, that are in my mind, as I've come to know. As important and equivalent, if not more so than we are, because they've been here for so much longer. So this tree, the reason that I won't part with it is because I learned that day in Randy's workshop, you know, one or two days fresh off of having returned from Japan. Oh, I've got to think about this differently than this was approached in Mr. Kamura's garden. I've got to think about this differently than I've kind of become callous to thinking about it. And it just shifted my entire thought process and has guided me as a professional ever since. OK, so now you can see, you know, when this was laterally emerging, this branch had this really, really kind of unsightly malformation and just rolling those from that vertical to that lateral has created an entirely different branch formation and definition. Now, when you look at this, you still don't have a lot of clarity because you've got a lot of clutter underneath these beautifully presented new tufts of foliage. And so as we wire, it almost is more. And I've told my students this a lot. You actually will have a much more beautiful tree if you learn how to clean than if you learn how to wire. And the fact that people don't start their students off learning how to clean and they just immediately jump into styling and wiring. And all of us are saying, I want to learn how to style. I want to learn how to bend. I want to learn how to design before we know the horticulture, before we understand water, before we understand soils, before we understand fertilization, before we understand how to clean and maintain our trees. We've missed the boat. We've missed a very pivotal piece of information that we've got to grab onto. So as I'm doing this, I want to be sure that I always maintain needle mass in the 360 degree circumference of this central bud. So Ricardo, if you can zoom in here and just kind of show, I've got this bud in the center. And even though this is hanging down slightly, right, as long as it's lateral and not hanging down below this boundary of the branch, then it still functions as a very fundamental and essential needle pair or needle mass in the design of this branch. Because if I start plucking all of these off and I've got this bud in this needle mass over the top of it, it's no longer a pine because a pine is reflected in these tufts. Now, I don't want to have to wire every single one of these fine branches. So notice and watch as I do this piece of work, how I'll lay these out laterally and I'll always carry the wire. And I'm just going to pull this aside and show you guys. Notice that I have all of these smaller buds back in here pointed up. And notice how I can. I came around this. I gained control of that chute. And then I came around here and I gained control of this chute so that I can actually change the angle of that. I can hold that and I can change the angle of that with one piece of wire. I'm controlling one, two, three, four branches. This is how we continue to maintain that natural, soft, what Mr. Camaro would call flat, flat feel, right? He would say that. He would say, I don't want you to wire this like. I want you. I want. I want it to be flat, flat, right? It's almost like a joie de vivre, you know, kind of like along that. OK, so stay tight with me here as and these needle these needle clusters that are hanging down below, even on the interior, because one of the other aesthetics of pines that we've got to be aware of is that our eyes pick up on needles crossing like this, right? Our eyes pick up on this. So we want to be reorganizing this as much as we can without destroying the formation of those tufts and those buds, reorganizing our needles here to the to the best of our ability. So if these inside guys are hanging down like this, all of a sudden you start to get your needle masses crossing again. So I'm even going to come in here, always approaching from beneath the shoot, and I'm going to be plucking these off as well. And then this one sitting outside of the canopy here, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take this and I'm going to further kind of lower that down into that into that canopy as an interior body piece of foliage. So that I just continue to refine and add to that. Now, some of these interior pieces that have been here for a while, they're losing strength because they're hiding below here, etc. I can go ahead and as this tree adds foliage mass and matures, these are some of the pieces that I can go ahead and get rid of as they lose strength and as I build more foliage. And this kind of goes hand in hand with the work that we've been doing to date where I'm saying, you know, these branches, I'm going to put these here right now. There's a chance that the branch above it is not going to thrive. There's a chance that the tree is going to give us other information. There's a chance that the branches above it are going to take off and these branches are going to go. This is that process for you guys. OK, I got some questions. Lay it on me. So folks in the chat are wondering if this timing is optimal for single flush pines. And then what are the signals that you use to determine the time? Yeah, so technically with single flush pines, you guys could have been doing this after the growth hardened. But here's what ends up happening. Right. If you notice on the interior here, I've got all of these, I've got all of these dead needles. They're being shed right now for the lodgepole pine. Now, some of some needles on some of our other short needle varieties, like a shore pine, were being shed maybe a month or two ago. When those needles are being shed, you can do two things. You can clean up the shape and clean out the dead needles and in one single handling of the tree, you take care of all of the work. So basically, we're pinching or managing the distribution of growth in the spring for our short needle single flush. And then as we get to the fall, we're taking out the dead needles and redirecting that growth. And you handle that tree really twice in a season. That's the most minimal way to handle it. But here's what you have to be able to deal with if you do that. You have to deal with a tree that does have a fairly unsightly or a little bit more of a, I would say, a organic, rustic look for a portion of the year because it doesn't have that same degree of rust. You have to deal with a tree that doesn't have that same degree of refinement when you're allowing this growth to exist as is, waiting for those needles to fall. At Mirai, we can't keep every tree in tip-top shape, nor do we want to. Trees have to be trees, right? And so in allowing a tree to be a tree, we'll wait for this to happen. We'll let that growth photosynthesize, reaccumulate strength. And is this an ideal time to be doing it? Yeah. If it wasn't, we wouldn't be teaching you guys to do it right now. So for short-needled single-flush, our ponderosas, our long-needled single-flush, like a white pine, has been shedding needles already. A ponderosa pine is just starting to show color change or just starting to shed its first needles. And every single tree is going to be different in terms of the timing. So coming back to that indicator that you guys asked about, the indicator is, is it dropping its third-year needles or not? Because if it's dropping its third-year needles, that's an indication to you that the growth has hardened. It's officially gotten back into an energy positive. The tree says, yeah, I feel good. I feel good about where I'm at. I feel like I've reaccumulated my resources. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to let go of these solar panels to make room and to improve the efficiency of the resources I'm distributing. So as I let these go, it's telling us, all right, it's a go for this scope of work in order to guide that growth. And so people have said, can we work on ponderosas yet? Can we work on ponderosas yet? If ponderosas aren't dropping that third year of needles, then no, you can't be working on ponderosa. Because any needle reduction that you do will cause elongation of that season's needles. And this is why we're waiting. Now we have a ponderosa-focused stream coming next month where we are going to guide you guys through this same approach on long-needle single-flush pines. Show you how to do it. Show you how to manage them. Show you how to prune them, et cetera, so that you guys can handle your ponderosas. All right? So we're going to be tackling short-needle single-flush from the perspective of our alpine. So Scott's pine would be the same. Mugo pine would be the same. If you guys are in Europe, we'd be looking at shore pine, right, which could have happened a few weeks ago. Lodgepole pine, pinyon pines, right, Zuisho white pine, that short-needle variety of the Japanese white pine. All of these are definitely in line with this scope of work as they start to shed those needles. Brandon wants to know how we can tell the difference between lodgepole and shore pine. So, yeah. That's a good question because they're both latifolia, right? Now, if we look at shore pine, we're talking about latifolia, latifolia, if we're talking or, excuse me, they're both contorta. But if we're talking about shore pine, we're talking about contorta, contorta. If we're talking about lodgepole, we're talking about contorta, latifolia, right? And that's the difference. They're very closely related. So the way that we tell the difference, number one, the needles on a lodgepole are slightly thicker and flatter, right? Whereas on a shore pine, they're thinner and they tend to have almost a triangular, you know, triangular shape, okay? Beyond that, the bark characteristics are entirely different. Shore pine tend to get very small plates that protrude from the trunk and are much thicker and much darker. Whereas lodgepole tends to be a lot smoother, grayer, and I would say less thick and aggressive in its bark formation. So those are two ways that we can tell the difference. Also if we look at the buds, the buds are extremely different and I'm sure you guys will be able to see as Ricardo zooms in here. The bud formation of the lodgepole. Lodgepole is, in my mind, one of the most underutilized species in North America for bonsai because it's such a wonderful short-needled, aggressive, strong, very deep green, wonderful movement, flexible, back buds profusely. All of the things that we want, lodgepole gives us, right? And it's just something that a lot of people pass up on and I still don't understand why, except for I don't think people know quite how to cultivate lodgepole. Michael's wondering if this kind of work that you're doing right now is damaging young or emerging buds? So I'm being very careful to not be plucking off buds. And if you can just focus in on the interior here, you'll see the plethora of buds that are here. You do have to be careful, right? There's no tree where it's like, oh, you can just completely run ramshot on that branch and just rambo the crap out of it. That's not damaged buds. That doesn't exist in bonsai, right? So I've got to be respectful of these young buds that are starting to develop and mature when I'm handling this tree. But this is very different from like a multi-flush pine where the buds are emerging from the crotch of a needle. Typically on our short-needled single flush, we see the buds, and I take this back, you'll see a deviation from this in the Scotts pine that we show you in some of the tertiary content tonight. But typically on a lodgepole anyways, for tonight's work, we see the growth emerging from buds that are adventitiously popping up on the tissue and not between needle pairs. And that's an aspect of lodgepole that we've got to understand, okay? So I'm going to step back with you guys right now and just take a general look. And you guys want to continue to do this. So when you see this now, notice this clean branch line and notice the smooth arc out here. Now, there's an interesting thing that happens when we talk about pines. A lot of times we'll say, you know, with a mature pine, you see this. It's continuing to kind of elevate upwards. That's phototropism. That's its propensity to grow towards the sun. And when we try to duplicate that with wire, a lot of people will take it and abruptly bring that up. That's not a good branch shape, right? It doesn't look natural. It looks aggressive. It's not aesthetically pleasing. Notice that swoop, that smooth arc, okay? And I do see that I've got some, just a little bit of tweaking that needs to go on here, okay? I want to, as I'm refining these trees, I want to be preserving the maturity. The maturity in the branches, which means I don't want to take all these buds that have this smooth arc and lay them back down flat. That would be taking it back to step one. We don't want to do that. Now, when we styled the Scotts pine for that traditional design that we did, all of those branches were laid out flat. Yeah, that's fundamental. That's setting the structure. This is how we start the process. But as those tips and as those interior shoots start to grow up, we want to preserve that. That is age. That's telling you this is a tree that's been a bonsai for a long time, or this is a tree that's more reflective of the nature. It's more reflective of the natural environment, okay? Even notice in the formation of my pad now that I'm getting this swoop here in the profile of the bottom, okay? If you over exaggerate, which as Westerners we tend to do, if one drops enough, five drops is better, we can't do that here, right? We've got to show a lot of restraint in the cleanliness of that branch shape. But just in the cleaning up of this, you guys see how much different this aesthetic is from this aesthetic in the way that we've laid those verticals down into laterals and we've cleaned off those bottom needles and we've cleaned off as maybe not quite as well as we would like, but we're getting there. Some of these interior needles that are crossing over the path that's causing you to see needles like this, we're cleaning it up and showing you needles like this, creates that really beautiful aesthetic. And this is the focus for this work on a tree in refinement. Sergio wants to know if you can use this cleaning the bottom of the branches that you're doing on blue spruce. Uh-huh. So I would say that spruce is not a species that you would want to be doing it to because as spruce ages, it will take care of it for you, right? Those branches will also come up and we'll refine those tips and we'll get that. But spruce also has needles radially distributed and if you pluck those, you're going to tear tissue and damage them on a spruce. Now a Douglas fir, Douglas fir, it's totally legitimate. On a hemlock, hemlock is totally legitimate. So there are species where you can clean up the bottom of that branch. You can not do damage. I would say a Colorado blue spruce is not one of them. Okay, so one of the other things that I want to talk to you guys about is how we prune these. Because in the refinement process on the impromptu Q&As, a lot of the questions that we're getting is, can we prune our single flush pines right now, right? So this is a shoot right here. Notice how much longer and stronger this is than the other two shoots near it. I'm going to want to take this out. I'm going to want to take this out of this to narrow down the tip of this branch right here. And if you guys can see this, okay? Now one of the big questions is, can we come back in and prune this piece of growth that elongated? I'm going to prune here as if we prune like so. Can we do that? Now it just so happens there's a dormant bud in here that that actually would work. So if that wasn't there, right, we'll find another one to illustrate this. If that wasn't there and I pruned there, at this time of year, nothing is going to happen for you. So if you guys go back to, gosh, what was the BSOP stream where we pruned the Scotts pine? It was the last BSOP stream we did before you went on summer break. Is it growth management? Post-growth management. Post-growth management, right? We're actually going to show you that tree tonight and show you how that pruning process worked out for us. That was timing at its 100% best, right? And we even talk about the indicators in that tree. So if you guys have questions about that in terms of pruning that growth back because you weren't pinching or you're in the development process and you're in the transition, that is the stream to go back and look at. You're going to see the fruits of that tonight, okay? If we're pruning now, though, we're either pruning back to a bud, back to a secondary branch, or back to a structural branch. That is the only pruning decisions that we can make right now and have a positive response and transition of strength in the tree, okay? So I want to show you guys one more area where I'm cleaning. I'm cleaning off some needles. Notice how I have needles here really close to this junction or crotch where I've got a split or a fork of ramification. Okay, I want to come in here, and I just want to clean off this first eighth to quarter inch of these branches. And what that does is it cleans up that structure and shows that there's two branchlets there instead of one really dense tuft. And in other portions of this tree, you'll see where those needles being present there create this massive visual mass. And we don't want that. We want to evenly distribute visually. What looks like and appears to be the density of the tree. Now in short needle single flush pines, we're not using needle distribution as the strength balancing. We're using pinching, strong to medium, medium to weak, to reallocate energy over the spring season. Now we can come back in and we can prune off those very strong sections back to a secondary branch, back to a bud, back to a structural branch. But we're not pruning that shoot back because we're not going to get buds in that position. So having said that, because we're not using needle mass to redistribute, we always have a fairly significant amount of old needles around our shoots on a single flush short needle pine. Okay, I'm going to come in, I'm going to come back to that bottom piece, clean that bottom silhouette up. Okay, and then notice because this is growing vertically, I've got two options here, right? I've got a bud back on the interior here. I could prune this all the way back to that bud. I could leave this here, right, and move this in. But notice how crowded that's starting to get. And this tree getting bigger and bigger and bigger. I feel like the best decision at this point is going to be to take off this big thick coarse piece back to this branch and back to this shoot that's starting to develop and then close that gap here with this branch. Just bring it over to now create kind of a cohesive line or pad that I'm creating in this tree. And those are the decisions that we're making right now when we're managing this growth and where we're redefining what this shape is going to look like after having added all of this new needle mass. This is a really, really fun time of year to be handling our pines. And look at, you know, again, look at the definition that you guys can get in a branch. I mean, it's like, it's literally for lodgepole pine, for our short needle single flush pine, it is the single most under-discussed sort of genre of tree because you guys have heard so much about multi-flush pines. And I hope that our multi-flush pine approach has made that easier and more clear for you guys. We will come back to that in November and show you guys how to handle that growth. Again, there's a little, there's an extended cut clip that will be nested in the archive with this stream to show you guys some of the concepts during the fall season and why we don't handle that growth right now. But a lot of the discussion around pine work has never ever mentioned or focused on single flush pines. And it's a shame because these are actually, I would say, the bulk of the pines that we work with in North America and in Europe as native specimens. And nobody's talking about it. Robin wants to know if you could approach graft lodgepoles now. If you could approach graft lodgepoles now, it's not a good time to be approach grafting lodgepoles now. And the reason is you've got so much sap flow as they're entering. Right now, our pines are making that transition from summer dormancy, if you're in a portion of the country where they're taking summer dormancy, they're making that transition from summer dormancy to their fall season of growth. And with that transition, we've got a nice tertiary clip that I want to show you guys just about fall considerations. I'm going to keep working on this pad here. When you guys come back, I'm assuming I should be pretty close to done with this, and you guys can see the fruits of that work. Take a look at this, fall considerations that we need to be aware of, and we'll see you on the flip side. Fall at Bonsai Mirai, and we're going to be learning to design, grow, and understand like you guys haven't experienced yet in Mirai Live. We've got a focus on the exponential increase in development of vascular tissue. We've got a re-look at watering and how that's changing. We're going to take a really in-depth look at fertilization, and we're going to come back and we're going to look at some of the seasonal specific things that we start to do during the fall season that allow us to have success and maximize our bonsai's development. So we're excited to have you guys on board for tonight's stream, and join us as we walk through and we start to pick apart the nuances of fall in the way that we maximize this very major season of growth to improve the quality of our trees. So we're going to come back and discuss the function of water over the fall season, but one of the things that I really wanted to touch on in fall fundamentals is this understanding that during this time of year, trees are adding a tremendous amount of vascular tissue, which means their branches and their trunk are going to be thickening. And with that thickening, we start to see wire really dig in and potentially create some problems at this time of year. Now a lot of people treat watering as a passive action, where we're going through the motions of applying water to the tree, quenching their thirst or supplying them with the resources they need to cool themselves. But in all actuality, watering for us at Mirai is a very, very active thing that we're doing, where we're consistently using that opportunity to engage with the tree and notice things that we may not be seeing at other times as we're just walking by the trees in the garden. Now whenever we're watering and we see wire bites, we have a marking system at Mirai that is two stones in front of the tree means we have wire biting in somewhere on that tree. It's a quick, easy way to remind us that we've got something here that needs to be addressed, and we can come back and we can take a much closer look at this tree. Now this Scotts pine was actually pruned during one of the BSOP fundamental streams that we've done. And as a result of the pruning, as well as a result of the vigor of the tree, we are starting to see a massive expansion of this tree. We're starting to see the tissue to the point that we need to be taking wire off of this tree before it does further damage. During the fall time of year, we need to pay particular attention to our elongating species. Our elongating species thicken and add more vascular mass during the fall season than any other genre of tree at the garden at Mirai. And as a result of that storage of those resources, we tend to see their branches and trunk expanding at a much more rapid rate. So here when we look underneath the structure of this tree, we can see wire biting in in multiple places. Obviously this bigger, thicker structural component is moving a lot of resources as a result of all of this foliage mass being focused through this one singular highway. But we also see wire biting in in these smaller areas that are also taking a lot of resources from the foliar mass that's attached to this singular branch and moving those sugars and starches through this independent singular vein of vascular resource. Between all of this accumulation of sugar and starch, it makes a lot of sense that the tree would need to expand its vascular tissue to handle the increase in photosynthetic mass. Wire being a very static object on the tree that can expand with the expansion of the tissue, we need to be very careful and be removing this and potentially replacing this at this time of year in order for the tree to continue to develop and thrive. Now when we look at a tree that's growing and has a lot of vigor behind it, we're typically going to see the thickening occur at points where we're getting a lot of elongation in addition of foliar mass. And this makes sense because this foliar mass is photosynthesizing, it's creating sugars, it's creating starches. And the areas that have more photosynthetic mass creating more sugars and starches and are moving more water and nutrition via the transpiration process are naturally going to be expanding their vascular system faster. So we see these in these areas that have intense vigor in the apical area of the tree, in the tips of the branches, and we also see this along the structural components of areas that have accumulated a very significant visual mass. So when we look at this tree, it's not necessarily the finer branches that are showing where the wire is digging in. It's actually on the structural components that are carrying all of those sugars and starches from this foliar mass as its entirety, where those sugars and starches are moving through this very major system that we're seeing the most swelling and the necessity to need to unwire this tree. Okay, so the fall time of year, we start to see trees using more water and drying out more quickly and more definitively. Here you can see that there is a very clear lack of moisture in the surface of this soil. This tree was actually watered three hours ago in the garden, and yet three hours later we're at this point in time where even when we remove some of the surface, we see a fairly minimal amount of moisture below that extremely dry surface layer of particle. Now if we were just focused on the actual particle itself, we notice that the akadama, or the beige color, component of our soil is showing little to no moisture content. Notice how beige that is, right? But beyond that, we're also seeing the tree's buds start to swell, we're seeing the branches start to expand, and we're starting to get a lot of the indications that are telling us that this tree is going into its fall state of growth and the creation of vascular resources preparing for winter and also preparing for bud push next spring. This is a direct indication that we're going to need to up our watering and increase the quantity and frequency with which we're giving these trees what they're demanding during this active period of growth. So one of the primary components of bonsai practice in the fall is the application of fertilizer. Fertilization at this time of year is the single most important thing that we need to be paying attention to. And if we only had one time of year that we're fertilizing our bonsai, this is the time to be doing it. Because this is the time where this nutrition equates to the expansion of the vascular system that's going to be prepping this tree for the upcoming winter. But more than that, prepping the tree for the expansion of growth next spring and the push out of all of that new photosynthetic material. Now we see at this time of year on a healthy tree the fertilizer rapidly decompose based on the fact that there's active consumption in the tree and that active consumption is also stimulating an expansion of the microbiotic material in the container. As a result of that, that hunger that the tree has, if you will, and that increase in microbiotic activity at these optimal fall temperatures and optimal conditions to produce the best results in decomposition of organic matter. We want to be applying fairly consistently heavy aggressive feeds. One and a half tablespoons per location on four week intervals through the fall season to be preparing this tree and giving it the best chance to have a stellar spring next year and have great winter hardiness this coming season. So I was hoping to have this whole branch done before you guys came back. That clearly hasn't happened. But we're actually not that far away. So I just kind of wanted to focus here for a moment and get you guys something really beautiful to look at. Now I know there's a lot of questions. Are you guys going to talk about more trees tonight? Yeah, sure. But brace yourselves, guys. We are in this for the long haul together. We've got a full season of fall streams. And, you know, as we were filming this, we all started getting really, really excited about what we have coming because fall for us is a season where we get to create, where we get to improve, where we get to maintain. It literally is an open door to a lot of work in terms of design, styling, aesthetics, maintenance, exploration, et cetera. And so we're not going to cover all of that tonight. But I do feel as though this is where we are in terms of what we're going to do. And I think this is one of the genres of trees. Again, I'm going to say it again. I feel like this is one of the most under-addressed. And honestly, as I walk through exhibitions, as I judge exhibitions in Europe, in the United States, across the world, I don't see short-needle, single-flush pines being handled very well or presented with a lot of quality. And one of the big differences is not understanding how to handle their growth and how to use that growth to continue to improve the tree. I hope that you guys really key in to the scope of work tonight. And just, it's not super sexy. It's not super dramatic. But it's fundamental. It's textbook in terms of being able to take this genre and use it, and use it well. So I would encourage you guys to try and build your skills tonight. Now, I want to go back to the clip that you just saw. But I know first we've got some questions. So, Kendall, let's knock out some of these pertinent questions to the stream. Sure. The first one is, what's... Robin wants to know what's the best way to get back-budding in a lodgepole pine? Best way to get back-budding. So this is like one of the biggest questions that we experience in dealing with these pines is how do we get them to back-bud. Now, if you guys notice the quantity of growth that's on this tree, you'll understand that this tree really, outside of the distribution and pinching really strong areas, this tree was not highly manipulated over the course of the growing season or the spring season when it was adding foliage. We just distributed energy. And if we want to get really good solid back-budding and we want to see our short-needle single flushes thrive, the more growth that you add on the tip, the more transpiration that's happening here, the more photosynthesis that's happening there, the more back-budding that you... that you'll see throughout the tree. And that back-budding gets really, really strong right now as the tree moves into vascular growth mode and it's creating all of the setup for next year's spring push, right? So in that video we talked about the fact that the vascular system is being pumped full of resources. All of those resources are going to be what's generating next year's foliar mass and the tree doesn't have a credit card. So it's got to create that vascular system to support the foliage mass before it creates the foliage mass itself. Keep that in mind as you guys are working because that's a really important aspect to a lot of the scopes of work that we do here. In the spring we're managing strength distribution by directing that output of strength. In the fall we're managing strength accumulation to some degree. Maybe on a maple we're trying to keep it more refined. Maybe on a pine we're trying to build up the strength to encourage that back-budding or a dug fir or a spruce. Depends on what you're trying to accomplish. This is a refined tree with a lot of interior growth. So it's okay for us to come in here and do this kind of refinement work and really get photosynthesis into those interior buds and start to get a lot of that definition regained in the tree. This is really what we do to get a tree into show mode as well as anything else. So Paul says, I see you're holding the branch while pulling the needles. Is it damaging to pull while not supporting the branch? So yeah, that's an interesting question. Before I go there, Ricardo, bring me in close here. Notice how we're starting to form some of these really significantly stronger branches here. These are some of the branches where I'm getting these big tufts and I'm getting this big massive thick pad here kind of right in the center of the tree. This is almost too aggressive. I'm going to come back in here and I'm going to be pruning back to, I've got smaller buds here. I'm going to be pruning this back and kind of putting that in check and also transitioning that energy into these smaller interior pieces. I don't know if you can see this. I've got a bud right here and I've got a bud right here where I cut. Just by doing that, I'm lightening the visual mass in this area and I'm also redirecting that growth back to the interior and taking what was being put into one apical or tip bud or branch or candle on the, excuse me, hang on, let me go back here, shoot on the tip of that branch into some smaller pieces that have been set up inside of it. And that's really how we can redirect growth on short needle single flush pines back into the interior. People talk about, okay, how do you take the strong? How do you manage strength in these? How do you avoid or prevent if you're not plucking needles, the strong getting stronger? This is the move right here. Here's another one. I've got two small shoots right here. I've got this big thick central one. I take that central one out and then I'm going to clean out those crossing needles around it and notice how I lighten that area. Now, when I'm done with this branch, what you guys are going to have to look at if we go back out wide is is the density here and here the same? That's the goal that we're trying to accomplish via this reduction model. So coming back to your question, Paul, you notice that I'm holding it. So this is a tree that's been wired and styled, right? And also, as bone tie practitioners, we should never be exerting the force on the tree. So to just take this and just be pulling these and not using this hand, shame on you if that's how you're doing it, right? You have two hands to be working with at all times, right? Or most of us do, okay? If you've got two hands, use them. Use them. Why wouldn't you use them? Mr. Kimura used to say you've got two hands, you've got five fingers on each hand. That's ten digits that should be functioning in bone tie at all times, right? And I would say if you're not holding it, it's just simply an aspect of either inappropriate habits that have formed or improper technique. Right? So be using those hands. Support that tree. And just going beyond that, if this tree's wired, which this one is, I'm just going to be making more work for myself if I'm reaching my hands in there or I'm not reaching my hand in there and supporting because I'm going to be destroying the shape that I'm trying to not necessarily be destroying but instead improving via this application of work. So it makes sense to be supporting. Now notice, too, when you guys are watching my hands in here, I always tell people this. The best way to improve your bone tie technique or the best way to know whether a professional is proficient is to watch their hands, right? My hands are always entering the tree from the bottom side of the growth, right? Notice how I'm always entering here or I'm sliding my hand in here to get inside of that. That's what prevents me from breaking those needles. And this is a big part. You know, when I was an apprentice in Japan and Mr. Kimura would hand me this super dense tree and I would be like, oh my gosh, how do I even get my fingers in there? Learning how to put your hands in a tree and handle a tree properly is a big technique in bone tie. Always approaching a tree from the bottom is a fundamental thing that shouldn't even need to be discussed, but is something that even myself needs to be consistently reminded of because there is always that temptation to take that quick route, and that quick route is where we do a lot of the damage, particularly on pines with broken needles. So Bishop wants to know from a design standpoint, did you mirror the angle of the trunk with the angle of that first branch? Did I mirror like intentionally? Yeah. I don't. So mirroring the angle of the trunk with the angle of this branch was not necessarily my intention, but like that wasn't my conscious thought. But aesthetically, I think one of the things that we've kind of established in here is that that angle is a very important angle to be considering in the design process, and that angle for sure in this tree being pressed up against the trunk and following that angle is the best way that we create this kind of a design. And this goes into a more advanced design, and I've been telling people we're working on some design projects to help you guys be able to engage with our design consideration a little bit more. Just continue to be patient with that because those are gonna come and when they happen, they're gonna be really, really awesome productions. But in order to be able to engage with this design where you have so much of the tree moving back and then you're bringing the visual weight to the left again, if you have that up too high, it's gonna feel like, oh, I'm moving here and then I'm here. It's gonna feel like the tree wants to fall over. Only by dropping that down do you bring that balance and distribution of the weight back to the left and anchor this design. And that's a big part of tension in design and creating that tension and utilizing that tension well. So coming back to fall fertilization, Steven wants to know, what are the signals you look for before you start fertilizing for the fall? Yeah, that's a really good question. So what I'm looking for, number one, I'm looking for an increase in water utilization. That's a big one, right? Because now the water is starting to rise again for purposes beyond cooling from the heat. We see water rising for purposes of setting up vascular tissue and that water in terms of hydrogen and oxygen is that bond of water is broken via the use of energy from photosynthesis or the sun's energy through the photosynthetic process, right? That bond gets broken, a very strong bond, takes a lot of energy to do that. So we see that aspect of water utilization start to pick up, which justifies the increase. And we also are seeing, you know, a lot more gaseous exchange taking place with cooler temperatures, the stomata or the pores in the needles that allow that gaseous exchange to take place. Cooler temperatures, less heat, means that the tree has to be less concerned about preservation of water, can be more, I would say, risky or productive in terms of allowing gaseous exchange to take place. If it's letting water out, it's letting carbon dioxide in. And carbon dioxide is the source of carbon in that C6H12O6, carbon-hydrogen-oxygen composition that creates glucose or the energy source that trees utilize to grow, right? In one of their most simple forms. And so when we start to look at that, we see more water leaving the stomata via transpiration, more carbon entering the system, and we see a greater increase in water being utilized to add tissue. So increase in water uptake is a big indicator. Another indicator is the change in carbon in color, size, and swelling of the terminal buds at the tips of our branches. So let me get this wire off of here, and then, Ricardo, if you can come into this really strong section here where my hands are at. And you guys notice how red the tip of that bud is, and also that there's actual liquid sap emerging from that. That sap is being produced because there's resources being pumped to the tip of that bud, and that bud is actively swelling as we speak. It's getting bigger and bigger. The more that we fertilize, the more energy is going to be put into the meristematic tissue that has the ability to generate foliar mass next season. This is a big reason why we're fertilizing. We're loading up all of the resources inside of the cells to help them be more tolerant to cold conditions, right? Those resources act like antifreeze. They actually increase cold tolerance the more that we nutrition our trees across the fall. But that stored energy is what also causes the vascular tissue to swell, and is also what causes the vascular tissue to exude that resource that's moved up to the foliar tips in the spring and generate that foliar mass. So is there a certain temperature range that you look for, like for someone in Florida who may not have the same fall? So Florida's going to be different because now you're in a tropical environment, and you guys are probably dealing with species of trees that are potentially growing year-round or taking breaks as a cue to daylight length more so than temperature range, right? And so in Florida, you've got to be careful how you try to manipulate and apply this. But typically, when you start to see temperatures dropping down into the low 90s, high 80s, out of the 100s, out of the mid 90s, out of the high 90s, and you get into that 85, 88 degree as an average temperature, or even, you know, 82 to 88, that wheelhouse is really when metabolic activity is happening at its highest pace, and you're producing the most photosynthetic resources for growth to occur. So that temperature range for us, which is basically what we're sitting in right now, we're just sitting in this beautiful wheelhouse of growth. And our trees are using more water now than they were using when we hit record heat a few weeks ago at 106 degrees. And people always laugh at me about that, but it is very real. It's very real. Now, it's also a function of relative humidity present in the air. And we do have a fairly high amount of relative humidity. So that also needs to be considered. But for the most part, I would say it's a greater function of the movement of water than anything else. So Robin commented, since this is the season of vascular tissue sort of being very busy for lodgepole, is this a good time to do major branch bending? Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. So when we start to talk about major structural work on our trees, right, and this goes across the board for all trees, deciduous may be slightly different because we're dealing with leaves, which is a little bit more challenging. But on our pines, on our junipers, on our spruces, on our hemlocks, on our firs, on any of these coniferous trees that we're handling, we want to be doing major work where we could potentially be straining, stressing, stretching, cracking, tearing, or breaking the vascular system. We want to be doing that work just prior to or during a major phase of growth. Now, the advantage of the fall is that we don't have the massive movement of water that causes the cambial layer to easily separate from the xylem, which we see particularly in junipers in the spring, but is across the board for almost all species. And so the fall is advantageous from that perspective. Now, the thing that we have to fight or combat in the fall is the fact that we do have the ability, like we're supposed to hit 95 degrees on Monday. So we do still have these influxes of heat that if we do have vascular damage, we've got to shelter and protect trees that have experienced damage in the styling process. Fighting that environmental condition is one of the downsides. And if we look at spring versus fall in terms of periods of time to do major significant work, just prior to the first push of growth in the spring, you can get away with the most severity because you're not fighting the environmental factor and you have that massive push of resources coming that's going to be moving all of those sugars and starches out of the vacuole of the cell, carrying those to the tip of the branch to generate foliage mass. But now we're seeing all of those resources being put into the vascular tissue to patch the damage that would be happening. It's a really good time of year as long as we understand those heat spells or potential times when we're going to be losing a lot of water via transpiration, that we protect those trees appropriately so that they don't suffer damage if we have impeded the movement of vascular resources to that branch. So there's a trade-off. With both of them, there's a trade-off. Now I want to show you guys one more technique to pines that I haven't really... We didn't talk about it on the Scotts pine because that was too developed of a pine. And that is, where does the wire actually end? And when I'm applying this, what is my thought process? Now I just want to show you guys I've cleaned out between these two buds as I said we would to delineate them as two different pieces of growth. But I also cleaned it out because I want to be carrying this in between these to get this wire. And I'm going to turn this so that Ricardo can see this. Can you see that, Ricardo? And I'm going to bend this down so that you guys can see this. I want this. So my actual orientation of this branch is going to be here. All of these needles on the bottom here, if I can, I want to try and save some of these and prop those up and position that bud so that I can get that nice smooth arc in that branch that we talked about. So my last turn of wire is across the bottom there. Then I can come back in and clean off those bottom hanging needles that aren't pulled up with that last turn of wire. I'm not going to carry it all the way out to the end of this because my concern is actually in creating this tuft. This is the aesthetic that we're looking for is this tuft, okay? So then I'm going to leave that pad across the bottom right there. I'm going to leave just that little bit of excess, okay? Now this allows me to maintain this so that I don't knock that off of that piece of wire and lose that aesthetic that I've just spent all this time to create. And it gives me the ability, watch what happens here. If I grab this piece of wire with my index and the bottom with my thumb, I can push with my index and pull with my thumb and I can change the orientation of that bud, right? So I've got that wire right across the bottom here and I've got it here. I can push on this and lift with that and it changes the presentation of that bud so that I have total control of that angle, right? So if I clean off all of those bottom growing pieces and I just change that, I get that nice beautiful shift, that line that feels so soft and natural and is a major part of short needle single flush trees. Now this is different from a black pine. With a black pine, that angle is a lot steeper. We want those needles to be really sharp, masculine in their aesthetic. With these single flush pines, we've got a much smoother, softer angle to that branch, right? So we're just giving it a light prop up so that we have that beautiful aesthetic established. You got any more questions, Deeds? Yes, we do. All right. Lay them on me. And then we've got another little piece that goes along with some of the conversation we've been having here. We've got another piece of tertiary content that I want to introduce to you guys. So Alex says, this tree looks to have all of its branches originating from the upper third of the tree. How did you determine which branches to use and get them to where they fill in that larger negative space in the bottom? Ah. This is, you know, again, this comes back to having a very clear concept of design. And also, if you guys did see that Scottsdale tree, that Scotts Pine, or even the Cryptomeria last week, where I talked about where a branch originates in terms of the branches around it. Where it originates is where it's going to exist. And the tree itself tells you exactly what branches need to be where to execute what, right? So let's just talk, first of all, about the fact that all of the branches emerging from the upper 30% of this tree, not ideal, right? That's not an ideal structure. It is a structure that we commonly encounter in bonsai. It's an aesthetic that we're used to probably seeing. But in all actuality, really, really, and that's not to say this tree isn't a valuable tree. It is because it's been worked and the structure's been reset intelligently. But when you have a piece of material where all the branches originate from one location, that is a lower value of material than if you've got a lot of structural options. And we talked about that with the Scotts Pine stream as well in that traditional design, having a lot of places of origin for the structure to originate from, okay? But when I laid this down, now, branches, in terms of their order, I had this one primary line that was a continuation of the trunk line that forms this branch. If I had branches on this side, right? We've got this cylinder. If I have a branch hanging off on this side, I know that's gotta be here. If I've got a branch hanging on this side, I know it's going over here. If I can't put it over here, it's gotta come off, right? If I put it over here and I'm gonna lay something else on top of it, it's either gotta come off or the one above it's gotta come off. A lot of the decisions that are made aesthetically, for me, are a matter of fundamental structure and establishment of that fundamental structure. Where the branch exists or where the branch originates is where it's going to exist in terms of its order in the rest of the crown. So, as this line was coming down, all I was doing was just saying, oh, this branch exists here, I'm gonna drop that here. Oh, this branch starts on this side of that primary line, I'm gonna drop it here. I laid those out, I created my pads, and that became the structure that we've built this more refined design on. And we will, again, you know, I can't stress this enough, we will be focusing on these exact aesthetic decisions moving forward with Mariah Live. This is an area where we've had to build your guys' skills, we've done a lot of educating about horticulture, we've done a lot of educating about species, we've done a lot of educating about growth management. None of that will stop, but we are gonna start taking you guys deeper down the rabbit hole of creating that structure, understanding the nature of the plant in the plant and just working on how to create those and just building those solutions and making these solutions more important and more impactful for everyone and for the community and for the community and for the community and for the community and for the community times a year to be practicing bonsai it's like so awesome so is this the time of year that you do major work on a lot of species yeah almost almost every species is favorable to be worked in the fall season now where we need to quantify that knowledge is say for deciduous trees where if you come back in the fall and you remove a heavy amount of foliage off of a deciduous tree you know that that tree is using that foliage to create the resources that build its vascular tissue that increase its winter hardiness and that set it up for growth next year so if while it's right right now on a deciduous tree it's accumulating all of this energy and you cut it all off and style the tree and you're like ha styled it did it well now you have a tree that's very very susceptible to winter damage you have a tree that has very little vascular setup which you can expect a very poor bud push next spring right so you You've disabled that tree by making those choices now. Now, if you let it load up resources and then you get to next spring prior to bud push, you could, on a lot of species, do major trunk chops, major reduction of branching. And all that stored energy in the vascular tissue, boom, explodes. And you've got a tree to be created with all of that growth. So that's where people are talking about, is it too late to be doing deciduous work? Is it too late to be doing air layers and whatnot and things like that? I'm going to say we're approaching that, right? We did the stewardia a few weeks ago. The stewardia is actually pushing another flush of growth. We pruned several of our oaks a few weeks ago. The oaks are pushing another flush of growth. They have enough time, because we're in late August, to be producing growth that can get them that photosynthetic mass to build up their system. But those were literally done out of the blue. We're at the cusp of the limitation of that season, okay? So just be aware that we're kind of past that now. Once we get into that vascular season of growth, we've got to let that foliage mass do its work. Cesar has a question about how fertilization differs for pines in development versus refinement. Mm-hmm. Oh, that is the question. Gotcha. Okay, cool. All right. I was like, cool. So when we're in development, we're not necessarily worried about course growth. We're not worried about long needles. We're not worried about anything except for generating, thickening, elongating, healing, or expanding foliage mass. And what that means is we are going to be fertilizing aggressively from the spring, maybe stopping in the heat of summer, and fertilizing aggressively in the fall, okay? Now, when we have a tree that's in refinement, and granted, this is a very broad discussion, because even for a ponderosa pine in development that has such long needles, I don't care about the length of those needles. I'm fertilizing a ponderosa pine in development, spring through fall. If it's in refinement, I'm not. With a multi-flush pine in development, I'm fertilizing spring through fall. In refinement, if I prune the candles, I'm not. And there's a tertiary video, or there's an extended cut video for you on that exact subject that will be nested with this stream. Okay? So when you're in development, you don't care. You want growth. When you're in refinement, you want strategic growth. Okay? Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. So I want to take you guys into one of the big considerations that we have during the fall season with this addition of vascular tissue. Okay? And that is the unwiring process. Now, just the same as I feel like there's not a lot of discussion around just this, and you guys are watching me as I'm talking. I hope you're watching as I'm cleaning these up, and I know Ricardo's giving you guys a lot of good shots into how I'm handling the needle mass here, but another thing that people don't talk about is unwiring, and Mr. Cremura used to always say this. We would get trees where the client wouldn't want to pay us to unwire it, so they would unwire the tree themselves, and we would get the tree, and we would have a plethora of dead branches to deal with, right, because unwiring is a big deal. In particular, the way that we practice bonsai at Mariah is we're trying to get to a point where we have less wire on the tree. In order to get there, with our conifers that produce bark and those wire scars go away very quickly, we do allow the wire to dig in a little bit more than we would where, like a maple, we wouldn't want those scars, right? If you allow the wire to dig in, you've got to know how to take it out because no longer can you cut it off, right? And so this season, right now, you're seeing swelling in the vascular tissue that's going to start to see wire biting in, I want to show you guys how we go about the unwiring process, and inside of that, right, the tree that we're doing the unwiring process with is the scots pine that we pruned in the BESOP stream. You guys get to see the product of that pruning process with a short needle single flush in development, fertilized correctly, and pruned at the appropriate time. Take a look when you come back. We'll get back to your guys' questions and keep working on this tree. So at this time of year, one of the things that we're dealing most with is the expansion and vascular tissue on our trees. And with that expansion, in addition to vascular tissue, we see wires start to really constrict the growth and bite in. And so on trees that are showing that kind of constriction and we're starting to experience that wire damaging the vascular tissue, we need to be coming back in and removing that wire. Now, people don't often talk about how to appropriately remove wire from a tree, which is interesting because back in Japan, this was actually the period and the time that the most damage is done to the tree based on the fact that we've got vascular tissue wrapping over the wire and removing that wire and the technique of it is important to preserving the quality and integrity of that vascular tissue. So during this time of season, the technique of unwiring and the attention to detail of the expansion of the vascular tissue is one of the most important things we can be focusing on. So one of the big questions that's always asked of me is, do we unwire or do we cut the wire off? And one of the things that I always tell people is, do you unwire? In particular, if you're allowing the wire to stay on the tree long enough to have a structural impact. And that is to say, if you're leaving the wire on the tree long enough to create or generate enough growth to hold the position that that wire was designed to hold. So we always will have some degree of wire scar on the tree for a conifer or a tree that has bark that can cover that scar. And as a result, unwiring allows us to enable that tissue to develop and then cut that wire in a way that's very sound and safe for the branch. So if you'll notice here, this is a little bit farther than I would ever suggest you guys go. And this really snuck up on me as the fall season caused vascular expansion in this pine. As a result, if I try to cut this off, I'm going to do a significant amount of damage to the tissue around this. And even in the unwiring process, I've got to be very careful. Now, the technique to unwiring when we get this kind of wire dug in is to support the wire and always move it in the exact same line or plane that it's been applied. So notice how I'm stopping it from sliding across this and scuffing off that vascular tissue. So I'll stop it right here with my finger and I'll straighten that. I'll stop it right here with my finger and I'll straighten that. I'll stop it right here with my finger and I'll straighten that. And in doing so, what I end up being able to do is remove this wire in planes so that I'm not rubbing off or cutting or scratching or pulling. If I'm not cutting off any of the bark that is associated with this, that is the biggest danger in the unwiring process. We can't cut it off. So when we're unwiring, we need to be doing so correctly. And doing so correctly means functioning in the plane of the wire, okay. Now, one of the other questions that's commonly asked of me is, do I need to take off wire that's not biting in? Well, this smaller wire definitely isn't biting in, which means we could potentially leave it. However, if we've got enough wire around it that is digging in and we're going to be removing it, it doesn't do us a lot of good to leave finer wires still attached to the tree because chances are we're going to be coming back and rewiring this and the position of this finer wire is probably going to be impeding our ability to create or apply better wire the second time around. So we might as well go ahead and unwire this in order to improve the efficiency of the operation the next time around. And one of the last things that I want to show you guys, this thinner wire is clearly attached to this thinner branch or was wired in combination with this thinner branch. Now if I unwire this piece completely, what'll happen is I'm going to open the door for the shoulder of this branch to bear a tremendous amount of the burden and the strength of the unwiring process. And I don't want to do this. So actually what I'm going to do is I'm going to keep this wire applied and I'm going to come to the tip of this and I'm going to start the unwiring process from here. Now by doing that, I take the pressure off of the shoulder of this finer piece of wire and I preserve the integrity of it. Now notice how I have these tiny buds here that are right up against the wire. I want to be extremely careful here, support the branch and support the wire to keep it from exerting force on those smaller buds. So that I preserve the integrity of it. So that I preserve all of the growth that is a result of the way that we prune this branch. The more that you support and protect this branch from exerting force on the shoulder or any singular location, the healthier that this is going to be after the unwiring process. And this is an important component of allowing a tree to establish enough tissue to be able to fully take on the shape that that wire was designed to give while also not damaging it in the process of removing the wire. Okay, so notice the really light yellowish color on this piece of growth versus the dark bluish color of the growth around it. Now this piece of growth had wire digging in significantly and when I came back and I unwired the tree, if you take a closer look here, you'll recognize that the vascular tissue was so constricted by several pieces of wire being in the junction of that branch that it caused an abnormal amount of swelling here to the point that it has officially cut off resources flowing in. That's the branch that is still growing to the tip of this branch. Now it's not a deal breaker being that this tree is still in the developmental process, but this is definitely something that you want to avoid having happen when you're creating bonsai and you're wiring trees because it sets us back in terms of the branching that we've created. That'll be a piece that has to be removed as it would never be structurally sound and always have a very major flaw that would probably come back and bite us in the future. So moving forward, we'll pay much closer attention to this tree. the rate at which its vascular tissue expands. And if you'll notice here, we're getting the exact same quantity of vascular formation around that constricting wire. So we're going to need to focus our efforts on getting this wire off immediately. See that? So I got to hold this in order to not do damage to the rest of the tissue. If I'm not supporting that, then what's going to happen is it's going to rub off the bark or it's going to do damage there. And this is caught somehow. So I can always just cut this on one side, pull this through on the other, and be free of it so that I can continue working without getting a lot of wire built up and accumulated. But really that constant support, notice that I'm holding back here so that this branch isn't moving around a lot because we cut off a dead branch that was connected. And when you get to that point where you're not able to get that support into this, that support is a big part of the unwiring process. And this is no different from the wire application. People just don't take unwiring as seriously, and they should. It's an area and an operation that can cause major damage. Now typically when we get to wire that's thicker than say 10 gauge, I'll come back and I'll try to cut this off assuming that it's not too dug in. If it is too dug in, then we've got to free this by taking maybe our wire cutter or our plier, straightening out the wire and then cutting the wire off. that tip, and then working in the direct line, supporting, always supporting, okay, so that we're not damaging the vascular tissue. So there's a lot of technique in the unwiring process that is wise for people to have their minds wrapped around so that we can be sure to not inflict damage on the tree doing something that doesn't even have the ability to advance the tree's aesthetic. This is just a routine aspect of maintenance that is necessary for every tree to be wired and continue to survive once that wire becomes constricting to vascular growth. All right, so we've got a lot of questions about wiring, do we wire in opposite directions if we get wire scars, et cetera, and coming off of that clip, I want to address that really quickly. So bear in mind that the function of wire is not to be accommodating aspects of the tree, it's to be establishing aesthetic decisions, okay, so that means if I need a rotation, of wire in a specific direction to accomplish a bend or a twist or whatnot, then if I've got wire scars from wrapping it in that direction, I'm still going to wrap it in that direction, I'm just going to change my path to avoid the wire scars, right, so if possible, it's easier to wrap in the opposite direction to avoid wire scars, but that is not, that's not my priority and that's not how I make that decision, so I hope that that helps you guys kind of with my mindset about it. Also bear in mind, though, that I... You know, having wired, you know, whatever, four, five, six thousand trees, wherever I'm at now, which is a lot, I've wired a lot of trees, it's easier for me to change that path and have the ability to avoid those wire scars, and so if it's a difficult thing for you guys, then absolutely, do what you got to do to avoid those, if it means spinning in the opposite direction, then please do so, okay? And then I wanted to talk about fertilizer, because that is another popular topic right now. So this fall season, now that we've had a full season of growth over the course of the spring, to be building up the microbiotic activity in trees that were repotted, or to be kind of managing the growth and creating the kind of growth that we want, this is the season that we really go heavy on fertilization, because in every situation, if we're trying to accomplish a really strong winter hardy tree that's going to be set up for really good growth next year... Supplemental nutrition is a really important part of building up that strength. This is the time of year that we can put the pedal to the metal a little bit, and really get a lot of built up energy inside of the vascular system. So we're going with heavy amounts of feed, which is a tablespoon and a half per location, and we're going every four weeks, assuming we're seeing the fertilizer break down. And we showed you that in the video, where you saw that fertilizer decomposing, you saw microbiotic activity hitting that kind of temperature range and activity at this period of major growth. The tree and microbiotic activity work in symbiosis. If one is doing one thing well, it probably means the other is also executing their job in that symbiotic relationship well. So you can use some of those indicators, fertilizer's breaking down rapidly, ah, that means that the system is working. Fertilizer is not breaking down rapidly. That means that there's something in the system that isn't working the way that we necessarily want it to. Those indications allow you and give you metrics to be able to know what's happening inside of that invisible, unviewable portion, which is the root system. And for pines, you know, even more than junipers, the most important piece of the tree because it's the epicenter of strength. And we know, you know, with the pine repotting, we talked about the sheen. All of those things start to become very pivotal pieces of knowledge when we're building up strength for next year at this season, okay? So I have another unwiring-related question from Sujata. Sujata says, when you cut into the branch, as much as was seen in the video, do you wait for the wire damage to heal? And then when you reapply a wire, do you avoid that damaged area? So I don't particularly, with pines, and again, I'm going to continually refer to this concept of phototropism. Which is the growth... It's the plant orienting itself to move towards the sun, right? When you have a tree that is very phototropic in its growth habit, it's very strong in its ability to reorient, and, you know, if you've ever seen a black pine branch, if you lay it down, the new buds will actually curve up like this. Very, very phototropic pines are, right? And it's a survival mechanism for their growth being compressed in the alpine or their growth being dislodged on the coast, in the case of multi-flush pines, right? And so when you have that phototropic effect, if you're trying to get to a point where you're using less wire to hold the shape of the tree, then when you unwire, you need to be rewiring soon thereafter in order to hold that shape and not lose the progress that you've made. Because the memory of the tissue, this tree is probably, I'm guessing this tree is closing in on 120, 150 years old, right? Judging by where it's growing, super high elevation, very short growing seasons, extremely stunted. So if I have 120 years of muscle memory in the tissue and I unwire this thing and I leave it for three months, a lot of that structure is going to rebound. Whereas if I reset it, it just continues adding vascular tissue, particularly at this time of year, adding vascular tissue to hold that structure with another layer to override that 120 years. This is how we get trees to a point where they stop needing so much wire and so much shaping. They're going to lose a lot of tension every time that they grow, right? And so I typically try to unwire, rewire. Now the exception to that would be if there's significant damage, right? We unwired, we stripped some bark. We had some weak junctions because it bit in and it caused a really thin area in the branch. I will back off at that point because I would rather be able to come back and wire that branch after it's recovered than to risk wiring it, to not lose the shape and have it die, right? And so that would be the one exception. Okay. And then, you know, always trying to maintain that shape so that you build more and more tissue and override the memory is if you do have damage. And I think that's what you're asking. And that is an exception for me for sure. What else you got, Kendall? Yeah. So Alex is another unwiring question. Alex says, so you were leaving a decent-sized lever of already unwound wire as you went. Sorry, that was a lot of Ws. Okay. And Alex says, is it easier that way or would you recommend cutting some of the excess unwound wire as you go? Yeah, that's a good question. I mean, I think it's situation specific. If you get your hands buried into a really tight situation or that wire gets so long that it's starting to get in the way, bump branches, cause more problems, then you got to cut it, right? But if obviously, you know, and we talk a lot about the use of leverage in the way that we wire at Mirai. That lever allows you to put a lot less stress and force on the tree during the unwiring process. And I mean, even in this wiring, I'm using the tip of this wire all the way out at the tip to maximize the leverage that I'm applying. It allows me to wire much easier. So if you've got the space, I think that's a more effective, low impact, very low force being applied to the tree method of unwiring. However, if you have a situation where you don't have the space. Then obviously, the better option is going to be to shorten that piece of wire so that you're able to do it without damaging the surrounding branches or needle mass. And then Paul's wondering in terms of fertilizer, if I use a tea bag, how do I tell if it's being used at a rapid rate? Yeah, I mean, so the tea bag also decomposes as does the fertilizer inside of it. If your microbiotic activity is ramped up. Now, obviously, it happens at a slower pace because you don't have direct contact. There's a little bit of weathering that has to take place in that tea bag for the microbiomes to be able to access that. So that's definitely on the trees that we apply tea bags to. I'm using the reference of the trees around it as much as I am for those trees that we do use tea bags on. And not every, when you guys use tea bags, not every location on the tree that needs tea bags or not every location will need a tea bag. We use it to hold on. On vertical surfaces or surfaces that have too much of a slope or are too compacted because of the root growth that we've been facilitating so that that fertilizer would wash off. But if you guys get to a position where there's a flat spot on that same tree that you could let the fertilizer sit on the surface, then I would absolutely take that option. And we've talked about that before. That contact being really, really valuable in the decomposition process because the microbiomes have a direct contact. So if you're using a tea bag that's too compacted, then that's a really, really valuable option. And we don't have a lot of capacity to decompose that organic material as it weathers and softens with water. And then are there some tea bags that are too thick or tough? Absolutely. Absolutely. I mean, we're looking for paper, number one. You know, if you get into cloth tea bags, then you're already kind of starting down the wrong path. You're looking for really thin, rapid decomposing, loose-leaf paper tea bags. The cheaper they are typically, the better they are. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So I think that's a really, really important question. I think it's an interesting question and it creates a lot of problems in our society. I think it's a really, really good point and it's growing rapidly. You know, the fact that we can't understand simply the difference between organic mineral and non-organic mineral, and so on. I think that's a really good question and I think it really helps to raise the bar. One of the issues with that is then not tearing them as you're loading fertilizer into them. But it's just a mechanism to hold that fertilizer in place until the—You know, when we talk about microbiotic activity, you're talking about a free way of thread-like root, you know, really fine root like hyphae. And that, those penetrate that organic material to decompose it. And so once you get that thread-like hyphae. highway occupying that organic matter, the fertilizer more or less sticks to the surface of the soil if you've got a really sound microbiotic system set up. That's what you're trying to achieve, and that tea bag is simply holding it there until you get that to occur. So the thinner it is and the more rapid that the tea bag breaks down, actually the better for the availability of nutrition to the tree. Eric has a question about repotting in the fall. Can you do it? You know, this is a question that I've been asked a lot in the Q&As, and I will continue to give you guys the same response, and that is if you make it to the fall, right, now there was a deficiency. There was a definitive reason in Japan that we would repot in the fall, and that was so that we did not impact the spring quality of growth on some of our pine species that can show reduced quality of growth based on a spring repot, and namely that was Japanese white pine that we would see a lot of that happen with, okay? And so we would wait until the fall or the late summer. We would be doing a repot then, and the growth was already solidified and established, okay? But there was a definite reduction in the severity or the thoroughness of the repotting that we could do at that time of year, and there was also a reduction in the winter hardiness of those trees based on the fact that we had reduced the tree's system and ability to move resources and prepare for that winter cold, okay? So it comes at a cost to repot in the fall. At Mirai. And so we had to be more thorough and get exactly what I want in the repotting process, and so I still am not a big fan of fall repotting just because our greenhouse isn't big enough and I'm able to achieve the results I want without the detrimental outcome that I did see happen a lot of times with trees in Japan, and it allows me to be more aggressive with more confidence in the springtime, and so I always wait, right? But can you do it? Is it possible? Sure. Absolutely possible. Should you do it? Mm. Good question. Good question. Yeah, we've definitely talked about that quite a bit on the live Q&As. Yeah. Especially with, yeah, percolation not happening or... That's right. That's right. And my feeling is is if you made it to this time of year, you're already so close to spring with a decreasing amount of demand on your tissue that why not just wait? Why not just wait is always gonna be... You know? And to supplement that... Yeah. We also showed you guys, or we've discussed in the impromptu Q&As, the use of that tape barrier. That will be a technique that I'm gonna illustrate for you guys in the upcoming weeks. And actually, Kendall, can you write that down? What am I writing down? Tape barrier for water retention. Oh. That would be a good... We've diagrammed that. Oh, you wanna... Yeah, I've diagrammed it, but there's actually a tree that I need to do it on that's showing apical weakness, because the sheen isn't getting water because it's so compact. So I'll just... Cool. I'll take you guys along for that and show you how it's done. It's written down. Yeah. Cool. Christopher has a question about... Do you feed trees more frequently that are in smaller pots because you need to water more? No. No. I feed based on what the decomposition of the organic material is capable of. So bear in mind that water isn't the decomposing component. It's the microbiotic activity. You could water a tree a ton and not have the fertilizer break down at all. If you don't have microbiotic activity functioning at a really high rate inside of your tree. And so don't be duped by the concept that water is what's causing decomposition. Now, water does soften it. Water does carry microbiotic activity. Water does move the spore formation and impregnation of some of those things. But water is not what's causing the breakdown process. Okay? And with that discussion of watering... I want to take you guys into the last tertiary clip that we've prepared for you guys this evening, which is a direct discussion of watering, resources, etc. We're going to walk you guys through this. I'm going to get through one more branch on this. How far in are we, Arthur? Hour and a half? So we'll walk you through kind of this last tertiary clip. We'll come back. We'll show the fruits of our effort. We're going to have the ability to spin the tree and see some of the immediate results. Okay. And I'm sure you'll see this tree on Instagram in its finished state or eventually on hopefully a gallery that should be coming soon, you know, in the next year or so for bone time arrival. Take a look at this. We'll catch you guys in two minutes. So fall watering is one of these really special times of year because you can literally see the trees making a tremendous transition in the way that they're metabolizing and behaving. And the big... the big piece of that transition is just understanding that they're getting past that summer dormancy where the heat was a little bit too intense for them to be adding any kind of new load of work to the already significant demands of water being the cooling factor in that intense heat via transpiration. But now that we're seeing slightly lower temperatures, we're seeing a decreasing daylight length, these trees are being cued to be changing their function of life. They're changing their function of metabolism towards producing vascular tissue. That is the highway for next year's growth to be added to the tree. Now, obviously, as bonsai practitioners, we know that we're going to continually try to be keeping these trees small, but it doesn't mean that the trees are going to be behaving any differently. And most of the trees that we're dealing with are using their foliar mass that they currently have as the reference for what kind of vascular system they need to produce. So we're going to continue to facilitate the expansion of that foliar mass next year. The trees don't have credit cards like we do, which means they've got to create the vascular system first before they put the growth on to be able to support that growth once it's added to the tree. If you don't create that vascular system, then the money or the investment that the tree's making towards that expansion of foliar mass could be poorly placed if you don't have the capacity to continue to drive that investment forward. And so we're seeing this fall season as what we would say the money-saving portion of the year. Okay, so some of the theory behind fall watering for us, and I like sharing that stuff with you guys because, and I have to be really honest with you, the first two or three years that I was teaching the Defining Concepts courses at Mirai, which again, registration's coming out in one week for everybody that signed up. If you guys want on the list, get on the list. I doubt we're going to have any open spots for the public. The first two, maybe even into the third year, there was a lot of information that was hypothetical but hadn't been proved out. And a lot of that information, there's been adjustments to the information as we've gotten better knowledge, as we've seen some of it work really well, as we've had to experiment with other portions of the knowledge not serving their purpose, or seeing the knowledge really work. But the watering in particular is something that we have made a transition from talking about it scientifically but not necessarily carrying that thought into the practice to when Troy and I speak about watering in the garden, we are having the conversation that you guys are listening to that's literally the dialogue that guides our actions in the watering process. This is, man, we're hitting this time of year. You can see the bud swelling. We're seeing the fertilizer break down. There is a question about a small container and fertilizer decomposing really quickly. I'm going to come back to that. But those indicators are telling us to change our game. And, you know, these are the signs. These are the tells that the tree, this is the communication that exists in bonsai that you guys have got to become very, I think, fluent in in order to practice bonsai at a higher level. And I would encourage you guys to invest quite a bit of time and energy in the process of observation. When you see a tree that's really healthy, notice what's happening. Notice what you're doing. Notice what's different. When you see a tree that's not so healthy, take a look at what's happening. Notice what's different about it, what may have gone wrong or what may be improvable. I've got a limber pine, very small buds, very minimal amount of needle mass, and I haven't been able to figure it out. I dug into it today, and just below the surface, literally all the fine particles accumulated in a hard pack, and there's no oxygen. And limber pine have to have oxygen. They need more oxygen than water to thrive. So I went in, I broke all of that up, replaced it, watered it really thoroughly, and literally, and I'm not kidding you, I'm not exaggerating, over the course of an 85-degree day today, I saw the buds make a shift in color. And it wasn't just wishful thinking. It can happen that quick, when those trees are metabolizing at the rate that they're metabolizing at now. Okay? Coming back to, does a smaller container need to be fertilized more because it's being watered more? And then, over the break, that gentleman wrote back and said, no, I'm saying, I'm seeing a fertilizer breakdown quicker than four weeks. That's great. We've got trees that we see the fertilizer almost gone within two weeks. That doesn't mean that we need to be fertilizing more, because still, if you guys have Akadama, or if you have an organic plant, if you have an organic component of any kind, because Akadama is an organic component, it's unfired clay, even if your bag says it's fired, that's not true. Okay? And if you've got that organic component with that cation exchange capacity, or if we just translate cation exchange capacity to the ability to bind nutrition with charged sites on that soil particle, then you're going to be holding the nitrogen in the system, even though the fertilizer is breaking down. So we typically function on that four-week interval for application, because that's how long it takes nitrogen to become water-soluble and leach out of the system. Right? And nitrogen contributing to foliar growth. If we want more foliar growth, we add more nitrogen. Right? But we don't want to accumulate nitrogen, because nitrogen can turn into a salt in our soil system, particularly in a smaller container, and that's where over-fertilization starts to become a bit of an issue. Every four weeks is safe. It's enough. Right? Don't be duped into, if one drop is good, two drops is better. Right? Pull back. Just a consistent, sustainable application. Every four weeks in the fall, we're feeding heavier to prepare for winter and next spring's bud push. What you got, Kendall? I'm just trying to navigate all these questions. Yeah? There's a lot going on. Yeah, we'll have to save some of these. They're not super relevant, so. Okay. All right. So, you guys know, we'll come back to relevant questions, or they need to be asked during a stream where we're discussing that subject. But that's also what the impromptu Q&As are for. So, if you guys don't get questions answered, either because we ran out of time, or because the question didn't have immediate relevance to this stream, we're always there for you, and we're constantly adapting. Let us know if you have any questions that you'd like to ask. We're always there for you, and we're constantly adapting. Let us know if you have any questions that you'd like to ask. We're always there for you, and we're constantly adapting. Or because the question didn't have immediate relevance to this stream, we're always there for you, and we're constantly adapting. Let us know when we can kind of meet your time need to get those questions answered with the Q&A, because the Q&A for us is flexible to meet your guys' needs. Got anything? No. No? Okay. All right. Cool. So, I want to come back to the aesthetics of this system. Now, I've been pruning off a lot of really cool things and really strong growth, and this is where, you know, as I make those prunes, I'm directly deciding, do I have the growth in, around, and behind it to be able to occupy that space and maintain that foliar density so that I do have even distribution, right? And again, I want to clarify and reinforce that we're not trying to use needle plucking as the way that we distribute the strength in our single flush pines, right? We're actually pruning and trying to make sure that we're transitioning strength from the tip and the buds and the shoots at the tip back into the interior as well as on our short needles, pinching during the candle elongation process in the spring. These are the ways that we manage strength in our single flush pines because they won't produce that second flush of growth. So, as you guys have been watching tonight, I hope you've been keying into those moments where I am making those decisions so that you're able to better understand my thought process as I'm handling a tree like this. Now, the one thing that you guys aren't going to see tonight that I'm going to be doing in the crown, notice now after having pruned these different areas and how laid out, how clean the bottom of those branches are. I'm sure if I step back, I'll see what you guys are seeing, which is not nearly as clean as I feel like it is, but I'll step back and make that tweak before we end the stream tonight. Notice how bulbous and full this feels, right? That's what the whole tree felt like and now notice how streamlined and beautiful and tight and compact and spacious and air and light, everything's getting to everything that's happening here. We see up here, oh man, we've got a lot of work to do. This will probably come back more than these lower sections to be able to equal that out as well as to prevent the crown from just exploding into this big Darth Vader helmet, you know, this big round ice cream cone on top of this really rugged trunk shape. I don't want that aesthetic. That's not a beautiful aesthetic and interestingly enough, seeing Japanese bonsai at the World Bonsai Convention, that has become the aesthetic of those trees that have been in the development refinement process for so long that they're at that junction that a lot of those trees need to have their proportions regained and reworked by major decisions being made in the shape and design and there's just not the same quantity of professionals making those decisions in Japan now as there used to be, right? And this is the turning over of a generation to a younger generation that you're seeing happen there. I think it takes a lot of work to maintain an apex and a canopy that is continuing to be proportional and not being lulled into the complacency of allowing that to happen, right? Now I'm sure when I'm 60 years old and I've been redoing apexes and checking growth and doing this for, there will come a point where I'm like, you know what? The ice cream cone looks awesome. It looks awesome. I'm tired, right? Right now, I'm not tired and we've got to be pushing hard to maintain quality in the apical region of the tree with this level of design. I got a question. Alex wants to know when's the last application of fertilizer for fall timing? Yeah, that's a good question. So last application of fertilizer, that's a great question. Now, typically for us, we hit trees at end of August, early September, right? We'll hit them again in October and if we have a really warm October and November has all of the signs of being a warm November, we may hit with a very light dosage at the beginning of November in the Pacific Northwest, okay? So we'll go September and October, two applications, maybe a light application if we feel like we can get it done. We'll get a little bit more in, okay? Now, this is for conifers. If we're dealing with deciduous, in particular Japanese maples, which can be with a warm spell in the fall and enough nitrogen added, encouraged to produce a new flush of growth, right? That's a no-no. We don't want that to happen. And that's where people say, do we use a low nitrogen in the fall? For trees that have a propensity to be encouraged to grow again with a nitrogen dosage, yes, pull back on that nitrogen. Mid fall, we'll stop feeding with nitrogen in our deciduous trees that have a propensity to push another growth. For our conifers, they will make the decision. I want that nitrogen. I don't want that nitrogen. Do you feel like the nitrogen today? I don't feel like the nitrogen today, but some people feel like nitrogen today. They can have that nitrogen, right? Let them make that choice in that fall feed, okay? All right, so I'm going to rotate this around. We're going to step back and take a good look at this together. I'm going to join you guys back here. Oh, heavens to Betsy. Okay, so what a... What a significant contrast now when you see, and bear in mind, some of these... Now, if you guys are... This is actually a good thing to teach you guys. If you guys are dealing with... Because we're cleaning from the bottom up, because we're doing design and cleaning at the same time, a lot of these needles are ending up here. To come in and just tap on the bottom of the branch allows a lot of those needles to fall out of that canopy. And then once we're done with that, let's see if I can... Let's see if I got something here. Hang on just a sec. Let me grab some tweezers real quick. I'll show you guys how to clean your pines. I'm going to steal Troy's tweezers. Troy, I'm stealing your tweezers. There they are. Huh. He doesn't like it when we use his tools, but he'll have to deal with it today. Okay, so we can tap on the bottom of the branch. Not enough to dislodge anything. And then we just come from the interior and use those tweezers to kind of rake up through that. And what this does is it pulls all those needles up to that position that you've been trying to achieve anyways. And kind of allows you to reset some of this growth in a really nice way. You know, in cleaning your trees out, finishing with a really good, strong, clean final product. It's a big part of finishing off the work. Right? And it's a heck of a lot better than going in here and trying to tweezer out every single needle that's caught in here. Anyways, small technique for you guys. Okay? It's beautiful because you can see... Yeah, you can see the difference. If you look at the branches in the back on the right, and you look at the branches to the left here, you can see the difference in what we've achieved over the course of this evening. I mean, the contour to these branches showing that maturity of those tips. Boom. And seeing that contour of that pad showing that maturity. And then you see all of these needles, right? And we're looking over here. All these needles hanging off of the bottom. A real disorganization to this structure. And all we did was just small little pieces of wire. Cleaning off the bottom. Cleaning in between the shoots that first eighth to quarter inch. And then making a few prunes on overly long pieces that are maybe sitting over the top or growing outside of that silhouette back into the interior buds or to the structure itself. And this pine has taken on a new life. And I haven't had to rewire it. I haven't really had to do an immense amount of work. This is how every single year you take that growth and evolve it and evolve it and evolve it and evolve it. This tree could sit in the Coco exhibition without a doubt. Put it into a beautiful pot and it could sit in the Coco exhibition without a doubt. Arthur, do you have that shot of this in Spectrum? We'll show you guys this tree on display in one of the exhibitions of my work that we had. I love that shot. Yeah, yeah. Really, really strong. Really interesting play on color there, too. That's that tree. And really one of, I would say, one of its really strong phases of glory. But I'm really happy with where this tree has come. I've worked hard to distribute the energy so that the interior branches, the lower branches are as strong as the apex. And we're going to continue to do that. Greg has a design question about that gin. Cool. So could you just talk about your process of creating that gin? And Greg commented, does it take your eye into the outer space? Like, is that what you're going for? I mean, so my feeling with Deadwood is Deadwood is designed to show you what was, but isn't anymore, right? It's a remnant. It's a discussion of the history. It's a discussion of something more that doesn't necessarily exist. And I like the idea that this tree had this piece of growth here. And actually, Arthur, if you can take them back to that original, unworked shot. This is a living branch that was on the tree. This wasn't actually a piece of Deadwood. It was alive coming off of this elbow. So if you guys look right at that curve on the lower right, now go back to that raw piece, and the lower right where the trunk starts to curve, you can actually see the living branch that's sticking off of that curve, right? It's a big, it was a big prominent piece. This is the remnant of that. And notice that I kept, come on back to this tree, Arthur. Notice that I kept the changes in direction, right? I always try with my Deadwood to maintain as much movement through the Deadwood as I can. And sometimes that makes the Deadwood excessively long to some people. And sometimes it's not long enough for my dead wood to be able to actually grow out of those eyes. For me, it's not about whether I'm taking your eye away because I think your eye is dominated by the visual mass of the green. I think that's an accent. And the more interest you can pull out of that accent that is that Deadwood, the better. And the more movement, the more changes in direction, similar to movement in a trunk that that piece of Deadwood has, the more valuable it is. If you took that piece of gin off of this tree, it would literally change the quality of this tree exponentially. For the worse, not the better. So I've always been very fond of that piece of deadwood, and we'll continue to try and preserve it to the best of our ability. Greg wants to know, what are some mistakes to avoid with short-needle single-flush pines? So some mistakes to avoid. Overly plucking, number one, right? Because you're going to shut down the back-butting system. You're going to shut down the development system. I think overly managing the growth. People try to keep trees from growing, keep trees from evolving, and hold them in this shape. That is really, really detrimental to the evolution of the tree. And one of the advantages that we have at Mirai is we have so many trees that we can't necessarily handle all of our trees as often as I would like. As an attentive-to-detail person that's overly compulsive about cleanliness, right? And so as a result, we have healthier trees because of that. And I think that that is an important thing to understand, right, and play into the evolution of things. Don't overly handle them, right? Don't be concerned about the growth. You guys have just been given the tools and the skill set, right, over the course of, say, three streams on short-needle single-flush. We showed you how to pinch. We showed you guys how to handle, actually, four. We showed you how to handle post-growth and development. We showed you guys how to fundamentally style the structure, right, and lay it out for the first time. And now we've showed you how to refine that growth. We're not even, let's see, we started this March 14th. It's now April or August 23rd today. So we're five months and one week past the launch of this platform. And we've already carried you through. Four. And we've already carried you through the phases of development of short-needle single-flush pines. I couldn't be prouder. I could not be prouder because, honestly, short-needle single-flush pines were the reason that we created this stream. So to see it coming to fruition is really wonderful. All right, we got any more? Yes. Rennie wants to know, so you say in the spring it's okay to prune 50% of foliage on healthy trees. Is this the same during this time? I think it's the same during this time. In the early fall. And typically when we talk about fall work, I'm glad you asked that, Rennie. Again, deciduous are a different consideration, right? Because we know that they're going to shed all their leaves, whereas conifers are going to maintain them. Okay, so that's a big thing to think about. Also, we've got to think about how much time does this tree need to move its resources around and respond to a reduction in foliage mass and respond to the hormonal reallocation, etc. And typically I would say four to six weeks prior to your first commonly anticipated harvest. If you're going to have a hard freeze, which is 28 degrees Fahrenheit or negative three degrees Celsius or below, if you're four to six weeks prior to that, you're probably okay. Any closer than that, you're not going to get enough sugar starch loading to give it the ability to resist damage in that first major cold issue. And so I would use that as your buffer. You have time in the fall up until you've got that four to six week window before a major cold event as anticipated by what you expect. So you're going to have a lot of experience on kind of an annual basis in your environment or even in your backyard. And then one last question, Paul said, I noticed that you stayed away from watering foliage. Is this on purpose? Definitely do not water foliage. Where we are at in the Pacific Northwest, we have enough relative humidity and we have enough problem with disease as a result of it being a favorable place for plants to grow that watering the foliage is not favorable. Now, if you guys are in Colorado, if you're in New Mexico, if you're in a very arid environment, if you're in a very arid, dry environment, Southern California, maybe, you may see watering the foliage as beneficial. Maybe it helps cut down on spider mite population. Maybe the trees respond with a lusher foliage or more robust growth. That's great. Use those indications that the tree is giving you to guide how you choose to pursue that application. The other reason that we don't water the foliage here at Mirai is I want to force the roots and the foliage to have as significant of a connection as I possibly can. And that is facilitated by not supplementing the loss of water from the foliage mass itself. And with pines, misting and watering the foliage mass is not very intelligent because they have such a thick, waxy covering that there's very little water that's actually going to get in there. And there's very limited transpiration that's taking place regardless, right? With junipers, it's a little different. You can shut down transpiration. You can allow water to rehydrate the foliage mass. Foliar misting can be a bigger tool for junipers. And then how do you feel about foliar feed? So foliar feed is also something that I'm not a huge fan of as a consistent delivery of nutrition. I would rather facilitate health in the container, microbiotic activity in the container to create ultimate health and the system that's going to give this tree immunity. If you look at the immune system of a tree, it is sourced from the roots because of that microbiotic system. And this is where I'm against chemical feed as a consistent delivery of nutrition because it actually shuts down the microbiotic system. And those microbiomes, expanding surface area for water and nutritional uptake and symbiotically existing off of the tree's carbohydrates or sugars and starches, excuse me, right? That system is paramount for this tree to respond to adverse conditions. If you have microbiotic system, you have an immune system. If you don't have microbiotic system, you're more susceptible to disease, to pests, to damage from styling, to cold, to hot, to drought. So I like to pursue that and let this do its thing based on... And think about it. Trees in the natural environment that have lived for thousands and thousands of years are not for your fed, right? I got to say, man, nature is the best teacher. Nature is the best tool for us to learn. Hey, Gerald has a design question. Why do you have the growth pad leaning to the left above the first sharp turn in the trunk rather than eliminating that and bringing the foliage back to the right? Yeah, good question. So he's talking about this one here, right? So think about this, Gerald. Even though we're trying to naturally reflect and we pull all that growth out and we have it coming back here, we still have to understand the visual aspect of design with bonsai. And if I remove this pad and I open up this massive amount of negative space right here, what's going to happen is your eye is actually going to focus more on that negative space and your trunk is going to look thinner as a result of the loss of that foliage mass than it is if we have it. So that is more a function of holding your eye in the design, increasing the visual significance around the trunk, than it is a natural reflection, more an aspect of design than environment. Okay, I think we can... All right. Wow, I'm pumped on this stream. I basically just ran it out for you guys for two hours, and I was like, gosh, I don't know if I'm going to have enough work to do on this tree, and people might get bored. I hope you guys gained something. It's always such a pleasure to get to share our information and knowledge with you guys. And I'll be bringing some of the leftover questions to the live Q&A, on Thursday. So if you didn't get answered, I'll bring some of them. Cool, cool. Yeah, we'll absolutely knock it out in the live Q&A. And then for you guys that can't attend, we're now time stamping all of the questions that are answered for the Q&A so that you guys can see where your question was answered and go straight to it on the archived Q&A. But we couldn't be doing this without you guys. You guys are pushing us at Bonsai Mirai to be better than we've ever been at Bonsai, and we're just going to continue to grow and build our own skills as we help you guys and spread the knowledge. Thank you very much for the support. Hope you guys again had an awesome eclipse and are looking forward to a rather outstanding fall season for your bonsai practice. And we're going to be here bringing you tons of knowledge over the course of the next three months. So get excited, and we will see you guys if not Thursday, next Tuesday for the stream. Thank you. 
