A stream where we can dig deep into fertilization. I feel like we've sort of dabbled around the edges of fertilization. We've tried to talk about it. We've sort of hinted at it so many times. Still a bazillion questions that pertain to how do we fertilize? When do we fertilize? Where do we fertilize? Why do we fertilize? What dictates all of our choices in fertilization? What's the best approach? Chemical, organic, why, why not? In this stream, we're gonna answer all of those questions to the best of our ability. But one thing that we have to understand in fertilization is all of the factors that contribute to the choices that we make. And the biggest question that we consistently ask ourselves is what are we trying to accomplish? What is your goal in fertilizing? First and foremost, we need to establish the fact that fertilization is not food. If we do not fertilize our bonsai, they do not die. They produce their food via photosynthetic processes that create sugars. And starches from oxygen and carbon dioxide being recombined into glucose. This is a primary component that we've got to keep in mind so that we don't feel so panicked about having to fertilize because that is the food source for trees. It is not. It is a supplement to the metabolic activities to increase the productivity and the efficiency of photosynthesis and all other metabolic processes. But inside of that increasing of efficiency and productivity, fertilization can and does lend itself to advancing what we can accomplish in a given period of time in terms of growth and management of that growth to provide the desired outcomes. Hence the necessity to ask ourselves what are we trying to accomplish? Now before we get into the nuances of what we're trying to accomplish, let's just first tackle that question of do we feed with organics or do we feed with chemical fertilizers as sort of that base point where we start to orient. And in order to be able to do that, to choose that, we've got to look at chemical versus organic and understand the systems and the situations that both of these potentially contribute to as well as some of the negative components of chemical or organic fertilization. So let's first start with chemical. Now when we apply chemical feed to a plant, the benefit of chemical feed is that we have an immediate availability of the resources being applied. What this means is in chemical fertilizer, the components that are present in the fertilizer when they're watered into the plant are immediately available forms of the nutrition. So the plant can take those forms of nutrition in and immediately utilize them. Now what you might be saying is, oh, this is a good thing, right? This is an amazing thing. And it's true. It is amazing that chemical fertilization means they can immediately access the nutrition. But there is a big component of culture, culture, and culture cultivating this tiny tree in this confined environment of the container that we've also got to consider. Because another aspect of chemical fertilization is it lacks the development of microbial activity in the container. Now are we saying that if we chemically feed, we won't have microbes developing inside of the container? No. Because if we fertilize our pines chemically, we can still see the presence of beneficial fungi and bacteria developing that create that microbiome. And that's what we call a mycorrhizal relationship. And we see that in that white webbing that's necessary for some of our species to be able to strong, healthy growth in a containerized environment. So when we consider chemical fertilization, we're basically understanding that because it's being supplied, because the nutrition is being supplied in an already available form, the necessity for a large population of microbial activity inside of the container to form, is not being facilitated. And that's what we're trying to do. And that's what we're trying to do. And that's what we're trying to do. And not only is it not being facilitated, it's not being fed. And this is where we move over to the world of organics. Now, when we move to the consideration of organic fertilizers, we're saying, listen, one of the detractors or one of the negatives of organic fertilization is it has a slow availability. It has to be broken down by the microbial activity in the container into the usable forms that the plant can then take in. This is not necessarily a bad thing. And this is where we start to separate ourselves from the, the idea that fertilizer is a food, and that fertilizer is mandatory for a tree to survive. Because we know that fertilizer is a supplement and not mandatory for the tree to survive, the slow release of that nutrition is not necessarily a bad thing. When we go into the benefits of organic fertilization, however, we have several positive aspects of organic fertilization. Number one, it feeds microbial occupation and development. Number two, those resources become available at the same pace as the tree is facilitating the expansion of the flora or the microbial activity in the container. So the nutrition is available at the same pace that the tree is needing it or wanting to access it. And the presence of microbial activity that is created by that organic component on the surface of the soil catalyzes the release of humic acids. And humic acids as a trigger or a stimulus for nutrient uptake is a very important factor. And it's a very important factor. It's a very important component of organic fertilization that helps aid and assist in the health of the tree. Now, when we think about a tree's root system, okay, and I have a small diagram up here, we need to understand that the tree's resistance, the tree's immunity, its immune system, we as humans have an immune system that allows us to fight off a cold, a flu, all of the things that are sort of attacking our body consistently in the environment every single day that we exist, okay? And that immune system for a tree exists in the roots and is fending off the establishment of pathogens, is helping aid the tree in the resistance to insect invasions or prolific invasions that spread very quickly across the tree. A strong tree doesn't necessarily have the ability to completely resist insects and doesn't have the ability to completely resist the infection of disease or pathogens. But what we see in a tree that has a strong microbial activity in the container is that those trees typically don't show massive proliferations of disease. They don't show massive proliferations of insects at a rapid pace, which allows that tree to be able to fend those off and allows us as the caretaker of the tree to be able to respond before we have a situation that is out of control and extremely detrimental to the tree. And so we say organic fertilization is a big component in aiding into the tree's ultimate health and resistance to all of the factors that are competing with the tree. Now, this is a step-by-step process when you start to look at how organic fertilizer and fertilizer in general contributes to the tree's strength and the tree's increased immune system. And it starts with fertilizer not even being a part of the conversation. Because we know, in order to get root growth in a bonsai container, the most paramount concept that we have is a balance of water and oxygen. That balance of water and oxygen is established, Number one, by the composition of our soils. Number two, by the size of the particle that we're utilizing to cultivate that root system. And number three, by the accurate way that we're watering to maintain that balance of water and oxygen. When we have a good balance of water and oxygen, we get fine root growth in the container. When we get fine root growth in a container and we're facilitating with that balance of water and oxygen, further root growth to be developing because that balance has been struck and it's a very favorable condition for new roots to be created by the tree, we start to increase the likelihood that those roots are gonna be forming and functioning at their best possible capacity. Now as roots form, because of that balance of water and oxygen, they start to excrete a substance. This substance is a sugary substance called root exudes. The roots are actually producing a sugary substance upon which. On that sugary substance, we have the development of the flora or the microbial activity in the container. So a root is actually cultivating the situation that favors the expansion of that microbial activity, okay? So we get these root exudes. Here's my root in blue, here's my fertilizer in brown, and here's my root exudes that are being produced by the root. Now this sugary substance is a product of photosynthesis taking place in the crown of the tree, being transported via the phloem, the vascular tissue that moves sugars and starches, and those sugars and starches are perpetuating the growth of roots because of the balance of water and oxygen, and expressing themselves as root exudes that facilitate the development of flora. Now those root exudes that now have flora growing on them or microbial activity is the beginning of that occupation of that relationship, okay? The microbial activity does several things in the container. Okay, when we look at this, the microbial activity acts as though it is an expansion of the surface area of the root. What this means is the microbes in the container are feeding on the sugars and starches in the root, and in exchange, they're creating all of these different highways into the soil that are surface area for water and nutritional uptake. They take some of the sugars and starches. They provide more water and nutrient uptake. This is a symbiotic relationship that the plant has with microbial activity, okay? So the root is building the exudes that facilitate this growth, the microbiomes, as a result of that sugary substance being excreted, are forming and expanding the surface area for uptake. In addition, the microbial activity is decomposing the organic fertilizer and breaking it down into usable forms of nutrition. Now this is important, and it takes time to be able to develop this, which is where we get the slow availability with organic fertilization, but there's another thing that's happening as it's decomposing this organic material. Just like in the forest floor, where we have all of the leaf matter that drops off of the trees in a consistent basis over the course of time, that leaf matter that sits on the forest floor is being broken down by the microbial activity in the forest floor, and with the decomposition of organic matter, we get the release of humic acid, okay? Humic acid is a stimulant. If the organic matter is not being broken down, we don't get humic acid, right? If the organic material is not being broken down, we don't get nutrition. So when we start to see the organic matter being broken down, that creation of humic acid is a hormonal trigger to the tree that says, we have nutrition available in the soil, we know that because humic acid has been produced via the decomposition process, and that humic acid tells the tree, hey, I'm present, which means that there's nutrition present, and it catalyzes the uptake of that nutrition into the tree via the roots, a stimulant, an activator, and a trigger for that nutrient uptake. So we develop this beautiful system, where we have expanded surface area via microbial activity, we have the creation of nutrition in a form that's available to the tree, and then we have the creation of a trigger that lets the plant's roots know that the nutrition is available for uptake. All of a sudden, we increase the network that's taking it in, we increase the nutrition that's available to be taken in, and we're communicating to the tree, with that organic fertilizer, that that nutrition is available and ready for energy expenditure to take in that nutrition. And this is where we develop the system that expands the surface area and increases this plant's ability to be able to have that immune system that gives it the resources to fend off this expansion, not only the growth, but the expansion of any sort of pathogen or insect, developing that immunity, giving the plant the ability to fend off pathogens and insects. This is where organic fertilizer starts to become such a significant component of bonsai cultivation. Now, if we continue to break it down even further, we say that that expansion of that surface area of the microbiomes occupying, that containerized environment, that expansion of that surface area means more nutrients, more water. It also means that it's able, the tree is more able to endure and tolerate drought, heat, cold, and all of the things that we do to that tree in terms of wiring, styling, pruning, foliage reduction, as well as the repotting process. The preservation of those microbes in that soil are also why we never bear root. Trees that lean heavily, on the microbes in order to be able to expand that surface area and have that immunity, namely our coniferous species in the containerized environment, we never bear root because we never want to fully strip them of the microbes that exist and allow them to have that enhanced immune system and be capable of tolerating the actions of bonsai. These are the fundamental concepts. When we start talking about do we use chemical or organic fertilizers that push us in bonsai cultivation to say we are going to be leaning more heavily, on organic fertilizer moving at the tree's pace with its relationship to that microbial activity that allows that tree to have success, sustainability, and resistance. The idea of ultimate health in the container to tolerate what it means to be cultivated as a bonsai. This is the point of orientation where we jump into fertilization as a practice. Now we're going to go out, we're going to take a look at some of this microbial establishment in the container. And we're also going to look at some trees that just like us when we have a scratchy throat or a little bit of a runny nose and our immune system kicks in, we're going to look at some trees that have the very sort of slight hint of potentially dealing with disease issues but seeing that microbial activity adding to the immunity that's preventing that disease situation from turning into a full blown infection. So that you can see this ultimate health and this concept of organic fertilization contributing to a bonsai's ability to resist. So now that we're out in the garden we have an opportunity to really see that ecosystem in the container with our own eye. And one of the species that's most easy to observe that on are our pines. Now when we look at our pines we see that coarse root system that stores a lot of sugars and starches. And we see that expansion of that coarse root system in terms of the surface area that our microbial activity provides for better water and nutrient uptake. Pines storing those resources in their roots allows that microbial activity to access the sugars and starches and symbiotically expand that surface area and we get this beautiful marriage that's known as mycorrhizae. Now mycorrhizae is the relationship between the microbial activity and the root. So here we've teased up a small piece of the moss to give us a little bit of a window into the established soil system of this ponderosa pine. And this is perhaps more than any other species that we look at in bonsai. Pine bonsai depend on, they hinge on, their success hinges on, the presence of microbial activity. They have a very coarse root system that has a lot of storage of sugars and starches. They produce a large quantity of root exudes to facilitate this flora. And in exchange, this microbial activity feeding on those sugars and starches is expanding the surface area of that coarse root system to provide water and nutrient uptake as well as to decompose that organic matter that is holding all of the locked in resources in unavailable forms. So as I tease this back, what I start to see is this cut in the substance. And notice as I'm teasing away these particles, it's almost pulling on these filaments and these fibers that exist inside of this. And it's a beautiful thing when we start to see this system accumulate and occupy the soil environment because it means that our tree is going to have an increased amount of immune system and an increased draw on the resources to be able to resist a lot of the things that it experiences in bonsai cultivation. It's a really, really beautiful system that happens here and is completely built by the organic fertilizer, and the creation of this structure in the soil system. So regardless of the size, we see this microbial activity present in almost every single bonsai that we're cultivating in a confined environment. Here we have a really small, beautiful limber pine whose health is clearly very, very vigorous. It's back butting with profusion. It's existing in a very tiny container. And when we flip this tree up, we're going to see that microbial activity present in the bottom drainage screen where you're going to see a lot of roots. It's present. So I'm just going to rotate this up. And what we start to see here is we see that same sort of filament, cottony-like mass present in this drain hole. And we see these roots that are existing around those soil particles that have been occupied by that microbial activity. This is facilitating a really favorable environment. It's allowing the plant to be able to expand its root system by that increased resource and nutrient uptake. And it's also providing a limber pine and all of our bonsai a really enhanced mechanism to increase its strength and its immunity to all of the things it's experiencing in the tiny, confined environment of the container. In between these soil particles, we see this kind of network, this almost cotton, this kind of mass that's occurring in here. And we see it in between soil particles themselves. This is occupying the surface area of those soil particles and pulling that water and nutrition off of those particles. We see it throughout the bottom of this soil system. And you notice that the prevalence of roots growing through the drainage screen, telling us, oh, this is good. It's telling us that we have a very healthy ecosystem that's been created inside of this soil structure. So when we come back to that concept of that increased immune system as a result of the presence of microbial activity, we can see that really illustrated and expressed in trees that are in bonsai cultivation. And the needle mass of this tree is almost a marker of sorts of what this tree has been through. Now, this tree was repotted three years ago. This will be the third year in this current container. And when we look at the needle mass, the needle mass of this tree, we will see that the needles three years ago, which will be shed this year, but the three-year-old needles do have some signs and indications that there was disease present and it was battling to a degree a needle cast infection on the tree. However, as we facilitated that balance of water and oxygen in the container, the tree accumulated photosynthetic resources, produced root exudes. Those root exudes facilitated the growth of the microbial activity, and the microbial activity, expanded that network for nutrient uptake and for water uptake. What we see is last year's needles and this year's needles are free of any sort of disease symptoms or signs or indications. And that is literally watching this tree's immune system take over and be able to help this tree fight those infections and that pathogen presence. And even though the pathogen is still present in those needles and still present in the air and in the system and in the environment, the tree's immune system is strong enough that that pathogen cannot get a foothold to infect and further cause issue to this. And in fact, the tree is thriving and just budding with health. Now, when I come back in and I start to look at, and I'll bring some of the needles in close here so you can see that infection that was present. But when I look for that microbial activity, you'll be able to see that it's heavily occupied underneath this top dressing of soil. We'll look at those older needles and you'll see that system of immunity working to keep this tree healthy. In this confined environment, experiencing all of those different factors that are sort of attacking and playing on this tree in its containerized form. So I've prepared some samples of the third year, last year, and this year's needles here just to show you the evolution. And you'll see in the third year needles, the presence of casting, you'll see some white specks where the actual fruiting body of the disease proliferated. And that speck is the sap where the eruption and the spores of that fruiting body were disseminated. And the other thing that you'll notice is that the third year needles are quite long. The second year needles slightly shorter and this year's needles are gonna be markedly shorter than that assuming everything goes well over the course of this season. So if you take a look here, you'll notice where we've got casting and the death of the needle back to that casting. And you'll see that white sap speck where the proliferation and explosion of the fruiting bodies occurred, actually rupturing the needle, which is where sap started to ooze from. And that junction and that site. You'll see some of the casting in this middle needle with that tipped dieback. And then in this third needle, you'll just see some of those spots and that banding where the disease was trying to take a foothold, but wasn't able to fully establish an infection or penetrate in through that cuticle into the tissue. Now, when we slide over here to the second year old needle, you'll notice that there's no banding, there's no spotting. And this is actually the white speck would actually be a piece of bird poop that sort of speckled that area of the tree, nevermind the poop, okay? But you notice the increased health. You also notice the reduction of the needle. And then in this year's needle, still new, still elongating, as you can tell by the lighter color where we're at at this point in time, but definitely lending itself towards a shorter needle this year, minus infection and completely healthy. So as I pull this moss up and we look inside of this, what you see are those filaments of the microbes inside of that container, that active, microbial establishment and occupation. In between the soil particles, you see that webbing, you see all of these filaments and this cottony mass in between the particles that are creating that immune system that's allowed this tree to avoid infection and further spread. And in fact, allowed it to fend it off altogether in the past two years of needles to create a very healthy bonsai. One of the things that we need to clarify is how this microbial system actually boosts the immunity of the tree. Cause we're saying, oh, that's great. It's occupied the soil. How does that make the tree stronger and more resistant to disease and insect proliferation? Now, if we think about the human body, anytime that we start to experience the beginnings of a cold or a sickness, the best things we can do, hydrate yourself and drink lots of fluid, eat a nutritious meal and get a lot of sleep. When the tree starts to experience this penetration of the hyphae from a fungus or the penetration of the cuticle from an insect, it immediately tries to compartmentalize that damage and that penetration of its interior tissue. It takes in more water, it takes in more resources and it beefs up that area where it's experiencing that sort of offensive action from those pathogens or insects. If it has the ability to pull on an expanded surface area and draw from that extended resource community in the container, it's able to build up a bigger defense mechanism to that penetration, compartmentalize it and wall it off so that the infection doesn't get into the interior tissue and start to spread. And this is where this microbial system, provides that immunity for the tree. So now that we've sort of tackled that idea of organic versus chemical, and coming back just briefly to that, maybe we use chemical in the ground. Maybe we use chemical in the grow container to get as rapid of growth as possible. We have to understand that we do sacrifice some level of immune capacity in the tree in doing so to get that rapid growth. Could we have a little bit slower growth and have a higher immune system? Yes. That is up to you as the grower to be deciding how you want to be facilitating the development of that tree. But when we start to get into the nuts and bolts of fertilization, once we've made that chemical versus organic sort of analysis, we start to look at these fundamental questions of, how much do I apply? How often do I apply it? And where do I apply it in terms of the considerations of the locations in the container? And one thing that we need to recognize inside of all of this, is that how much we apply and how often we apply comes back to the idea of, what are we trying to accomplish? Because the more frequently we apply and the greater quantity that we apply is going to elicit different results, depending on what we're trying to accomplish. But the one thing that we don't really have or choose to not fudge on or have flexibility with is, where do we apply it in terms of the container? So when we look at the where, we're talking about the number of locations, that we put fertilizer on in the bonsai container is proportional to the container size. And those locations are evenly distributed between the edge of the container and the trunk of the tree, as well as evenly spaced throughout the container to get even distribution of fertilizer in concentrated locations across the entire container that we're applying fertilizer to. So what this says is, in a 12-inch container, our standard proportion of locations in a 12-inch container is going to be three locations that are evenly distributed between the edge of the container and the trunk, as well as three locations that are evenly distributed across those three locations to give us a balanced distribution across that container of concentrated pockets of nutrition. Now when we come back to fertilize a second time, we know that there's a strong chance that our initial application of fertilizer could still be present on the soil surface. And we say, do we remove it? Do we leave it? We're going to be leaving our fertilizer on, because we know that some components of fertilizer take a long time to decompose into a form that's usable for the tree. Some components of our fertilizer are decomposing or being made readily available more rapidly. So we want to leave that organic on to be capable of all of the nutrients that that tree can utilize. Supplement its metabolic activities, being made available. So when we come back for that second application now, still adhering to this concept of even distribution of concentrated pockets across the tree, spaced evenly between the edge of the container and the trunk, we're going to be finding those points in between our initial application, where we're going to be applying our second application of fertilization. Still following the same principles, and now evenly distributing the nutrition, to new areas in between the initial application to get that really strong release of concentrated nutrition throughout the container of the tree. And if we start to think about, what about a third application? What if I'm fertilizing very aggressively, and I'm applying a third application? We're, again, going to be finding those spaces between, evenly distributed but between our first and second application. And when we come back with the fourth application, we're going application, at some point we will get to a position where our older applications are going to be fully decomposed and disappear because all of the nutrition has become available. We still want to be evenly distributing those fertilizer applications in different locations to continue to offer that balanced distribution of concentrated energy. When we talk about the where of fertilizer application, it is not a product of what are we trying to accomplish. It is a product of number of locations proportional to the container size, starting off with our reference of a 12-inch container having three locations. Each time that we add fertilization, we're looking to distribute in between, evenly distributed in between the edge of the container and the trunk of the tree, as well as evenly distributed between our prior applications to find those pockets and those areas where fertilizer has not existed that we apply it to get even distribution of concentrated energy. Let's go take a look at fertilizer application in terms of what we've applied to date and where we're going to be applying this next application to take these considerations into account. As we wander through the garden, there's a plethora of examples that make it very easy to see the process of fertilization and the execution of a lot of the techniques that we've been educating you guys about in this stream. One of the big things, once we get past the purpose of organics and how that functions inside of the system, is to start looking at that placement, that number of locations for the size container proportion, and then the even distribution of the piles themselves throughout the container to get the concentrated pockets of nutrition, as well as the even distribution between the edge of the rim and the trunk or the major primary root system of the tree. Here we have a grafted Rocky Mountain Juniper with Kishu foliage. It was repotted this spring, and this is the first application of fertilizer that we've applied to this tree now that it's really started to grow and get its root system rebuilt underneath it. Now we've got a container that's, I'm guessing, roughly 16 inches in size, and we said with that 12-inch container, three locations is our standard distribution of fertilizer proportionally for the 12-inch container. Now that we bump up to that 16-inch container, we've got four locations that we're applying the concentrated pockets of nutrition in. And the way... The locations that we've placed that fertilizer in this are evenly distributed. We've got a pile right here by my back hand right here. We've got a pile up front. We've got a pile off to the side here, and we've got a pile immediately behind this location on the rear side of the tree so that we've got even distribution front, back, right, and left. The spacing between these piles is equivalent to be able to give us that even distribution. And notice that those piles are placed midway between the edge of the container and the trunk. So that we've got that distribution right in the heart and the core of where those roots are going to be growing and really capable of taking in that available nutrition as the microbial activity decomposes this organic fertilizer. This kind of spacing is a very beautiful, well-illustrated execution of proper application of fertilizer. Now, when we come back, we're going to be looking to apply another four piles because the number of locations is proportional. It's proportional to the container size. We're going to be applying another four piles. Now, whether we choose to be applying a heavy quantity or whether we choose to be applying that sooner rather than later, we'll come back in and discuss. But what we're really looking to do in that next application is to be applying in these locations evenly distributed between these piles, evenly distributed between the edge of the container and the base of the tree. We would have a pile here. We would have a pile here. We would have a pile on this backside. And we'd have a pile on this rear corner. To really strike those even distribution between the piles, between the trunk and the container. This is how we look at locations proportional to container size. This is how we look at distribution of our fertilizer during a single application evenly between the piles as well as between the edge of the container and the trunk of the tree. And we want to maintain this consistency so that we get that concentrated distribution alternating and rotating throughout the container, building roots up and all of these different pockets and all of these different areas over the course of the tree's history in the container itself. Another thing to take note of when we're applying fertilizer is to really be aware of and examine how the fertilizer is decomposing. The way that the fertilizer breaks down is an immediate indication to us of how strong and how well occupied and established the microbial activity is inside of the container. So if we take a look at this fertilizer that was applied less than two weeks ago, you'll notice it cracking and starting to break down and decompose. You'll see some of the bigger particles, some of the calcium from the bone meal and other components in here starting to come to the surface. This is a really good indication that the microbial activity in the container is functioning and decomposing that organic material. Even though this tree was recently repotted, we didn't bear root the original root system and in fact left a lot of the root system intact that was established and in this healthy really choice aggregate that we're growing the tree in. As a result, when we apply this, we're seeing this immediately be broken down and made available to the tree. If we applied fertilizer and we came back and we weren't seeing this level of decomposition, we would know that microbial activity is not as strong and not as healthy and that may inform or influence our choices as we come back and fertilize next time. Maybe we wait a little bit longer to let the microbial activity reestablish. Maybe we come back with a lighter application knowing that we don't have that activity present to fully decompose a heavier application of fertilizer. But watching that fertilizer break down gives us an immediate indicator of how healthy that microbial activity is and that's going to allow us to be able to adapt and adjust not only our fertilizer, potentially tweak our watering a little bit if we're not noticing the tree's foliar health responding and we see that fertilizer not breaking down. This is the tree communicating with us. This is the ecosystem of the containerized environment communicating with us and it's a very major indicator of where our interior container is. This is the ecosystem of the containerized environment communicating with us and it's a very major indicator of where our interior container soil structure and microbial activity stand to allow us to be able to further have information that enables our improved delivery of care to the tree. So when we come back and we look at this, just to offer you a comparison and to accurately apply the fertilizer in an effective manner, if we were to put on another application, we would be evenly spacing that application between the two piles that exist and between the edge of the container and the root system of the tree. But in seeing a fresh application, now you can truly see how this is really beautifully decomposing and in a very short period of time. This is less than two weeks to go from this really beautifully solid pelletized form down to this organically decomposing mass. Almost looks like a campsite or a campfire that's burning down as the microbial activity decomposes it, makes that nutrition available and releases that humic acid that triggers the tree, tells it nutrients are available, take in that nutrition. So this is our distribution. This is a great contrast and this is a great sign that the microbial health in the tree and in the container is working and doing its job. Okay. So now that we've seen sort of the application process and the strategy of considering older locations and where we're going to be applying newer locations, we've seen that even distribution edge and trunk, even distribution across that proportional container size to the number of locations. Now we get to dig in. Okay. We get to the actual considerations of how much and how often are we applying. And again, the thing that you always have to come back to is what are we trying to accomplish? Now inside of what are we trying to accomplish, we have to understand what some of the nutritional components that are provided in fertilization, what those components are contributing to. And if we sort of break down all 34 of the elements, essential elements that a plant utilizes to grow and thrive. There's one major component that we start to look at in terms of rate and its effect on the growth of the plant. And that is the nutrient component that is nitrogen. Okay. Now nitrogen as a component is one of the biggest contributors to full your growth in the plant and the creation of chlorophyll, the synthesis of sugars and starches based on the capturing of that sun's energy and nitrogen when we look at it just as a broad brushstroke. Okay. It's a component that drives for your production. Now when we look at nitrogen, nitrogen is the most water soluble and most easily available component that exists in fertilization because it's so water soluble and so easily available. It's the one that is capable of contributing to for your development. It's also the component that in four weeks is going to be completely void or leached out of the fertilizer and now no longer present as an available resource. In the container of the tree. Okay. So when we think about this and we're talking about what are we trying to accomplish, most of what we're trying to accomplish on the exterior and the aesthetic sort of position of the tree is dictated by full your growth, elongation, thickening, expansion, or potentially the refinement of finer twigging, less aggressive growth for a more older mature refined bonsai and being able to maintain. Okay. Push the development of that tree. So when we consider nitrogen as that component that really is facilitating rapid growth or potentially pulling back on the production of that foliage mass for more refined trees, shortening the inter node length of a more refined tree, we start to look at nitrogen as the dictatorial component that allows us to consider our two gas pedals. Okay. Our two gas pedals are quantity per location. How much fertilizer? Are we putting in those proportional locations that are dictated by the container size? How much goes in that pile, right? And then how often are we going to be reapplying fertilizer to either drive growth with the availability of nitrogen being continuous or how often are we going to be applying to potentially pull back? And to what degree do we want to drive with that quantity and that timing, the growth and to what degree do we want to pull back? Okay. So that we're not facilitating really aggressive growth, really long internodes and very, very large leaf production or needle production in our tree. So when we start to look at a heavy application of fertilizer or a heavy aggressive concept for feeding to really push development, we're applying one and a half tablespoons of our organic fertilizer to a singular location. Now you guys might be saying, well, my fertilizer is pelletized. So how do I measure that? Well, it's still the quantity. One and a half tablespoons. If we're using bile gold, which is pelletized, then maybe we're saying that that is going to be between 12 and 15 pellets per location. If you measure that with a tablespoon, you will get almost an accurate amount. 12 to 15 pellets is a tablespoon and a half per location. If our quantity we're aggressively feeding to drive rapid growth, rapid development and pushing that creation of photosynthetic mass, leaves or needles. Okay. Okay. So maybe we're developing a little bit more slowly. We don't want as aggressive of growth. We'll have one tablespoon of that organic fertilizer in each of those locations. We're backing off on a little bit of that nitrogen resource. We're backing off on some of that really aggressive push of growth. And if we're saying, listen, I don't want this big massive push out. I don't want big internodes. I don't want big leaves or needles. I just want to maintain, I want the tree to be able to metabolically function at a, at a. At a reasonable rate. Then we might be talking about a half tablespoon per location to be able to back off. Now we also have to pair this with timing because timing we're saying, listen, every four weeks, if we're aggressively feeding ensures that we do not have a lapse in the availability of nitrogen inside of that container. Now we go to moderate with a six week application. We know we have a two week lag in between the availability of nitrogen. So we allow the tree or we allow the nutrition. That's available to be depleted a little bit so that the tree can't produce as rapid an amount of foliage. Or if we're saying, listen, I don't want that big aggressive, rapid growth. Maybe I'm preparing for an exhibition. Maybe I'm working on ramification. We could talk about an every eight week application so that we're really allowing nitrogen to be fully washed from the system. The tree is sustaining itself and developing other components of the tree, vascular resources, flowers, fruit, et cetera, by going with an every eight week schedule for timing. And we pair our quantity and our timing to be able to accurately control the delivery of this nutrition to accomplish whatever it is we're trying to accomplish. So when we look at this, we have multiple ways and capacities to be able to apply fertilization based on what we're after. Your trees in your region, in your backyard, in that growing area that you are cultivating your bonsai are going to be responding very differently to fertilization. And your job is to be able to identify what sort of mixture of these components at that point of that tree's stage as a bonsai is most appropriate, both in terms of quantity and in terms of timing, to be able to accomplish what you're trying to accomplish with that tree in that specific season, in that specific aesthetic of that tree, based on what you're thinking about in the future, what's happened in the past, and where that tree is headed in the future. To be able to maximize that tree's stage of development, refinement, or period where you might be preparing it for exhibition. These are our tools. Let's go look at some trees. Talk about their stages of development, stages and what I want out of those trees, and look at how that changes the way that I'm going to be fertilizing them to be able to get what I want out of that tree for this particular situation that that tree is in right now. So prior to fertilizing, anytime we're going to go. About this process, we want to have all of our preparation done. Now we've got a bucket of our loose pelletized organic fertilizer, and oftentimes we'll just empty the whole bag into this so that it's easier to access and fertilize as we're going. Ideally, we would put the pellets directly on the soil surface of the of the tree so that the contact with the soil surface and subsequently the contact with the microbial activity is immediate, but there are times where we may have a compacted soil, slightly compacted soil where water will wash off, or we may have an angled surface to our soil that we need to be able to hold the fertilizer in that location. And this is where we have started to utilize loose leaf tea bags. Now these tea bags allow water to pass through, allow the microbes to be decomposing the paper and getting that contact. It takes a little bit longer, but it's worth it to hold the fertilizer in place so that we can evenly distribute the concentrated nutrition across the container. So prior to fertilizing, we always prepare a large number of these tea bags filled with the desired strength that we want to be applying to that tree. So I'm just going to show you the process that I go through to be preparing these, and then we'll see how we apply them to the tree out in the garden. So I'm going to be opening up my tea bag, and I'm using, just to illustrate the point of the tablespoon and quantity, I'm going to be preparing some heavy strength quantity, which is one and a half tablespoons. And we generally say... If we're using a product like BioGold, that's 12 to 15 pellets. Now one heaping tablespoon here is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 pellets inside of this heaping tablespoon. I'll be putting that heaping tablespoon in there. And just for illustration's sake, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to go to the half tablespoon and go ahead and pull out. And right here I've got five pellets. So we said 12 to 15. With a heaping tablespoon and a half tablespoon, I've got exactly 15 pellets. So I've got 15 pellets inside of that tea bag. That's a good heavy application in a singular location on the container. What I'll do then is I'll just go ahead and I'll cinch up that opening. And in order to be able to define whether I have a heavy, a moderate, or a light, I'll just put an H, an M, or an L on the tea bag with a Sharpie so that I know what strength is in the tea bag and I'm accurately fertilizing that tree to accomplish what I want to accomplish. We'll go ahead and prepare several tea bags of each sort. Here's what it looks like when we're ready to go outside and apply fertilizer in those moments and those locations where we may need to hold this on an angled surface. Once you get more proficient at the fertilizing process, you'll be able to just simply feel by the quantity that you pull out with your bare hand how many pellets you've got. Here I've got three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 18, I've got exactly 15 pellets in my hand. Then we can just sort of dump those into the bag, cinch it up, and we've got a much more accurate reflection. We'll show you the test. without having to use the tablespoons as that measuring device. It saves us time and it allows us to be more in touch with the fertilizing process. Now another component that we're going to be utilizing in this is toothpicks. So we always have a jar of toothpicks ready for us when we go outside because when we apply this fertilizer bag to the soil surface, we'll wrap it up, we'll choose the side that has one single paper thickness so that we're not doubling or tripling up what has to decompose before that contacts. And then we'll take a toothpick and we'll simply stab this through this bag and into the soil surface to hold it on that angled surface. So have your bags ready and have your toothpicks ready. I've got four heavy strength applications of fertilizer. I'm going to prepare my moderate and my light and then we'll go outside and we'll start fertilizing. Okay. And just like that. We've got 12 bags, four heavy, four moderate and four light bags prepared to be able to go accurately fertilize any trees that need a differing strength. So here we have a tree that was repotted this season. We maintained a lot of the native root mass and we've got reoccupation of the microbial activity in the container. We have two applications of fertilizer on this tree so far and our major priority is in expanding the foliage mass and really beefing up. We're focusing on the vascular tissue, getting back butting, getting more foliage mass on this tree so the foliage mass is dense and capable of anchoring a tree of this size. This is a tree that's truly in a developmental phase. Even though the structure is set, we need more foliage mass, more back butting, more branching, more elongation. We need more of everything. And in that case we start to fertilize with a greater quantity at a more frequent consistency. This last fertilization for this tree occurred four weeks ago. We've got two applications of fertilizer. applications on the tree to date. We're going to be applying a third application in between these two prior applications and there's a few things we want to look at before we start applying that third application. Number one, our first application here of the original fertilizer is very broken down and decomposed. This says that our microbial activity is functioning and working very efficiently. When I look at the tea bags of the second application, you can see that the bottom of the tea bag has completely decomposed and as a result of that decomposition the fertilizer is actually in contact with the soil. But the structure of the tea bag and the toothpick is holding that fertilizer in place even though it's on an angled surface and we're watering aggressively because this tree's root system is building and using a lot of water. That's exactly what we hope to accomplish with the tea bag and seeing the tea bag decompose tells us that we're getting the major impact of the fertilizer that we're trying to accomplish and get out of it. All of these systems are working very effectively for us. So in this next round of fertilizer I'm going to be applying a heavy quantity, a tablespoon and a half, 12 to 15 pellets per location. And I have to now be spacing it in between the spaces of all of these original fertilizer applications to continue working on the distribution throughout the container. I'm going to go ahead and grab a handful of 12 to 15 pellets and I'm going to be working to the left of my original piles. Okay, and we want to be sure to be accurate with this. So I'm going to be finding that space in between that first application and the second application with the tea bag so that I have that even distribution of concentrated nutrition evenly distributed between the piles and evenly distributed between the rim of the container and the base. Now I'm going to be following that same application style just to the left of my original application. And if these piles get close, that's okay. There's no harm in that as long as we're continuing to alternate the spacing between those applications. Now as I come around to the back here, I get into an angled situation in the root system again. I'm going to go back to my tea bags and the pinning method with the toothpick to be able to apply that heavy feed application on this angled surface to hold that fertilizer in place and allow that tea bag to decompose and maximize the delivery of nutrition. Okay, I have my heavy marked bag of fertilizer in terms of concentration. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to wrap that around. I'm going to take that single layer of paper. I'm going to place that against the root system back here. And I'm again going to stab it with the toothpick just to the left, evenly distributed between my applications back here, following the same protocol for the original application of fertilizer. Okay, now as we get to this last point over here on this side, I didn't have a tea bag and I've got this space in between both of these because we don't have the angle that requires that tea bag. If I have any concern about fertilizer washing off, maybe because this is the far side of the root system and I'm always approaching the root system with water from this side, I can go ahead and choose to use another tea bag wrapped up in the exact same way with a toothpick, single paper surface in between those two sticking that to secure it. So I'm done. I've basically applied another round of fertilizer in between and evenly distributed to the first two applications of fertilizer at an aggressive pace every four weeks at an aggressive rate, tablespoon and a half to move this tree continually into development, build up the vascular tissue, get the back budding, get more foliar mass built up on the tree, and really construct a super microbial system in the container that facilitates the development and growth. We're now in the heart of the fertilization season in the garden. Now generally the way that we handle fertilization is to handle the whole garden sort of in bulk and be fertilizing the totality of the garden so that we don't make this a big massive memorization of each individual tree. But a lot of times we'll get trees that are staggered in terms of where we put them in the phase of development. And this is a tree that's been fertilized once this season. The fertilizer is fully decomposed. It just came out of the workshop after having been wired and pruned. And we want to apply a next application of fertilizer. So when we look at this tree and we start talking about what are we trying to accomplish, the structure on this tree is set. We've done a big major prune to transition energy from the tip back into the interiors. And our next focus is now on a moderate application of fertilizer to evolve our secondary ramification, which is the strength from the big pruning and foliar reduction. And this will set us up next year to be dealing with that tertiary distribution of foliage mass and strength throughout the tree. As a result, I'm going to be applying a moderate application of fertilizer to coincide with that desired impact of developing my secondary branches. I'm going to be going moderate in terms of equal spacing of quantity. I'm also six weeks out from when this first application of fertilizer was applied. And I'm going to be utilizing some of the packets that we created, the tea bag fertilizer on the rear portion of this because it's an angled surface to hold the fertilizer in a new nuanced location to get that even distribution between the original fertilizer locations. So where I can, I want the fertilizer to be in contact with the soil. Now I'm going moderate, so I want to be right at a tablespoon of fertilizer. I know that for the fertilizer that we're utilizing on this tree, that's eight to 10 pellets of fertilizer. Here I have eight. I'm going to go ahead and go 10 with my moderate feed. I want to see this tree produce more foliage growth over the course of this season and really develop those secondary branches. I have an original fertilizer application in these two areas. I've got five throughout this size of container for this size of tree. So I'm going to be equally spacing the next piles immediately in between the initial application, keeping them in a concentrated pile equally distributed between the rim and the base of the tree. I'm going to be forming five new piles equally distributed with that moderate fertilization quantity in those locations. And again, I want to be very aware of maintaining that distribution as I apply this. Okay, I've got a pile here. I've got a pile in the back. I've equally hit that spacing here, hit that spacing here and hit that spacing here. I've got two more piles that I need to be applying and I've got a slanted surface area back here. I'm going to use a tea bag and I'm going to pin it to this slanted portion of roots as well as a tea bag to access the spacing between this pile and the pile that currently exists in the back. Why don't you come in and we'll show you how we go about that operation. I've got my moderate strength fertilizer in my tea bags here. I've marked those so that I know what strength I'm applying in each location. Okay, I've got an application of fertilizer here and I'm going to be placing this right in this intermediate distance. Okay. I'm going to take my fertilizer bag and I'm going to fold over the excess and just wrap that cord of the tea bag around it. And I'm going to be applying the surface that only has one paper thickness on it so that I get the closest amount of contact as I can while still holding the fertilizer in place as that bag decomposes. I'm going to set that bag on that angled surface right in that location. I'm going to take my toothpick and I'm just going to go ahead and I'm going to drive my toothpick into the soil surface to hold that tea bag in place. This application of the toothpick will hold this this tea bag in place so that as I water, I make sure to not displace the fertilizer and lose that application and its distribution of nutrition in this component of the roots. Now I've got one more application that I've got to apply. I have my last application here and another one on the far side of this trunk. So I'm going to split the difference on this back side, crawl in behind this tree here and I'm just going to be seating this fertilizer bag. Again, following the same protocol, wrapping it up so that I have one surface. I'm going to be placing it in here and I'm going to be using my toothpick to secure it so that we hold that in place and we get nutrition delivered to this portion of the roots. Now with my two tea bags of fertilizer in place, I've got five locations that are equally distributed between the locations of the original fertilizer application as well as evenly distributed between the rim of the pot and the trunk of the tree. This application of fertilizer perpetuating and facilitating the development of my secondary branches six weeks after the first application and at a moderate strength is a good rate and a good timing to be able to continue to develop what I'm trying to accomplish in this given tree. Okay so here we have a highly highly refined redwood and one of the things that we start to talk about when we deal with fertilizing refined trees where we're really reaching that ultimate state of energy distribution, the shape is where we want it to be and we're maintaining and continuing to improve that ram of resource-safety in there so if you look at the tree and we're removing the stem out of it and now the plant growth is gonna start to take some shape and then the plant will begin to reproduce and it's going to grow on the stem and the stem will start to form again. So now I'm coming in here and I'm going to be applying the both left and right branches to this entire tree so we're actually going to date from the 1st to 2nd. So I'm going to be taking this plant right up to the 2nd because I was thinking of we come back in and we pinch to redirect from strong to medium medium to weak this tree has been pinched twice this season so far now we want to start to add that nutrition back to the system so that we can get one more flush of really beautiful fine growth and continue to perpetuate the health without blowing it out and causing a big strong response or a really lopsided strong growth of that refined pieces that we've pinched back to I've got a lighter application of fertilizer prepared most of the time when we start fertilizing a very refined tree we will have a soil system that is heavily confined to the container dense filling up the spots and that's what's distributing the energy and allowing us to get that reduced needle size that reduced internode length and that really refined form balance of energy strong medium and weak equal across the entirety of the tree I'm going to be putting these applications of light fertilizer eight weeks after this last application in between these pieces that I've already fertilized once again wrapping create that single layer of paper I've got my toothpick and I'm just going to be evenly distributing it between the edge of the container in the trunk and in between my prior applications of fertilizer to just continue to perpetuate but not drive big strong aggressive growth even when we want to hold a bonsai tree in its current form we have to acknowledge the fact that in order for a tree to be able to survive and continue to thrive we can't stop its growth entirely and fertilization is an inherent part of supplementing this confined environment that exists inside of this small container now you'll notice I'm even putting fertilizer on this big large rise of roots over here on this side we have to continue to be dedicated to the even distribution of concentrated energy across the entirety of the container so even in these large protruding locations I'm still going to be fertilizing and dedicating nutrition to these components of the pot so that we make sure to have even distribution I've got two more locations one in the back one on the left side of the root system that I'm going to be using a teabag for to be getting that even distribution of energy and this tree will be fertilized to produce a very fine piece of growth after its second pinching driving that ramification and that beautifully refined distribution of energy forward at a very slow moderate pace to allow that tree to stay as refined and as balanced as it possibly can five locations evenly spaced in between the others evenly spaced between the trunk and the edge of the container will continue keeping this tree moving in that direction of refinement with a low quantity spaced out to allow the nitrogen to fully leach from the system and I have no doubts that this redwood will continue to be an extremely refined specimen an example of what redwood bonsai can become if they're accurately taken care of technique wise and that technique is also accommodated by the appropriate fertilizing practice so now you've actually gotten to see sort of the the image of the tree you've heard my ideas of what I'm trying to accomplish and you've seen the fertilizer that was applied I wanted to come back after having done that and just sort of crystallize the information on the board so that we have clear concise knowledge about the actions that I took in terms of documentation when we start to look at the phases of bonsai building and one thing we've been very intentional about this year in the Moriah live streams is really starting to highlight those different stages of creation of a bonsai we've done several conifer and deciduous streams where we've been focused on the structure big cuts or big structural setting to be able to build that first establishment right when we're in that developmental phase where we're setting structure maybe even prior to setting structure when we're getting recovery from either the collection process the transplanting from a field grown tree into the bonsai container for the first time or the manipulation of the roots of a piece of nursery stock into a bonsai container we're talking about development we want increase in root production we want increase in vascular tissue we want increase in foliar mass to be able to drive the presence of back budding we're talking about a heavy concept for fertilization now again heavy applies to each of those locations is going to have a heavy application one and a half tablespoons per location locations proportional to the container and that timing for those trees that we're trying to drive recovery we're trying to drive the the creation of vascular tissue to establish the structure we're trying to drive the expansion of the foliage mass to get more vascular tissue to get more back budding to really build the components that we're going to be able to create a beautiful bonsai from we're going to be applying those every four weeks so that we're able to make sure that there's no lapse in the delivery of nitrogen this will contribute to the establishment of that microbial environment and the microbiome microbes in the container it's also going to be delivering nutrition at a very rapid pace so that we are able to set that structure get that recovery and enhance that development now in trees where say we've set that structure we've gotten the components that we want and we're trying to now build the secondary branching we want a little more control over the secondary growth that's being accomplished in that tree we don't want to be driving the same course growth we don't want to be driving the same rapid thickening we want these pieces to be that next transition of strength we want to start that process of moving from thick to thinner eventually to thinnest that intermediate section of the creation of our secondary branching sort of that second working of the tree to start to build the secondary branching we're going to set that secondary structure and we're going to back off we're going to back off and we're going to go to a more moderate application of fertilizer moderate from the perspective of quantity moderate from the perspective of timing now inside of this we could choose to go moderate in terms of quantity but still be applying every four weeks if we need a bit more growth we could go moderate in terms of timing and still apply a heavy amount if we feel like that's what the tree needs to give us what we're trying to accomplish again if we allow a lapse in the nitrogen with timing right we're gonna slow down the production of foliage mass okay so maybe we give it a lapse in timing and a higher quantity based on the timing of the season and when we made those cuts and what we're trying to accomplish or maybe we give it a lapse in timing so that we're able to then say slow down that delivery of nitrogen in the times of year where it's most producing foliage mass mainly because we're trying to get that nitrogen in the time of year where it's most producing foliage mass mainly we would see that timing shift in the spring when the tree is just starting to produce growth has all of its stored sugars and starches from fall of last year and we're not really interested in going above and beyond to push it back in development with the formation of our secondaries we back off to moderate okay and when we start to talk about that really refined stage we've gotten ramification our structure is set we're trying to build shorter needles shorter internodes we're really trying to play on the concept of bone cycle where we reduce the portions or we're maintaining a highly refined tree maybe we're moving to exhibition maybe we're just facilitating even strength distribution across all of the branches in our bonsai form then we start to go and enter that light phase of fertilization a half tablespoon per location maybe we're going every eight weeks in order to allow it to slow down inside of these general concepts we have to understand that all of our species have different nuances to when they should be fertilized and how much they should be fertilized and in terms of timing and the quantity that we should be applying to accomplish these things these are broad concepts that give you multiple levels of control so that you can truly achieve what you're trying to accomplish with the tree at that point in time this is a very very pivotal fundamental piece of developing bonsai we talk about technique we talk about pruning we talk about wiring we talk about defoliation or partial defoliation we talk about pinching we talk about all of these concepts if you are not clear on how you're fertilizing you can have all of the technique in the world and you can offset the benefits of that technique by inaccurately fertilizing your tree this is a paramount pivotal fundamental piece of knowledge that has to be working hand-in-hand with the techniques that you're applying based on what you're trying to accomplish to achieve the results that you want and reach that higher level of bonsai creation very very important that you tune into this and explore this in your own gardens your own regions your own environments your own nations right all of the locations and all of the factors that change the way that trees behave so that you have an accurate understanding of how you fertilize your trees to get what you want out of that tree in that season at that stage of development and reach that higher level of product as a result Which products are easier to grow? have the the Colorado Blue Spruce mother-daughter that we planted on the slab in the live stream and this is a tree that we had set the structure on and had placed it on the stone slab in that developmental process right and so now we're talking about our motivations moving forward and what we're trying to accomplish are the building of the foliage mass the building of interior buds the expansion of the foliage mass as a result you can see that we've been very aggressive and plentiful in the applications of fertilizer we've got three applications of fertilizer on this tree to date which means from the moment that we started to see growth emerging from the buds every four weeks we've been applying a heavy amount of fertilizer to this planting to be perpetuating building up that strength playing on pushing out as much foliage as possible and really starting to try and achieve that accumulation and momentum that a tree in development needs to be moving towards that next stage which would be the the secondary, that moderate, and then eventually that tertiary, which is that more refined application of fertilizer. So we have three applications evenly spaced, even utilizing the edge of the slab where we know we have roots still staying, finding those spaces in this very confined soil environment that this tree is existing on. This is an excellent illustration of how diverse the locations are that we place those fertilizer applications in order to be able to get that really wide distribution of concentrated nutrition to the root mass of a developing tree, and more importantly, to the root mass of a developing tree that is existing on a stone slab. This is one of many compositions that we're building on stone right now, and this is a tremendous sort of statement of what's possible with the evolution of this tree and the evolution of this composition as a whole based on how we combine the marriage of technique and fertilization to achieve what we're trying to achieve. So here we have a spruce that we had the structure really well set and established. We've built up the microbial system in the container, and now we're starting to work on that secondary branching, really building out the foliage pads, and we're applying a moderate fertilization with that moderate amount in terms of moderate timing as well to this tree to be able to get a little bit more control over the growth and not push such rampant vigorous growth over the spring season. We have two applications that are spaced out six weeks apart, and those applications were the moderate amount, so we're talking about that one tablespoon, that eight to 10 pellets per pile of moderate fertilizer quantity. And if you look at this, the way that we staggered this very odd shaped container is a consistent distribution of concentrated nutrition. Our first application started here in this corner, moved here, staggered over to here, and ended in the back. Our second application started on this odd shape container. opposite corner of the first one staggered to here opposite of this staggered to here opposite of this and it over in that front right corner so we still have that staggered distribution equally spaced in terms of the distribution across the odd shaped container still finding that space but really setting ourselves up to have equal distribution across the front to back of this long linear container as well as equal distribution in regards to where the second and eventually the third applications are going to come so we'll continue on the moderate feed over the course of the season build up that vascular system build up that energy not so much that we get such an uncontrollable growth push next year that we go back into the development phase but just enough that we're able to have that energy to be able to put into that refinement phase that will start spring of next year and we'll work towards really getting solid even distribution of energy creation of fine internodes fine branchlets you find needle mass and really move this tree into that refinement phase of development and have evolution as a bonsai so here we have a deciduous tree that's very much in a refinement phase and even over the spring season when we had all of the stored energy from the fall all the stored sugars and starches from photosynthesis those resources are being utilized to create the solar panels that are being produced this spring as a result having this tree in that high level of refinement I didn't want to even fertilize in addition to those sugars and starches being produced and pushed into that foyer mass I didn't want to add to that strength so we allowed that stored energy to produce the first initial push of foyer mass and then we came back and fertilized with a very very light very low quantity very light application and we've only applied one application so far this season we're at a point now where we've achieved that smaller internode we've achieved that smaller leaf size and we can come back and apply and we can come back and apply and we can come back and apply another light application eight weeks later but we're spacing it out to that eight week light application and we're applying that half tablespoon to make sure that we're getting that refinement in this tree where we're building those finest tertiary branches and we're sort of at that tail end of really building the structure in the tree okay coming to one of Mirai's iconic trees and and the Rocky Mountain Juniper in the garden that probably has the highest level of refinement and you can see the really even distribution of foliage mass you can see only about 10 of the branches are wired right now this is a really high level of refinement and development for a Rocky Mountain Juniper to get this tree into a showable state would literally be an hour or two of scissor work and it would look as brilliant as it's ever looked as a result our fertilizer applications on this are very very light we let the energy run out over the course of spring without fertilizing we only have one application of fertilizer on this tree currently where when the foliage hardened off we went ahead and applied that very light application energy had been run out foliage had hardened off and now we've applied just a moderate amount a light half to three-quarter tablespoon per location and we've got four locations across this container size just to give it a little bump in energy and supplement that metabolic activity without blowing it out and creating really coarse strong big inner node big heavy growth this tree will continue to be maintained like this until we decide that it's time that the proportion of the tree has outgrown the scale of the trunk and we need to go back in remove some branches rethink the design a little bit and we start building and developing that next course of sort of refinable growth secondary replenishment Etc but this will be the general consensus for fertilizer application as long as this tree stays in a state of refinement and beautiful proportion to be presentable as a finished bonsai so now we're at this point where we've established some very fundamental backbones that help us develop that idea of how we're going to be fertilizing and we understand that inside of this there have to be some nuances and considerations that could alter and trump any of the things that we've just talked about all of those areas and all of those situations that sit outside of this ideal health this ideal phase of growth this ideal level of development that this tree is in that we're trying to match our fertilization too so I wanted to come back to some of these nuances and bring attention to the nuances and then go into the garden and look at some of these nuances and how we're adjusting our fertilization to appropriately be able to accommodate some of those situations that don't fit into ideal or that we realistically address consistently in the practice of bonsai number one repotting this is maybe one of the biggest questions that I get from people how soon after repotting do we begin fertilization and this is where we have to go back to that fundamental idea that fertilizer is not the food that the tree uses to sustain itself fertilizer is supplemental nutrition that enhances the efficiency of metabolic processes and allows the tree to function at a higher level depending on what we want to accomplish out of that tree now after the repotting process we're going to have roots that have been pruned in order to fit that tree into that container or roots that have been pruned in order to refresh that root system and put it back in that container constricting the growth and getting the impact of that confined environment when do we start fertilizing as a result of that repotting operation hinges directly on how the tree responds to that operation if we see the tree struggle after a very significant repot we are not going to be improving that tree's health by fertilizing and we need to separate ourselves from that concept the way that we get a tree to recover from the repotting operation correct balance of water and oxygen to create the system in the container that makes new root formation possible okay so the way that we repair a tree from repotting the way that we care for a tree after repotting hinges on appropriate watering not the application of fertilizer as a result we say post repotting fertilization only becomes a consideration once we see the presence of new growth the presence of that new growth as far as the tree's communication to us as the cultivator of that tree is if it's producing new growth it's telling you i have enough of a root system to sustain the current foliar mass and i have enough of a root system to be producing new foliar mass i have the root system to support the production of that new root mass trees do not have credit cards if they can't support the presence of that growth then they will not produce that growth right so we want to see the presence of that new growth before we even consider fertilizing that tree to start to build that microbial activity and that system inside the container that allows us to achieve that higher level of functionality metabolically with it okay when we talk about season season is a big big nuance for when and how and and the quantity with which we fertilize when we're entering the spring season and i've highlighted spring and i've highlighted fall here as the two biggest seasons for growth and development in our trees in the spring season we're producing new solar panels new leaves new needles new foliage mass that can generate food for the tree at this point in time in spring when we're producing that new photosynthetic mass we're pulling on the resources that were stored over the course of last fall the tree always constructs vascular tissues first before it produces the growth that that vascular system was built to sustain and support so in that consideration if we're in development in the spring season we may be fertilizing aggressively to be able to really aid in the expansion of that photosynthetic mass but if we're in a stage of refinement like we have a japanese maple that we want fine ramification on we have a rocky mountain juniper or a sabina juniper or we have a juniper that we're trying to get really fine refined pads and growth we may be holding off on fertilizer entirely as it runs out that stored resource from last fall and we may just be picking up fertilizer as we see that first flush harden but if we're developing structure if we're building new roots if we're building trunks branches secondary structural branches we may be aggressively fertilizing to not only play on that stored energy from the fall of last season but to be aiding and supplementing that push of resources to give us the best possible expansion of our solar panels based on what we're trying to accomplish now when we get into the summer season fertilizer can act as a salt in the soil system and if we experience intense heat over the course of summer the presence of that salt could potentially compete with water uptake and water is the component that plants use to cool their system we need to be very accurate during the summer season in our fertilizer application to be considering those temperatures and whether or not fertilizer is an aid in the continued development or could potentially be detrimental in japan where they had intensely hot summers we would always stop fertilization in that midpoint of july in the northern hemisphere so that the trees could focus on cooling themselves they're no longer producing new growth because it's too hot for that you're not going to be able to produce new growth because it's too hot for that new growth to stay hydrated they take a period of dormancy in the summer before they transition to their fall growth however if you're in the uk if you're in the pacific northwest if you're in scandinavia your summers may be cool enough and your growing season may be short enough that you're able to continue fertilizing through that summer season because the heat is not going to be a detriment to the tree with salts present because you don't have to worry about that competition and you have that shortened growing season where that supplemental nutrition will aid in the further development based on what you're trying to accomplish now when we get into the fall season this starts to become our most important season for fertilization if you did not fertilize at any other time of year except one that one time of year would be the fall season because this is when the tree takes all of that solar panel that it produced in the spring all of those leaves and needles and it starts accumulating all of its energy and storing that energy in its twigs its branch branches, its trunk, and its roots. This is where we see the greatest amount of vascular tissue stored, and all of that energy that's produced over the fall is building the tissue that will produce the growth the following spring. It's building the tissue that gives you back budding and the potential to expand your ramification and your foliar mass, and it's giving you winter hardiness over the course of fall that allows that bonsai to tolerate winter conditions. This is a paramount time of year to be fertilizing and fertilizing correctly to accomplish what you want to accomplish. Over the winter season, we generally see the farther north you go or the farther south you go, whether you're in the northern hemisphere or the southern hemisphere, we generally see a tree start to shed its needles or shut down and stop growth entirely to be able to weather those winter conditions. However, the closer to the equator, whether we're in the south, moving north or south, moving north, or whether we're in the northern hemisphere moving south, the closer to the equator we get, the more prolonged the growing season is. Maybe closest to the equator, we don't have a period of dormancy at all, and through that winter season, we could be looking at light applications to be supplementally increasing the tree's metabolic activity so that we're able to further development. That winter season and that summer season hinge on where you're at, what the conditions are, and again, what you're trying to accomplish with that tree. We want to be able to formulate how you're going to be approaching fertilization and accurately giving that tree what it needs to get out of it what you're trying to. Ill health or with a tree that has suffered some sort of setback in its development. This is a time where we really have to lean on that knowledge that says, hey listen, fertilizer is not the food, fertilizer is a supplement, and if a tree is unhealthy, we know that that lack of health, more often than not, is stimulated by an imbalance of water and oxygen. In the container, if we have an imbalance of water and oxygen, the last thing we want to do is add a salt or a component to that that is going to further throw off the movement of water and its ability to seamlessly and evenly balance out to a point where the tree starts producing root mass or starts to find it's a level of health again. When we have a tree in poor health, we're going to back off on fertilizer entirely. We're going to reestablish the balance of water and oxygen, and we're going to wait for that tree. We're going to begin producing strong growth again, and when that tree produces that strong growth again, that's its ability to communicate to us, I have enough roots to sustain what I currently have on the tree, and I've been able to create the root mass that allows me to consider adding more to the tree. Now we can start feeding again to supplement that production of that new foliar mass, that vascular tissue, that root mass, whatever it is. The season that we're in that's experiencing that ill health, reestablish balance of water and oxygen, remove fertilizer, back off on fertilizer until that tree communicates to you, I am back in a position where I'm ready to expand again. Recovery. Now, recovery from an ill health is a very gray line that we draw because we're saying, listen, I've collected a tree out of the mountains, do I fertilize it? That's different when we collect a tree out of the mountains and we're saying, do we fertilize to facilitate the reestablishment versus having a tree that's been in a bonsai container and is experiencing ill health. In the recovery process, more often than not, and again, this is not black and white, this is gray, but more often than not, the addition of a light application of fertilizer will help in the recovery of a tree that has been collected, will help potentially in the recovery of a tree that might, in the containerized environment, not be experiencing the right conditions. So when we're in recovery, we've really got to balance sort of that consideration. Is it ill health or is it recovery? If it is, in fact, recovery. Fertilizer could be an attribute or a component that assists in the recovery that is going to be up for you to decide and make those judgment calls on to be able to get that tree to perform the best it possibly can. And the last and maybe one of the most, you know, when we compare species nuances to the seasonality of fertilization, species nuances have a huge, huge dictatorial concept about how we fertilize. For example, if we consider a Japanese maple, in the spring season, where we're seeking refinement in the tips, we're going to be backing off on fertilizer entirely, letting the stored sugars and starches produce the growth, and we're going to be pinching to manage that so that that stored energy does not give us big, long, coarse growth. If we're talking about a black pine, in a black pine, when we decandal in the summer season, we're not going to be fertilizing after we decandal, because we want shorter needles and shrubs. We want shorter internodes, which is the entire reason that we did decandal. So these species nuances and the stage of development that that species is in starts to manipulate and change the way that we fertilize that tree. Another good example would be white pine, five-needle pines. Five-needle pines are a long-needle, single-flush pine. That means that if we fertilize, as that candle is elongating and as those needles are elongating, we can get excessively long needles, okay? But once those needles harvest, we're going to be able to fertilize. Once those needles harden off, we may come back and be fertilizing to give them a bump of nutrition prior to that summer dormancy that they might experience, or if we're in an area where they don't experience summer dormancy, we may start fertilizing after they harden off to accomplish what we're trying to accomplish with that tree. So these species nuances and what we're trying to accomplish start to change the basic framework of fertilization, and this is where refined bonsai knowledge is pivotal for us to be able to achieve. In combination with the technique that we're applying, the best possible result. Let's walk through the garden. Let's take a look at some of the species that have these nuances and how we're handling fertilization at this point to help to form some of the concepts and structure that you guys can apply to your own trees at home and start to experiment with to have that greater understanding and elevate your bonsai level to that next step. So when we get to this concept of nuances, we have all of this big framing. We have all of this big framing. We have all of this big framing. We have all of this big framing. We have all of this big framing. We have all of this big framing. We have all of this big framing. We have all of this big framing. We have all of this big framing. So we've got a framework of fertilization established. We know that we've got heavy, we've got moderate, we've got light. We've got the idea that we're always asking ourselves, what are we trying to accomplish? We've got gas pedals in terms of quantity, we've got gas pedals in terms of timing. But there's so many other components that we've got to be considering and one of the biggest ones is talking about seasonality. In that spring season for a lot of our trees, we're trying to harness and drive that energy and that strength forward. use that strength of the stored sugars and starches from the previous fall to be manifesting itself as new foliar production, we're executing techniques that tandem component of fertilization at the time where we're getting that energy pushed out to be maximizing where that energy is directed. We would see this happening in our elongating species like our spruce, like our fir, like our larches, like our hemlocks, like our redwoods pinching to be managing that growth and and potentially fertilizing to be driving that growth. But we can go the opposite direction and we can say a deciduous tree in refinement like a Japanese maple, like the flowering pear that we've seen in this video, in the refinement phase we don't want to be driving any more strength into that first flush than exists already in the stored sugars and starches from last season and we'll hold back on that spring application of fertilizer, let just the sugars and starches produce that first flush, pinch and manage or prune to be able to keep that growth and drive that growth. Compact the internode short and really work towards fertilization after it's already used its stored sugars and starches to be building the energy that allow it to perpetuate a second flush and give us that tertiary refinement over the course of that season. We've got to be thinking about seasonality in its entirety and seasonality starts to blend with a lot of those considerations. In the spring in general we do want to be planning to be fertilizing our bonsai outside of those exceptions to be developing that finest level of ramification and refinement. As we move through the spring it's important to be supplementing the nutrition of our trees and their growth so that we're able to maximize the productivity of the foliar mass, direct the energy from strong to medium to weak if we're pinching, get to the tail end of that spring fertilization and have the strength to decandle if we're handling black pine or red pine or multi flush pine. And as we move into the summer we start to maybe back off a little bit because we've had all of that foliar production we've reaccumulated that energy and we're starting to see that energy we've gotten back into an energy positive. Temperatures were favorable for that fertilization to be maximized in the metabolic processes of the tree. We start to move into those periods of intense heat and we say boy temperatures 95 degrees and above consistently the fertilization starts to compete with some of the water availability that the tree needs to cool itself. Summer is a major consideration if we stay below those temperatures we can continue feeding to accomplish what we want to accomplish if we're trying to continue driving development. When we look at fall, fall is the most important time to be fertilizing. Fall is the period in the year where we're experiencing vascular growth and the storage of all of the sugars and starches that give us both winter hardiness and the production of vascular tissue on the tree that gives us number one back budding and the presence of back budding but number two is storing all of the energy to be able to create that foliar mass the following spring. So if we had one season in which we fertilized it would absolutely be the fall. We look at our ponderosa pines where if we fertilized ponderosa pine from the spring through the summer their needles would elongate excessively they harden off in the late summer early fall that early September time of year and then we start fertilizing and yet they continue to thrive year after year because we hit that one significant point the fall season to give them the resources to store the energy and produce growth next season. When we talk about seasonality as an application of fertilizer and how it blends in with our different species spring is important for different reasons and we sometimes pull back from spring. Summer can be important for development in different reasons but if the heat's too intense we sometimes pull back in summer. Fall is the most important and is the one season where we virtually fertilize everything with a very vigorous dose of fertilization outside of trying to get a little refinement in our deciduous trees and when we get to the winter time we're going to say temperatures are low, metabolic activity is low, fertilization may be effective in some of the warmer portions the closer that we get to the equator but are we trying to accomplish things that would warrant us to fertilize in the summer? In the winter time and in the more northern or southern portions, northern in the northern hemisphere, southern in the southern hemisphere, farther away from the equator, the winter time becomes a time where we pull back on fertilization because we're not getting the functionality and we're not trying to accomplish growth when the tree is going into dormancy. I'm standing here in front of a black pine and I wanted to touch on one of those major species specific nuances in terms of fertilization. We've recently decandled all of our multi flush pines. When fertilizing our multi flush pine, the nuance that we're trying to get out of our multi flush pines is that we're trying to get all of our multi flush pines out of their pines. One of the things that we need to be aware of to achieve shorter needles and shorter internodes in the decandling process is that we need to apply our last fertilization one month prior to actually decandling the tree so the nitrogen is gone when we go in and we decandal and we won't be fertilizing again until the second flush fully hardens off. This is a really good example of species specific nuances that impact in combination with the technique of decandling that impact how we fertilize to achieve what we're trying to accomplish.  we're applying to maximize the quality of our bonsai productivity. So another nuance of fertilization that we really got to dig a little deeper into is how soon after repotting a bonsai do we go about applying the fertilizer? And this is a question again, that we receive a lot at Mirai because the the urgency and the feeling of necessity to be fertilizing is so strong in people. Now at Mirai we would say, OK,ak a it s at least 10 days if conditions are optimal for any pruned root once we put it into a bonsai container to callus and compartmentalize that prune and produce new roots. So that means that those fresh new roots then have a period of time that they've got to acclimate to be able to develop enough tissue to be able to harden off a bit before they can accept that salt influence from the fertilization into the soil environment and be able to endure it without it causing damage. This is the risk of fertilizing too soon after repotting. And we don't know how long that takes, however. And we don't know what the state of the tree is for a fairly significant period of time after repotting. And so what I will always tell people and where we orient from at Mirai is what's the hurry? What's the rush? Why? We just repotted this tree. We can let it recuperate. We can focus on balance of water and oxygen to stimulate the best root growth. When we see the tree start to produce strong, robust health, not just start to grow because that will happen very quickly. Strong robust health. Strong robust growth. Good balance of water and oxygen. This is an opportune time to fertilize. We're now right at the beginning or the middle portion of June at Bonsai Mirai. And this tree, this Seiju Elm that was repotted this spring, was fertilized for the first time two weeks ago. We waited from the repotting process at the end of March all the way until June. Almost three months before we ever fertilized this tree just to make sure that its roots were settled, that the balance of water and oxygen was intact. There was no panic. And here's what happened as a result of that. We go in and we redirect a growth through one single pruning and one application of fertilizer and we see this tree starting to explode with back-butting because we made sure that the roots, the balance of water and oxygen and those fine root tips that came out of any pruned section of the tree had compartmentalized, had calloused, had produced new roots that had fully hardened off. When we talk about post-repot fertilization, minimum time to wait four to six weeks. Ideal indication? Presence of new roots. New, strong, robust growth. Optimally, we're not in a hurry. Fertilization is not the food. The tree does not need it to survive. Let's give that tree some time to really establish that balance of water and oxygen so it can optimize the first fertilization that we apply. When we talk about post-repot fertilization as well, first application, moderate or light to start to integrate that salt into those new root tips and harden them off for further future more robust, aggressive applications. Here. We're starting to see a moderate application of fertilizer on this tree for the first time to start to harden those roots, even though we're three months later. Harden those roots off so that we're able to apply heavier applications of fertilizer depending on what we're trying to accomplish as we move through the rest of the season. Be very careful. Understand the role of fertilizer as not a essential component of this tree's survivability and health, and all of a sudden, post-repot fertilization becomes something that we don't expect about and we can do in time when the tree gives us the indications and we identify what it is we're trying to accomplish with the technique and the fertilizer that we're applying. Another major nuance of fertilization is when do we start fertilizing a tree that has experienced significant health issues? Here you can see a Rocky Mountain juniper that clearly has experienced some root-related issues and we were forced to repot it out of its collected soil into this container this season. Now, it's recovering and we're starting to get new growing tips on several portions of the canopy. Never do we want to fertilize to try and improve health-related issues where we have a tree that is suffering and showing ill health. Fertilizer is not a cure, fertilizer is not a food, and fertilizer is not a remedy. We always want to establish the balance of water and oxygen and take the actions on the roots that are necessary to be able to rectify any of the things that are causing that lack of health or lack of immunity in the tree before we ever look to fertilization as a tool to begin helping it build supplemental resources. With this tree, we're going to have a lot of fun. We're going to have a lot of fun. With this tree that was repotted in early March, it's taken all the way until the beginning portion of July for us to see those growth tips occurring, see the health recovering, and you'll notice how small and how light the application of fertilizer is to be going very slowly with this tree that is recovering in the process of rebuilding its root system and recovering from a very significant setback in health. This is the appropriate way that we move into fertilization and the key to, the indicator that we can begin to recover. We can begin fertilizing in a very light way is seeing those new growth tips and new growth emerging from a tree that has suffered a health setback. One of the last nuances I want to talk about is the idea of how do we fertilize trees coming out of the field, trees in nursery cans, and trees coming out of the collected environment. Because we've talked about a tree needing to recover health before we start fertilizing. However, when we're collecting trees out of the environment, when we're digging trees out of the field, more often than not, we have an impact. We're going to have a lot of fun. We're going to have a lot of fun. We're going to have a lot of fun. We're going to have a lot of fun. We're going to have a lot of fun. We're going to have a lot of fun. We're going to have a lot of fun. That's a humongous side effect that we can have an impact on the entire tree right now. And finally, I want to give you one little tip if you're going to know how butterfly has developed the technique well enough to really talk about working with mattered fruit like this. We're gonna open it up right now and we're gonna talk about what it's all about. You're looking at your plant and you're looking at a plant yesterday at the top of the tree. If you're going to be manual funding, you're giving later, but to go back to pulling out the plant right now is really great for doing work. Notice that the small unit that you're putting in there? in terms of balance of water and oxygen contact microbial activity before we're able to fertilize intact root balls get fertilized root balls that have suffered any sort of structural impediment we're going to hold off and let the tree reestablish this is a good framework and foundational concept that you can use to be able to gauge when you do and don't fertilize collected trees trees coming out of the field and trees in the nursery environment that you're going to be facilitating their evolution and development in bonsai so one of the big nuances that we've got to be able to address when we come back to fertilization is how do we handle that smallest tree how do we handle those shohin size bonsai in our gardens and this is a question that we get a lot at mirai and so i'll just share with you guys how we handle it now just the same as what are we trying to accomplish drives whether we're setting structure we're driving secondary or really in that refinement phase that that sort of accomplishment and what we're trying to achieve has two gas pedals with that timing and with that quantity now timing is not going to change when we go down to these smaller trees and shohin containers we're still going to be thinking about how long do we want the nitrogen to be present in that system every four weeks do we want a gap with six weeks do we want to really dilute it with eight weeks okay but but the quantity is really where we start to make the adjustment because we've got this condensed container that we're applying fertilizer to so when we say the 12 inch container with three locations is our standard model when we start to get smaller in container we go from three to two locations when we get to a standard we're actually going to have one location that we might not be able to apply nutrients you can talk to us about that and we can talk about that in the next video so as you're getting smaller you may also want a container that is two inches manner and something that you'll be able to use in a more efficient way number one we're going to apply fertilizer to two locations it's a good thing that we've got two locations we're good at these places we may have a refrigerator location we may only have one location that we would be applying fertilizer to if we're doing a heavy feed we'd have a tablespoon and a half in a singular it's heavy moderate or light into multiple different locations so what I have here is I have my tea bag and I've got five pellets I want to moderately fertilize this juniper bonsai it's in the secondary phase you can see it's got good strength we're filling in some areas we're working on sort of taking those secondaries and really building with so I've got a half strength here and I've already got the other five pellets from that sort of one tablespoon divided in half here so I basically essentially now have a half tablespoon half tablespoon if you guys were doing a half tablespoon strength you do a quarter tablespoon quarter tablespoon so we're taking that desired output of one location in terms of that quantity and we're dividing it up across across the number of locations that we want to apply to in the container so I'm going to put my five look five pellets inside of there I'm gonna sort of that that that half dosage and then what I'm gonna do because we've got such a condensed container and we've got such a confined space instead of wrapping this up and creating a little bit of space for the juniper bonsai we're going to take our two endpoints and we're going to cut that off and then we're going to cut this right in half here just so I have a much smaller surface area and a much smaller amount of paper that's going to be sitting and existing in the container I may choose to fold over one of the edges so that I've got a nice small little pouch here and I'll tuck that into a space where it doesn't intrude with the trunk or any of the details and just find that location where I can drive that toothpick down in there so just to maintain that aesthetic quality after we've applied that that pouch to this much much smaller tree I'll take my scissors and I'll just cut the top of that toothpick off so it still holds it in its place but we don't have this big obtrusive stick sort of standing in the in the line of sight of the tree now you can see a fertilized front to back in this application the original application I had a place here where some of the smaller fertilizer pellets were able to sit without a pouch so we went top to bottom initially now we go front to back and we'll continue to alternate in those locations each time that we fertilize with that appropriate quantity right taking that singular location quantity for a show heen tree dividing it into the number of places that I want that to exist in the container and then we'll be still following that concept for timing are we going every four weeks are we really driving growth are we going every six weeks are we going every eight weeks to really achieve that refined ability in that tertiary ramification so we've basically covered the gauntlet of fertilizer as a basic fundamental technique that we utilize to go hand in hand with management techniques to be able to develop the highest quality bonsai again I'm going to encourage you guys to be experimenting with this exploring your own growing conditions in your region of the world and the species that you're working with and see how fertilization impacts facilitates in enhances the development of your tree to reach that higher level of bonsai in the end you have to always be asking yourself what are we trying to accomplish in terms of being able to guide your fertilizer application but now that you have all of this fundamental information in the backbone of what needs to be considered and the questions that you can be asking yourself the techniques and the gas pedals to be manipulating fertilization and its impact on your trees development you're going to be much more prepared to make that correct decision and enhance the level of your bonsai good luck fertilize well and we'll look forward to seeing your guys enhance quality of bonsai 
