What's going on everybody? Super Tuesday and we got a special one for you this evening. Now, one of the consistent questions that gets lobbed our way in Q&As and I think it's a continual discussion topic is how do you repot a forest? Do you have to pull that forest apart when you repot? How do you go about this process? Do you keep it together? And we happen to be coming upon the sixth year of this Bald Cypress Forest, or I should say Pond Cypress Forest if I'm being correct, having been a composition created in 2014, I do believe, and now in 2020, really hitting that point where the surface of the roots are starting to really mound up, water doesn't enter and percolate as freely as it used to, the organic accumulation is significant, thicker roots are showing on the outside of the container. And here's the big indication that it's time to repot. Some of the smaller trees that are against that outskirt of that ceramic body are starting to show weakness, starting to show a slight decline in health and before they do go too far and before we lose that vigor in those trees while we still have the opportunity to make some changes, we're going to go back in, we're going to investigate this root system, we're going to see how it holds up to the extraction from the container and roll with the punches of repotting a very, very pivotal, iconic piece of Mirai's forest creations. Now, here's what we would like to see happen and just to establish a baseline of forest repotting. Ideally what we'll be doing is treating this entire composition as one singular compositional tree, if you will. The central dominant tree and it's root system is where all of the smaller trees were arranged in the original construction of this piece and so all of those have been fit into the spaces between the major macro system of the largest piece. Ideally, what we'll do is we'll clean around the sides of the container, we'll remove this as one singular piece that has all of its root growth grown together, solidified, and maintain its shape as a singular forest composition. We'll work the bottom, we'll work the top, we'll reduce the sides, cut back some of the thicker roots, get to those finer secondary tertiaries, put it back into the container refreshed, and have this tree move forward with health. This would be ideal scenario when we repot a forest and answering that question of, do we pull it apart? Do we have to restructure the forest every single time? If we like the composition of the forest, we should not deconstruct that, and our goal over the course of time is to, in fact, create one singular root mass and one singular composition. Inside of that, however, we don't know that this is going to hold together. We see that some trees are not producing the same root mass as other trees in the composition, as demonstrated by that change of health and strength, and we may see this forest, just on its own accord, start to fall apart or change. It's position and composition. How do we then act on that, preserve that shape if we're happy with it, and really buffer and protect that forest creation through the repotting process to be able to maintain what we've created and started to build? So without any further ado, knowing what our goals are in terms of what we're trying to accomplish, the notion that we want to work each independent tree to create a healthier root system, give it its space to grow, but as a whole, entire holistic composition, we want to preserve the shape and what we've created. To this point, Troy and I are going to start to free the sides of that root system from the container and begin the process of extraction so we can dig in and see just what it's going to take to repot this bald cypress forest. All right, Troy, you ready? Okay. So I've got two different sizes of commas here, and I'm going to bring these over and just kind of show you what we're dealing with. So I've got my smaller comma here on the left. You can see the larger tooth structure on that smaller comma. Anytime I'm digging into a root system that's become, you know, very tight and has scaled the okadama and has really broken down into a very fine root system, I always like to start with the coarser comma to just break into that root system and start the separation process. On the right here, I've got a much finer tooth and a longer comma that once I've used the smaller comma to open up the space, I'll use the longer comma to get through all the way down to the bottom of the container and really start to separate that matted up root system that's occupying the wall of the container so that I have free and clear space for the container to be able to extract this tree. Now, if we go into the details that exist inside of this, you'll notice that some of the trunks in this composition are right up tight against the edge of the container here. What we notice and what we're aware of, even if we come in here to the very small perspective and view, is we've got big, thick structural roots that are right up against the edge of the container. We've got the structural trunk and the physical tree of this front-facing bald cypress up against the edge of that container. I don't want to dig my comma. I want to dig my comma in and try to get my comma between the trunk of this and the container, and I want to avoid these major structural roots as well, so the first place that I'm going to be inserting my comma in this location is just past that thick structural root. I'm going to first create that path. I'm then going to come in at a 45 to shave off that angle so that we create that track, if you will, that we can start to dig in, and we're going to start that process in all of the open areas where we don't have a tree touching the container or thick structural roots. I'm going to now be hitting the container to begin the extraction process. How you doing? You hitting anything thick? I've got a few roots that I did hit over here, but- Nothing big? No, yeah. Nothing big. Nothing big. I mean, because we're going to, you are going to cut through some bigger, thicker roots in the process, and that's okay. Okay. Good. Oh, got some root aphid. Okay, so here you can see these kind of speckled cottony masses, really nice and small and fine. Sometimes people mistake this for mycorrhizae. Mycorrhizae is an inner working net or mesh, and it's a little duller in color, but these kind of spectacular white pockets of cottony masses, you kind of see I obstructed that one. This is definitively root aphids. Now, I know that this tree right here is showing some weakness in terms of the overall composition and distribution of strength. I'm seeing the apical region of this piece against the edge of the container, losing some of its strength in the canopy. Now, I see that there are root aphid issues. I recognize that this is a compressed root system. All of these things, reasons, indications, and clues that are leading us to want to repot this tree, if I left it for another year, I think we would see a further decline in the health of some of these exterior, really pivotal pieces in the composition. I'm happy that we're going back in and addressing this. So, I'm just having to work around in the areas where I can get down to the bottom of the container. I'm just working around big structural pieces that are pinching in the corners, and we really want in the areas where we can open it up against the wall, we really want to try and open up a pretty significant amount of space because we're going to have so many areas where there isn't space that the areas where we have space, we're going to have to create more space. We're going to have to create more space to be able to extract it. And this is just a beautiful aspect of cultivating a forest composition because you don't want to put it into a massive container. Otherwise, you can never refine any of the trees. But when you come back in and all of those root systems are growing aggressively, you've just got the power of, you know, this composition is five trees. You've got the power of five trees and one very significant, I would say in most people's bonsai practice, the central tree might be occupying this container all by itself to get the... The perspective and the scale and create the environment and the constriction of the bonsai container to put all five trees in this was a definite roll of the dice. It's worked out well for us, but coming back to it now, it's interesting to start to see what's happening. And here's the thing about, I would say, bald cypress or pond cypress taxodium as a general species of tree. Super strong, very vigorous, and what ends up happening is they will scale the akadama and become very fine in their root system. And you can see the ramification on this. The tree starting to show some of that refinement and scaled aspect. You can see the constriction that exists inside of the branching, and that's clearly a result of the akadama combined with that restricted environment. But I think the other thing to know is they hit a tipping point where they're producing big, thick roots, and we need to come back in and check those big, thick roots, cut them secondary, and continue to work that root system much the same way we work the branching structure. Every time I hit a constriction, I come back to that original place where I have access, and I just open it up a little bit more because it's like, ah, this is going to be even more important than I thought. So just see if you can get the space, right? So all of the gunk out of it, so there's not even any soil. To the best of our ability, that's going to be, oh, wow, that's really tight, isn't it? And this right here, a little bit of space right here. Let's continue to find it. Okay. I think as much as we can get, we get. That's all that we're going to get. Should we see? Should we see what it looks like? Okay. We're probably going to have to come back and do this a little bit more, but let's go ahead and tip it. That way, when we're doing it, we're getting the soil out. We'll see how far we have to go. So, Troy, let's go ahead and pull back here and tip forward. So we're going to pull back this way. Okay. And we're going to go forward. Okay, all the way. And then let's pull back again. One, two, three. Perfect. Okay. Can you hold right there? Yep. Okay. All right. Okay, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to cut, and I'm just going to angle so that we can see, so this gives you an idea of the extent of the tie-downs in the original forest composition. You see the roots coming out of the bottom and most of the holes, which says we do have a significant occupation, but you see the number of wires that it took to really secure each of these pieces when they were independent root systems. So I've got to come in and I've got to separate and just open up the opportunity for each of these pieces to not necessarily be any sort of binding component that's going to hold any aspect of this forest in there. And just making sure that we're really accurate with this so that every single tie-down, and a lot of these I would assume would be starting to rust out with the kind of water frequency that we apply to the bald cypress. Some of them are still solid. Some of them are quite deteriorated. I'm going to cut each one. Okay. And then I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to rotate. And we're going to see. Let me just apply. I'm going to apply a little bit of leverage to this and just see what it's going to take. I'm going to use the primary tree as my torsion device. Oh, okay. Not nearly as big of a deal as I had thought. Okay, Troy. So I'm going to go ahead and just drop that back just a little bit. Okay. Okay, hang on. Hang on. Okay. All right. I'm going to take that out. We're good. Good. Good. Okay. All right. So let's go ahead and lay it down one time. Actually, let's just take a look at this. Okay. And if you want to come over here and just grab this, and I think probably here is going to be your best bet, but see where you're comfortable. Oh, it's pretty balanced. It's not bad. Not bad at all. Okay, now we can see the root aphid actually being present, but here's the bigger thing. Notice the density and the fine root mass. Notice what I would consider to be an exorbitantly small number of really big, thick, coarse roots. You've got this incredibly beautiful scaled root system, full occupation. I mean, just a tight mat of roots, and you're starting to see why we use Akadama for a bald cypress or a pond cypress to show this kind of really, really intense ramified root growth. When you start to look at the ways that these have been handled and how it either creates the opportunity for ramification or we lose the opportunity for ramification, that Akadama substrate as a component that really does facilitate the ability to refine a vigorous species like a bald or a pond cypress, it's an imperative aspect of that higher level of bonsai aesthetic. Obviously, these can grow in a lot of diverse conditions, and there's a lot of diversity, there's a lot of justification that I think people use having that tolerance and capacity to be able to tolerate different mediums, but I think when you look at trying to maximize its potential as a bonsai specimen and scaling the roots to give you the finest ramification, we're seeing how that happens on a really beautiful scale. Okay? Do you want me to bring a prop with me when I come back? Would that be good? Okay. All right, let me... I'll look here and look pretty. Yeah. Okay. Okay. And I think what we should do is swing this. Okay? Okay. So I can work this on the front side. All right, so when we have this kind of compressed root system, and I don't want to change any angles, I don't want to change the design at all. To get through this, we know these matted roots are not something we're going to tease apart and still utilize in the container. As we refine a bonsai root system, we're actually going to be shedding this bottom mat, shedding the matted roots that we've been utilizing the comma to free from the edge of the container, and shedding the surface area with all that decomposing moss, organic matter, from fertilization and root growth. I'm going to come back with a sharpened paint scraper, and I'm just going to use this to define that bottom mass and really create that angle to preserve, but also take away that matted up root system so we can begin the process of further penetrating into the root mass itself. It is like real solid. Big, thick roots in there. Icky, ickies. Be a little bit careful around these really big pieces. It's a nice, clean wound. It shouldn't do any damage to them. I don't want to, though, cut through big roots that do attach to prominent pieces inside of the shape. And if these are too big and too rigid for my paint scraper to go through, then I can come back and just give them a nice, clean cut. We're going to clean up all of these anyways, so I'm not really worried about it, but I do definitely want to be cautious. Scraping it, new roots will emerge from that, but if I try to go through too big of roots, these might be the thing that's keeping that trunk alive. A little bit of discrimination and discretion on the bottom of the root mass, but for the most part, coming back through this, you can see where we're getting a really nice separation, and also noticing that we're actually getting past that drainage screen that we had in there, which had been engulfed, engulfed by those finer roots. Okay, now, Troy, as we're doing this, if you start to see any of the trunks becoming loose or starting to separate or change their position, go ahead and let me know. They're extremely coarse root system. You cut through a lot of the really big structural roots that anchor them, and kind of what I'm seeing on the bottom here, is what I would expect to see in a tree that is making that transition to a bonsai container, but also the quantity of rigid roots, stuff that looks like this, to be coming back into these big, thick roots that are now running, and you can see how apically dominant they're becoming. You see the fine roots that exist here. I want to be cutting these back to these fine root junctions and really transitioning from this longer, more dominant, what I would consider to be apically developmental growth into this big, thick root. So, I'm going to be cutting these back to these fine root junctions, into a more refined, tertiary, secondary kind of root structure, just the same way as we handle the canopy of a tree. This bottom section here, where I'm really wanting to be, and this is where knowing your tree and kind of analyzing what could potentially be a limitation or something we need to be aware of, the smaller trunks that exist, and up in here, right here, now that we've turned the tree around, is where that really weak piece is existing. I'm going to be just a little bit easier in that sense, not really hammering the roots, because if it already has a decreased or maybe a limited space to grow, and it's got this nice little tight, compact zone of roots, I don't want to be taking that zone away from that tree where we've already seen the apical regions start to lose a little bit of the vigor. I think over the course of time, when you talk about really healthy, really good, really productive, positive forest bonsai cultivation, you are striking and finding all of those nuances within the ecosystem, of that community, for each tree to have success and be significant and proliferate inside of its relationship to everything else. Okay, let me get inside of this here. I see these big, thick roots right at the bottom here. Let me go ahead. Just kind of get through those. See if we can't get down, because I notice that this side, particularly, still has a lot of those matted roots on it. These are the areas that I really want to be investing my time in, just trying to, as much as I possibly can, refine this root system. And again, this is that big, broad, initial pad reduction. Now we're going to go back in, and we're going to use our chopsticks in a more refined approach to come back in, and start to make a lot more refined decisions. You still see I have these pieces right on the bottom, which this bottom cusp is always the toughest to work, because there's really no way, particularly on a tree of this size, there's no way to be able to tilt it down past that horizontal, and I'm now working on a perpendicular plane to the surface of my repotting bench, so I have a reference to be able to maintain that angle. But I also have a reference, and I can start to see how is all of this starting to play into the root system, the decisions that are going to be made around the repotting process. All the trees seem as though they're holding their position and shape. Yeah, solid. Looks solid from here. Okay, cool. This one's moving around quite a bit, but I don't know if it's just... This one? Yeah. Yeah, just the upper canopy. Okay. So now that I've come through, and I've taken off that bottom mat, and you can see I'm going to have to access this bottom corner somehow. Probably when we do the sides, we'll hang it off the edge of the table. Now I want to come back in here, and I just want to start to find those voids. Where potentially I see some of this black accumulation. You can see the black accumulation. This is original soil that existed within these pond cypress as they were put into this container. An original soil that was probably maintained because we'd never want to bear root a conifer, even a deciduous conifer like a bald or a pond cypress. Same would go for a larch. You don't want to take away all of that microbial activity. With deciduous, we can do that, but a coniferous, a deciduous conifer definitely has some nuances where we need to preserve that root mass. We do not want to bear root and take that off entirely. There is microbial relationships that we need to facilitate and continue to value and promote that relationship existing. We want to be very careful of these aspects of the deciduous conifer and that realm or unique little genre of trees. I'm going to be fairly crafted in my approach on the bottom of this because I want to reduce as much as I can these big communities of coarse roots that were left intact. We couldn't bear root. We definitely didn't want to take the roots back too far. Initial root movement into a bonsai container means a lot of this stayed because there wasn't the same fine root system that you now see inside of this container. So if we come back in here and we don't dig deep enough to get to some of those original areas, then what we're going to do is we're going to be leaving that organic really black soil inside. And we're not going to be opening up the space for a better balance of water and oxygen, but more importantly also for that continual homogenous root system of that Akadama substrate to really create the balance of water and oxygen throughout the rest of that root system that's given us the scalability of the areas where you see the Akadama having been really positive in its impact on the fine root systems and their networks. Okay, now when I look at this it's interesting to me because the tree itself was making some transitional moves to definitely moving back towards a coarser rate of growth without checking those big thick roots. But when I come back in and I prune these, what I'm seeing is there's still quite a bit of unoccupied Akadama. And you will start to recognize this once we make this secondary repotting move on this forest, right? Getting back into these mud pockets and taking out some of this decomposing black matter. And we start to really open up the space, right? Open up everything to Akadama and scalable root growth in terms of the medium and the soil mix that we're utilizing here. This is what's gonna create the capacity for us to now leave this bald cypress. It's been in here six years and we see there's open space. We have the capacity to potentially look to leave this in far longer on the second repotting or after this second repotting. Just based on our observations of the scalable space that exists and having gone back in, corrected that initial native soil issue that we see in terms of these black pockets and recognizing how much available Akadama still lives inside of this root system for those roots to become nice and fine, compact and contribute to the ramified growth. Keep as much of this intact as I can. Not really seeing as much of the blackness as I thought I would. It's here somewhere. Might be a little deeper in the root system. And really see the finesse of this, this cut back into these finer roots that are conducting a lot more efficient water. You can see it changing the profile of our root system here. Just in that small little adjustment that we're making, things changing in terms of what's sticking out here, how flat it's starting to become with that reduction. There's some of that blackness, oof. And it stinks, smells really, really bad. Really sour, which is the smell of anaerobic activity, which means there's no oxygen. You've got a high bacterial content in there. Potentially even some rot or the continual perpetuation of whether it's fungi or bacteria. There are good fungi and good bacteria. There are bad fungi and bad bacteria. And you talk about bacteria that causes the decomposition and expansion of rot as an actual attacking mechanism that will go seek out roots and try to cause those roots to decay. We don't want to feed off the decaying tissue. We want to be sure that we're trying to create as rich of an oxygen environment. Even though bald cypress and pond cypress are incredibly water-loving trees, this is really where I don't agree that even though they're water-loving trees in a bonsai container, they should be submerged. We have to keep in mind what kind of a root system we're trying to promote. And we're trying to promote a fine-scaled, really beautifully ramified root system in terms of these species to get them to really hit the pinnacle of their potential. So when we start to talk about that, just making sure that that is what we keep in mind as we work this root system is of utmost importance and significance. And I'm going to find these random veins in here because these were put together trying to keep everything intact that we possibly could. And so that means that there were portions of each of these trees that were not bare-rooted. And when they were compressed into this singular small containerized environment, those veins just get buried inside of the Akadama that we utilize to kind of fill those spaces and promote that really refined root growth. So I think we'll probably see more of these blackened organic areas from the top as well that we'll be working on. And whenever we do this kind of elimination second repot where we get into some of that native field soil, much like we do on our conifers, it's going to be this back and forth of working the top, working the bottom, working the top, working the bottom. It's not a fast repot this second time because we need to come back and fix all the areas that we left intact that first time. And again, with a forest, we want to continue to be aware and considerate of the fact that we don't want to restructure this, so we want to notice if it's starting to shift position or if our reduction of these roots starts to free up some of the pieces that we've put together so that we can compensate for it should that start to happen. It doesn't mean we change our goals, right? The goal isn't I'm going to do a minor repot so that I don't impact the shape of the forest. We have to do the repot that sets our tree up for health and success, but we need to be aware of it so that we can compensate for it in the correct action that we're taking on the roots. We may have to put those pieces together or secure them together so that we don't end up having to restructure the entire forest. And I'm just cutting every single tip, every single damaged tip I'm cutting to make sure to be absolutely positive that these damaged tips do in fact have the capacity to produce new fresh roots. Let me go to a smaller chopstick here when I'm getting into these finer pockets. Ooh, there's some black, black nasty, organic field soil from the original collect, yeah. Let me just punch that up through that surface so we can find that. Still a little matted over here. This is where I was being a little more conservative, so I'm going to be a little bit more aggressive as I kind of go into this and start to look at. How do I need to handle this? When I find wires, I'm not necessarily focused on pulling wires out of the root system. I'm just going to cut it back up inside so that I don't have to deal with it. It doesn't cut me as I'm working. I want to continue to make sure that I've got a reference for my depth so I'm cleaning away all of the pieces that are existing as we knock all of this soil off. You start to see this mound of mass, and it prevents us from doing the work we need to do on this bottom edge. Okay, so just continuing to cut and continuing to reduce and continuing to work back. These margins in these areas, very, very almost fleshy type of roots that Bald Cypress and Pond Cypress have, really capable of ramifying to a beautiful degree if we handle them correctly. Okay, but they're also relatively fragile. You notice that as I was driving through those initial pieces, I did kind of pull back a little bit because I started to see how it was breaking, how they were potentially being damaged by that. We did have to get through that initial root, sort of adapting and adjusting as we see what the tree is giving us. Okay, now when I get into these decomposing, really organic filled areas where that black soil is prevalent, you can see as I pull it out, I start to have that accumulation. And that black mass is not facilitating really good root growth. So when you see inside these pockets where that black mass has existed, these pockets don't have a lot of fine rootage, if any fine rootage in them, and it makes it easy to remove it once we open it up and start to get into that actual crevice where that field soil still exists. And the second that we hit the outskirts of that pocket and we get back to Akadama, we once again see that fine root mass starting to accumulate again. And this is that discussion of going back in and continuing to seek that higher level and better balance of water and oxygen, opportunity to create a more refined root system, fix that initial necessity and leave some of that intact so the microbial inoculation from that field soil still exists. These are all of the points that we talk about and discuss and you're getting to see it here in a forest environment. And again, trying to keep this as we make all of these moves, keep the actual composition still intact, that is the challenge. Now anytime I start to get into some of these areas where I have to go super deep to get through the organic, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to try and see if I can punch up into an area that gets through the root mass and I can access through the surface. And if I can't get there, when we lay this down, I have to make note, like right here, I can't get past the big nebari. I'm right under the nebari. No matter where I go, I can't get through it. I've got to make a note because somehow I have to fill that pocket. I've got to get soil up in there. There are techniques that we can utilize to do so, but I've got to keep that in mind as I work this root mass. Beautiful, beautiful. Good with air. Okay, let's keep going. Got some black over here. Let's attack it. There we go. Let's get in there. So interestingly enough, immediately underneath this trunk that's really weak on the front side, we're seeing the biggest pocket of that black decomposing soil. And that makes sense. Makes sense. There's always an explanation for health-related issues when you start looking at the roots. It just makes sense. It stinks. It's a very, very strong odor. Unpleasant. Not a positive. Not a positive stench. Systematic. I'm going to work from this side so that I don't get ahead of myself down here. I'm going to come through this portion, and I'm going to end up right at that area where I can tell I need to put in some time and put in some work. Okay, just making sure that I've got all of these pockets hit, and I'm clear on what's happening here. That I feel good about the quality of the soil and the state of the roots that exist in these regions. I want to be, I want to know, I want to understand every aspect of this root mass before I move on. Bald cypress loves to push from these sites where we cut these nice and clean. Okay, so if we come back and we make beautiful cuts, that's where we're going to get new root production occurring. And that's true for any root system. Bald cypress having the capacity to generate a lot of resource and push a lot of resource, it's important that we make those clean cuts and just continue to really insist upon that as we work through this. And this is what you expect to see when you start to repot deciduous conifers in general. Larch will do this exact same thing. Dawn Redwood will do this same thing. These big roots, you start to cut them back, you see finer roots, they have that deciduous nuance where when those roots, just like the branches, they start to accumulate auxin in that root tip, that auxin is what gets transported up into the canopy and combines with the auxin production that's naturally happening there. You start to see that's what creates apical dominance. Well, we need to check that auxin that is existing in the roots because it suppresses lateral roots behind that growth and that's where we start to see these bigger roots taking over. Look at how much finer our root mass is here now. Okay, we've started to dismantle a little bit of that structure. We're getting down, drop crotch pruning, pruning back to the junction where we're finding finer roots. Refinement, refining, refining. The quality, the structure, the shape, the system that exists here. Okay, so now I've kind of walked myself around this outer edge. I'm not hitting any black pockets. Clean up some of these pieces right here. Just a nice clean cut, nice clean cut. Okay, and now I can actually dive into this place that I know I've got some issues. So let's spend a little time here. Let's just settle in. Wow, mega mud. Mega mud. And I see Akadama. I see where I've got scaled roots. Probably just a loss of space for really good root growth to occur. We've got that balance that we've struck. It grew healthy for a while, and probably what's happened is the Akadama and the scaled root system has occupied all the space that existed, and now that field soil that's not really generating healthy roots, holding too much water, pumping that water back into the space where that root mass had occurred in the Akadama and starting to create an imbalance, too much water and not enough oxygen in that area. And again, even though bald cypress can grow and pond cypress can grow in areas where there's instanding water, when we put them in a bonsai container, those conditions and those considerations change. You can overwater, you can drown a bald cypress, to be sure, inside of the bonsai container. Okay? I'm going to attack the rest of this from the side and the top and go ahead and just move my way over to here. Work myself through this. I started to uncover some pockets here. I stayed diligent to make sure that I had handled all of the upper areas. I know we're going to hit more of it when we work from the top in. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to continue to try and not be tempted to avoid the areas where I can tell I've got a lot of less enjoyable work, where I'm going to have to do a little bit more physical labor, where I'm going to have to explore that discipline, making sure that each piece gets hit and gets its time and its attention and gets improved in terms of its quantity of roots and type of roots and soil quality that exists in that region. These are the points. Not too shabby, is it? No. For a bald cypress or a pond cypress? Like right underneath the big base of the tree right here. I can feel it. It's spread out. There's nothing there. No possible way to get there with a chopstick. I'm going to show everybody a super fancy tool technique today. All right. I think what we'll do is we'll lean it up one time and I think we approach from the top down and see if we can break through to some of these locations just to see if we can get in and start to fix some of the situations that we're seeing that exist down here. Does that sound good? Okay. Ready? Okay. And I got it. It's all yours. I got it. Now that we've exposed all of those under areas, we've started to reduce the coarser roots. You can see in the sides here, notice how just massive monstrosities of roots that are circling this container in every single junction that we approach. We've got those really big, thick, heavy roots. So we want to be working down the mat on the side of these. We want to be reducing these, chasing them back to where we start to see them dive into a much more ramified root system. And we also want to be coming in on the top and starting to remove this upper surface, re-expose that nebari, and let's see if we can find those organic pockets that exist from the top down into the interior to connect to those areas so we can get soil into the core of this root mass. Okay. So just with a chopstick, let's go ahead and take the moss off. Let's set the moss aside and utilize it for future repots. Okay. And then let's go ahead and pull back that black decomposed organic matter on the very surface. Oh. Look at how black it is. All that moss over the course of the past six years, or excuse me, all that fertilizer over the course of the past six years, creating a really wonderful organic scenario that really does facilitate some beautiful, fine ramification, healthy trees, et cetera. And it's time to get rid of it. One of the interesting things about a composition like this is you start to see all these pieces really maturing. You get to see the evolution of these pieces. So to see the nebari again for the first time having been covered up, and as that organic matter and that moss increases, you lose visibility of all those, nebari and those surface pieces, right? So getting to reacquaint ourselves with those is pretty spectacular. Now when we're working these surface areas, these finer roots and the network of roots up in the surface, this is what we want. The bottom pieces, the big coarse pieces, we don't necessarily want those. So we're going to be holding our chopstick with a very, very loose grip. We don't want to be rigidly tight because that's how we're going to break those. And the roots are very, very brittle when we start working in this fashion. So I'm working with the hard part of my bamboo chopstick so that I'm pulling back and pulling against that hard part, but I'm holding my chopstick very loosely so that if it hits significant structural roots, that I get that flex and I don't exert that force on those roots. That's what allows me to tease through these surface areas, work out this black decomposing organic matter, and I want to go down to friable soil. Friable meaning the particle is intact. I see that okadama particle. I still have that okadama particle as a visible intact particle, balance of water and oxygen. I'm going to take this down until I get to that visible particle. If I don't see that and it's just a continual sort of mass of muck, I need to go down further until I at least get to rootage where I can start to change out that decomposing soil. But I think we'll see friable okadama show its head up here pretty quick. And I think we'll leave this fern in, Troy. I think this fern is pretty spectacular and it's growing right in the crotch of that. Now there is some potential that that fern might be sapping some of the energy out of that. We'll make that decision as we get into it. Does that sound good? Don't be afraid to come in and just break up this matted stuff on the side here just so that until we get to, and this is that friable. See that intact particle right there? That's what I'm looking for. That's kind of my boundary that I want to be pushing until I get and expose that. I like to downsize my chopstick to the scale of the roots that I'm working. And when we start working with Nibari, we know we're going to be, because we have that great moss coverage, we have that really small, fine network of roots. We don't want to be at a size that's not going to do as much damage there. Those big chopsticks can really be pretty blunt. See how brittle the roots are. And then along these margins as I'm freeing this up and getting these coarse roots, notice I'm taking off those coarse roots and again I'm just cutting back to finer interior pieces. And you see some of these big ones that are starting to kind of congregate here. I'll find those big ones. I'll just kind of tease them out. They may have a connection point. I'll cut back to that connection point so they have a natural transition and that's what's going to cause that finer root system to start to amass and develop. It's a matter of getting all this garbage, organic debris out, right? Because it's quite challenging. You have to work at it. And there's that black vein right there. Beautiful, beautiful. So that gets us into one vein that we can come back in and tap into. I'm going to mark that. I'm just going to mark that. Okay? That feels really good to me. And think of it like a deciduous. You really got to think of these. Although we have to show some restraint compared to a deciduous in terms of we can't just full on bare root this thing, you really want to be thinking about like this in terms of cutback and exposure, taking out coarse roots, opening up nebari. That's a nice thing. That's developed. And ultimately, all this is doing is we shrunk down the bottom. There's a lot of structural roots along the bottom. Now we're shrinking down the top and we're thinning this root mass down. So these are the kind of roots when we're starting to do this reduction that when I see this big long expanse, I know it goes to fine roots. I also know because of the abundant fine rootage that I have that if I cut it cleanly on both sides, the place where it originates is definitively going to give me fine roots as a result of having cut that. And that's where we start to really neck down those thick coarse pieces. And we can see these secondary roots emerging from these primary pieces. You can see the callus rolling here. You can see some of the bigger structural pieces that exist inside of this. Just trying to get rid of those thicker pieces, transition them. That has to be a focal point priority for a tree that does have the ability to go back towards an extreme root. To go back towards an extremely coarse, really, really coarse aggressive root system. And I'm opening up these holes and I'm marking them to be able to clear out some of that field soil underneath these really big, dominant pieces of root mass so that we can get down and start to refine as much as possible. Refine, refine, refine. That's our goal as we get in here. We're trying to improve soil conditions, refine the size of the root, drop it down to finer and finer root masses. And we see we've dropped off literally over an inch of, and you can see where the original soil line was right here. We've dropped off that much. Now we're almost two inches deep in terms of getting down into that evolved shape of that root mass. A lot of roots growing back and up and in towards the interior, which I'm not super hyped on. So I'm trying to take those out and get everything moving out, down and out, you know? Doesn't really compare to the first potting, but it's far more work than I had anticipated it being. How about you, Troy? I wasn't sure for the first potting, but I can imagine what that would be like, what that would have been like. Oh yeah, because we made it. Yeah. It was in the middle of the night. But putting together that, I know the spruce forest is totally different, but just putting all that together, you know, from scratch was quite the challenge. But I can imagine putting these together and seeing the wiring structure you had to keep them together, right? Yep. Well, and when you think about it, just a forest planting in general is a tremendous amount of work, right? Yeah. So when you think about the repotting of this taking this much time, well, if you consider repotting each of these as individual trees, the time that would take you're going to roughly come out to an equivalent timeframe to repot a forest because you have to address each individual tree in that whole process. Did you start out with this amount of trees when you put this together, or did you have some that you held back on? Well, I had quite a few that we held back on, yeah. Certainly, I'm seeing a beautifully expanded nebari on this main tree. I mean, that's just incredible what's come from that. And this kind of mud here is nuts, isn't it? So when we talk about that decomposing organic matter that exists on the soil, even after we've taken the moss off, you just see it almost looks like mud. And this is just the organic debris, moss as a filter, also moss continuing to dump photosynthates from its photosynthetic production, sugars and starches, into the soil system. There's fine root tied up in this. It's a very, very nutrient-rich layer that exists on that surface, but definitely a layer that over the course of time you can see how mucky it becomes as that organic fertilizer and solid breaks down. And we recognize, oh, if we don't get that off, we're going to really impede water and oxygen movement. That becomes a crux of repotting. We're creating a new surface with this reduction. Because you have to think in the beginning, there wasn't any root on these, so I had to cover all this up to keep what living root was there. Now it's through and through all the way to the bottom, fine root. Looks good. Looks really good. Looks really clean. Looks nice and loosened up and friable again. Now the big roots have been pretty much reduced. I see you got most of these big ones that were just kind of just... Yeah, I tried to get as many of them as I could. So what we've done as far as removing what roots we have, would you consider that to be a little bit conservative? I would say it's probably pretty aggressive. Oh, okay. Because their roots tend to run so linearly that they probably, a lot of the roots that we cut are attached to other roots, so we've probably cut a large portion of roots, which makes me a little nervous, but I'm seeing the roots so scaled that I have the confidence that there are new rootlets or they will produce new rootlets, right? Because whenever you make those kinds of... Ah, there it is. There it is, okay. So now we've taken... And I mean the cleaning of that surface, the reduction of that accumulated mat of roots that continues to amass in that organic material underneath that moss, but that rising level of our surface rootage, we've taken all of that excess muck away, we've gotten down to friable soil, and we've also heavily reduced all of our thicker roots to finer secondary tertiary roots to get that ramification. We've exposed more of the nebari that's evolved or we had to cover it in the original repot because that was the only rootage that we had, and we have dramatically altered the surface of this bald cypress forest to be able to see so much more quality. Now we're checking as we continue to work and we notice that the trees are pretty stable together, but there are some loose slight movements that are occurring between the trunks. We would expect this. And you also notice that there are these chopsticks where we see field soil that we now punch through to the bottom of the root mass to find if we have the capacity to go ahead and further take away that field soil replace with Akadama and improve the health of the tree. So now we're going to lean back one more time. A lot of the surface soil that we've been teasing away is probably going to fall off. As good practice, we want to shed that before we put it into a container. Let's see what happens in these pockets, any pockets we don't have access to. Let's see if we can gain access to. And all in all, this is kind of that final move to really set the root mass up to be ready to move back into the container in a completely revamped and reinvigorated state. Okay, and I'm going to come back towards you. Okay, and go ahead. And I'm just going to pull you forward. You ready? Okay, here we go. Okay, all right. Okay. So, interestingly enough, that area that I had the big pocket in, I have total access to right here, which is outstanding. So I'm going to open this up and we're going to utilize this for that chopstick location. I'm just going to clean this out a little bit more and try to, there we go, look at that. Beautiful. Now we can get soil up into that pocket, which really, really helps us kind of take advantage of that cleaning out. I'm going to leave that right there so that I don't lose sight of that. Now this one, this one gets us to a spot that I don't really see any advantage being into. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to avoid that. I'm going to cut off some of these pieces that I see are damaged. Just having a fresh look at a different side. I'm not limited now. I can come back and I can do this work. And this is where there's a real advantage to flipping the tree and getting to see some of these sides. Now this was that real organic piece and this tree here has a little bit of malleability. I want to go ahead and see if I can, in fact, improve any of this, if there's any black that I find. And I just see right along the edge here, right along the edge of the container, I've got this kind of black mass of roots. I see these big long pieces running along the bottom and as tempting as it is to cut them, we've already cut so many roots in the reduction and the movement of all of the systems and the reinvigoration and whatnot. I think we're past the point of cutting any more big thick roots on this particular repot. I think we'll go ahead and give the tree the benefit of the doubt, try to get some soil back up into these areas and really try to, as much as we can, build the tree's next course of root growth. Here's something interesting. I'm sticking my chopstick and it's going all the way up inside of this tree. Oh, is it? Completely hollow. Yeah, that's interesting. Doesn't surprise me. And we've got all of these really nicely cleaned. Now, this is the one that I am most worried about in terms of my, and I think I can hit that from right. There it is. There it is. That gets me into that high point right there. That's a really important point to be able to insert soil into because I've got this big cavity there. I've got this big cavity. It's immediately under the big nebari. That piece right there, that's our only access to it, but we got it at the highest possible point. That is beautiful and makes me so incredibly satisfied. Okay, so let's see what we have here just in terms of, I'm gonna go ahead and pull that back for a minute. Feels like we've got some, and I don't really see that black soil. So I'm gonna say, as much as it feels like we've got some of that, it's probably just a superficial amount right here on the surface. I'm not gonna concern ourselves with it because we've already filled so much up here and opened up so many holes. I'm gonna come right back to here just one last time as I kind of see a little bit more of that blackness just to be happy. Okay, so let's see where this one goes. That's gonna be filled right there. See that connection? So now I find the peak of that hole, I punch through, and you can see that coming out right here, right at the side of that big piece of nebari, just giving myself the ability to access all of these big holes. Absolutely mandatory. Absolutely mandatory in order to be able to really ensure that we have the capacity to generate health in this tree as it goes. So I'm gonna go ahead and make sure I pull the thick side of the chopstick out. I'm gonna come back in from the top side here. Okay. Okay, my tree. I got it? Mm-hmm. Yep. Okay. So bottom is done. Top is done. Sides are done. Thick roots are reduced. Transition to secondary tertiary. Field soil that we could find is gone, and we see Akadama D. doing its job. Time to container prep. Because we have solidarity through and through in this root system, and when we look at the manipulation of any of these trunks, the only one that we see being slightly loose is this one, and even this piece is really solidly anchored to the structure. We're just gonna do a very simple 2-2, tying into the root mass on the right side and on the left side with a bamboo stake driven in, and this will hold the entire forest anchored solidly in the pot. We are gonna have to do, yeah, those guys, and just make sure you got them big enough so that we don't run any, because even this feels like I got a little tighter than I wanted. Okay. Yep. Okay, either side have pros or cons. There was a cool chip right there and a crack right here. We'll go ahead and go with this as the front, huh? Okay. Okay. All right. So, I think what we want to do is we're gonna shift this over and we're gonna rotate it. Okay. Okay, so right here. I'm gonna run it up and check to see if we can kind of feed these and then we'll go into it? Yeah. Okay. Okay. Okay. All right. So you should see if the fit is working. Yeah. Yeah. I like that. You want something doing what you want, which also helps the jitter. Yeah. So, Now, we're going to go how long and see how fight frame it makes. Wow. Great. Okay. Okay, now, the way that I remember it, I have a patch here underneath that trunk that I've gotta get some. Gotta get there. I'm gonna go big center. Absolutely the toughest thing to do. I don't know how much movement we're gonna have in this thing. We put in the aeration layer, single particle layer thick, very simple, very fundamental. We laid down an interior single particle layer. Now, underneath the root mass of this tree, on the right side of it, I've got the hollow trunk. My chopstick went up into it. There's a small little hole there that I can't access with a chopstick. There is no room to be able to insert soil from the top, so I've given myself just a little bit of a mound to be able to settle down into it right here. We always work with that central mound here. I've given myself a nice, subtle central mound, and I've left the outer edges very, very low so that I can settle and shift all of this excess soil out. And then I have another mass over here where I've got a little bit of a hole. Again, I wanna occupy it. I don't want these two side pieces to be as tall because the risk that I run is I settle down to here, I settle onto here, and I have these air spaces in these low points of these bridges between my big center mound and my two small outer mounds, okay? To the best of our knowledge, we always try to guesstimate. We always utilize the center no matter what's happening, and in a situation with a root mass that is this wide as one singular block, seeing as that we've handled it and it's grown together in that fashion, that is an exception to be creating these two side mounds knowing that there's no way to get soil into those two positions. We've guesstimated their position. I feel comfortable with their position, and now we're gonna go ahead and insert it and just track the progress. What happens when we settle it? Do we have enough room to get it down and into the container? We may have to adjust this one time. I hope not, but this is the process on a tree this big to really working through that situational exception of that bottom root mass and a lack of ability to enter it. Okay, you ready, Troy? Okay, so let me just square this up here. Beautiful, beautiful, okay. How do you want to go about this on your side? Grab those two? Okay, if you grab those two, I'll grab these two. Yep, front in. Okay. All right. And you can lower yours now. Okay, and then we're just gonna go ahead and kind of pick up without shifting. You want me to help you pick up? Yep, because we gotta set it square in the container. Let me see if I can. Yep. We'll push down. Okay. One, two. Yeah, good. Okay. All right. Okay. All right. Let's see how this goes. Okay, you got it? Okay. Yeah, let me go ahead and square up here again. Pull me in here. Okay. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So that settled there. I really need to get this directional stuff here. See how high it is? Mm-hmm. See how high it is? Yeah, yeah. It's propped up on that sitter mound. I might have gone too big. Okay, you ready? Yeah, go ahead. Ah, this thing's hard. You're fine. You're fine. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. We're all good. All right. Here we go. With the knee down. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. MichaelALL All right. Okay. See how it dropped down? Dropped down a lot. Yeah. Yeah. It dropped down a lot. Got all the way down to where, yeah, we're right on that cusp. Yeah. I need to drop it more, though. It's still too high. There's still too much ledge underneath here. This side feels good. I feel like I've got level. Let me just step back one time. All right. Yeah, look at that. Still rocking. Okay. Can you give me a hold? Okay, coming at you again. Okay, that dropped that down. Real nice. Okay. Let's go bamboo steaks. And we'll go ahead and hammer these in and call it good. And I'm going to go ahead and start filling. If you want to build the bamboo steaks, go around the outer edge here. All right, we'll get that good bulk fill. So when we're doing the bulk fill around this very, very narrow space that we have, because we did hit those big structural pieces and this tree has historically to get it into this container and create this composition been very, very minimized in terms of its root mass and maxes out the space of the container, we're still trying to get that space closed. Now, the settlement process was very laborious to try and get it because we had such a little root. We had so much room to move to get that big cone of soil settled underneath. But the tree shrunk down and really settled into the container beautifully, which definitely closes down the spaces on the edge. And I knew it had been settled when I would reach into the spaces and I didn't feel a big lip of negative space between the root mass and my soil. The more I settled it down, the more that cone moved to the edges and really increased the contact of soil to those physical roots, which tells me it spread out across the entire bottom of the mass. So when we're building this, we're going to have to do a lot of work. We're going to have to do a lot of bulk filling now. We have areas where the thick roots come all the way to the edge of the container and it's not necessarily possible to get soil between that big structural root and the edge of the container, but I don't need it. When I hit those areas, I know there's probably space underneath them and space above them that I do need to get that soil for the finer roots to grow. And so if I hit those limitations, I'll just take my chopstick in at an angle to get underneath that obstruction of that thicker root and fill those spaces. And that's what Troy and I are working on right now in terms of the bulk fill process. Okay, now one thing to keep in mind, and this is a perfect example of this. I've got a big thick root that's right here on the container. I'm coming in diagonally to get under it from this side. I also need to come in diagonally from this side. And when I do, I feel a whole new amount of negative space open up, even though this side felt very nice and tight, felt like I had worked it enough. Coming in from both sides on these constrictions, take a big step back into where it was, slide that aside, slide that back out. This is going to be a really complicated phase. It's going to be challenging. I think it's just really, really hard to meet up with creepy little perfected areas. And just making sure we've given every opportunity to find those spaces and fill that with soil is a mandatory aspect of this type of a repot. Then it's basically, this is really, really difficult to try and work because the soil is not that nice. Next day you can spin them up, right? Take that shell really, really hard. Okay, so on the backside, if you can come back to these holes here and fill these holes. And then I'll just go continue going around making sure everything's copacetic. Troy, we officially got our butts kicked by this. All right, let's do this. okay four hours later and a world of difference in the root system worth the effort but definitely one of the more physical repots we've had we took off that bottom mat we got inside that decomposing black mass that was still there all of the trunks held together we worked on those thicker roots transition to the finer roots to continue to ramify and refine our pond cypress forest and then inserting it back into the container settling with very limited room filling all of those edges on that big massive expanse and then coming back at the end and inserting soil into those small holes that were accessing the open cones underneath the root system we've now contoured top dressed we'll go ahead and mist that top dressing take it down thoroughly water it through and this bald cypress is set up for the next five to six years again in this container healthy you growth even distribution and even more refined ramification hope this helped with all of your repotting questions and concerns around forests how we maintain that singular symbiotic organism and aesthetic piece that we've created and how we go about that process of handling each individual section teasing out the nuances of the underside the surface and the outer edges of that containerized environment good luck we look forward to seeing your healthy forests and if you have any questions come talk to us at murray mwah 
