When we start to talk about garden design, it's one of the most difficult things to teach inside of bonsai. And the reason for that is garden design is a real product of the nuts and bolts and things we're trying to accomplish with a bonsai garden, but also the solutions that the individual comes up with in their region or area to solve those problems and maximize that potential. Tonight in the stream, I want to talk about those backbone pillars to give you guys something to really establish some knowledge on. And then I want to share with you the ways and the solutions and the creative direction that we utilized at Mirai to maximize that potential and solve some of those problems in a way that created a really beautiful and effective garden. So to start with, let's establish those backbones, those nuts and bolts things that we need to consider when we start building a garden for bonsai. And number one is the land. What potential does the land offer? What exposure does the land offer? What problems does the land have that we need to address to be able to cultivate bonsai on that land? This is a very major concept that we've got to take into consideration with all of the factors that are entailed. We're going to go out into the garden and we're going to look at those factors and we're going to talk about how we address those factors with the creation of Mirai. Number two, the creation of spaces in your garden. And this is something that is a reflection of the land, but is more a reflection of what purpose and what function does our garden need to serve within our bonsai practice to give us the spaces to cultivate bonsai. And number two, the creation of spaces in your garden. And this is a reflection of what purpose and what function does our garden need to serve within our bonsai practice to cultivate the kind of trees that we need or want to be creating as bonsai. And number three, what are the resources that we have to build this garden that we can pull on, that are locally available, that are financially realistic, that are capable withstanding the test of time to maintain a beautiful and functional garden over the course and journey of your bonsai practice. Those three pillars really set the tone at Mirai for what happens when we start building a bonsai garden. And that has become a total ethos around the garden design and the pursuit of bonsai from the perspective of a well-designed garden. I want to take you guys out into the garden. I want to go through each space. I want to talk about those big pillars. And then I want to walk you through all of the personal solutions that I came up with that might spawn and stimulate ideas for you guys to be able to solve and answer some of those solutions in the construction of your own garden so that you walk away from tonight's stream, not with a how-to manual, but with a firm, backbone of understanding of what you need to build, why you need to build it, and some of the solutions of how you can build that to best reflect your own aesthetic and the resources you have around you. Mirai is built on a really special five-acre parcel land just outside of Portland, Oregon. The garden is in the shape of a diamond and there's a small cabin at the very top of the garden. The garden is built on the top of the property that sort of forms the epicenter of the garden where you can look out over the entirety. It's got a perfect southeastern facing slope to maximize our sun exposure and give us the potential to cultivate any species of tree we would want to be growing here for bonsai purposes. Beyond that, it's got this amazing native forest around it that creates all of these different microclimates from full sun exposure to the highly transpirational rise in humidity that you get around the garden. You get around the dug fir to the really heavily or even slightly dappled shade underneath the big leaf maples native to the forest of the Pacific Northwest. And to top it off, Mirai has some of the best water in the country. The pH oscillates between 6.2 and 6.5 throughout the season. There's no contaminants in it and that totality of characteristics really makes Mirai a very, very special ideal place to be growing bonsai. Inside of that, there's a lot of knowledge for you guys to use to grow your own bonsai. If you're interested in learning more about bonsai, there's a lot of information that you can utilize in terms of the exposure that you have on your properties, the microclimates and the conditions that exist or that you have the ability to create to facilitate those different spaces to maximize bonsai cultivation, and that super pivotal nuance of quality water that's going to consistently be delivering and allowing that tree to thrive and survive in that confined environment. Let's go take a look at these things in detail and really get down to how we can maximize these characteristics in our garden design. When it comes to growing great bonsai, secret is in the sauce and that sauce is exposure. The more sun you have over the course of the day, the better the bonsai you're going to be able to grow. Now when you're in the northern hemisphere, that southern exposure is the exposure and orientation that maximizes the quantity of sun that you're going to get as it moves across the sky east to west. If you're in the southern hemisphere, conversely, that northern exposure and that northern orientation is going to give you that prolonged amount of sun. Without sun, we start to limit the number of species that we can cultivate. We start to limit the amount of heat that propels and perpetuates growth. Exposure is a key consideration when you guys start to design and put together your garden to quantify and correctly cultivate bonsai. At Mirai, we've got a variety of microclimates that are created by the native vegetation around us. On the east side of the garden, we butt up to the doug firs and the western red cedars that are native to the Pacific Northwest. These massive trees transpire over the course of the day and even though the bonsai that are in this location are growing in full sun, the relative humidity around them because of the forest transpiration and water loss is actually building a more robust environment for the trees to exist in. This is one example of a unique microclimate that's created by what was inherently a part of the property and the land when we started to design and build the garden. You have the ability to access and tap into all of these features wherever you're at. By exploiting and utilizing those key characteristics of that site that you're building your garden. In the center of the garden, this is where the magic truly happens. We've got exposure to full sun over the entire course of the day and our biggest, baddest, best conifers exist in this space to maximize their daylight length and the heat that propels growth. Now in the very, very center, we created a retractable shade cloth just in case the summer peak temperatures got a little too warm for some of our more sensitive varieties. That structure allows us to maximize daylight length while cutting the intensity to preserve any of our more delicate trees. As a result, the center of the garden has become the epicenter and the place where the most development and evolution of our trees takes place. It's a paramount location at Mirai to be able to see what we can do when we maximize exposure and we increase the ability for the best of the day. The western margin of the garden at Mirai is lined by these big beautiful big leaf maple trees. This is the first point of the garden where the sun starts to set below the tree line and we get shade at the earliest possible point here. These big leaf maples over the course of eight years have been the savior for so many bonsai that needed some protection from that intense sun, needed that dappled shade, and just needed to recover from stressful operations. In any garden we create, we've always got to build a triage center or a location where trees can seek reprieve from all of the elements pulling water out of their foliage. At Mirai, the western boundary with those big leaf maples is that microclimate that allows trees to recover from adverse conditions. This is a pivotal point of garden design and building to successfully cultivate bonsai. As much as I would love to believe that horticulture can take care of so many of the issues that we experience in bonsai, one of the almost undeniable components about cultivating bonsai in colder weather areas is the necessity of a greenhouse. A greenhouse allows you to be able to extend your repotting season, protect trees from inclement weather, and more than anything shelter those trees from excessive moisture loss once they've undergone excessive work. When we look at the potential and the opportunities that a greenhouse creates to really do high level bonsai, it's one of the biggest tools we can apply as a microenvironment or a microclimate in our gardens. Even if you don't need a massive greenhouse just having it as a tool, a small resource to help you move your bonsai along is a massive leg up towards creating, growing, and cultivating the best bonsai Now, believe it or not the deal clincher for Mirai was actually the water quality. The day we got the water quality test back that was the first time we had a water quality test. That is the shadow The day we got the water quality test back, that was the day I signed the papers to close on the property. Anytime we're cultivating plants inside this small containerized environment, the quality of that water is the lifeblood of that tree. We're looking for a neutral pH, we're looking for a low quantity of salts, and we're looking for any kind of freedom from dissolved solutes or heavy contents of metals or gas or anything toxic. The water at Mirai oscillates between that sweet spot of 6.2 to 6.5 pH, no salts in the water, and we have nothing dissolved outside of iron, which actually contributes to the health of the trees. It's an ideal solution for growing and cultivating really healthy bonsai. Now there are things we can do to tweak the water quality, but always remember that the quality of your water is what's going to be the backbone of healthy bonsai cultivation. There's any number of ways to organize your spaces in a garden, but one of the most important things you can do for the function as well as the design of a garden is create outdoor rooms or outdoor spaces. At Mirai, we organized our spaces based on the function of the space, and we created consistent thematics that tie a space together, and we created a system that allows us to create a space that is as clean as possible. To make it feel like it's separate from the other locations in the garden. Below me is one of the most functional and utilitarian spaces at Mirai. This is the container yard, where we hold all of our stock that's never been touched before. It's never been styled, it's never been repotted. We get maximum sunlight for these trees to grow, recover, and expand in preparation for their transition to be bonsai. This space is delineated by a gate, it's delineated by the landscape that occurs around it, and it serves its function. Based on the layout of the actual room that's created beyond this entry point. This is our functional location for inventory to exist. Another prominent space at Mirai that we created after we had already built the backbone of the garden was the display space, where we have a core tin backdrop. We've got trees with a lot more room around them to be able to focus and feature individual trees. And it truly is a point in the garden where we're able to enjoy the nature of the garden. And it truly is a point in the garden where we're able to enjoy the nature of the garden. And it truly is a point in the garden where we're able to enjoy the nature of the garden. And it truly is a point in the garden where we're able to enjoy the nature of the garden. And it truly is a point in the garden where we're able to enjoy the nature of the garden. And it truly is a point in the garden where we're able to enjoy the nature of the garden. And it truly is a point in the garden where we're able to enjoy the nature of the garden. And it truly is a point in the garden where we're able to enjoy the nature of the garden. And it truly is a point in the garden where we're able to enjoy the nature of the garden. And it truly is a point in the garden where we're able to enjoy the nature of the garden. And it truly is a point in the garden where we're able to enjoy the nature of the garden. And it truly is a point in the garden where we're able to enjoy the nature of the garden. appreciated. Now the entryway to these spaces and the width of that entrance is a very big component of telling people when they're walking through your garden or touching on that sort of intuitive subconscious way of engaging with a space which direction they're supposed to go. Each of our subrooms inside of this layout has a very narrow entrance compared to the major rooms that we're trying to constantly drive people to engage with and so you notice we have a small neck down space to be entering the display garden. We still have the plant material on both sides to show that it's a delineated room and even if we look to the right here as we exit the garden we've got that same sort of change of size of the pathway. We've got the same elements delineated by the wood and the borders and the landscape. This is creating distinctive changes in experience as you walk through a really well-designed garden. In a lot of ways the creation of outdoor spaces throughout your garden design is very similar to the way that we style a bonsai tree. Behind me is the entry gate and sort of the widest entrance to the garden and the widest entrance funnels you into the main pad where the finished trees sit at Mirai. This was always designed to be sort of that entrance that called to you to engage that told you this is where you're supposed to be. The color of the trees that you're going to be planting, the color of the landscape plants along the edge of this path with the red barberry, the contrast of some of the plant material, the verticality of the landscape along with that sort of narrowing down underneath that gate that you walk through, all of it is experientially funneling you into the garden into the main room. When we say these rooms are almost in some way supposed to coordinate or coincide with the styling of a bonsai, the biggest room where your most prominent pieces sit is almost like that defining branch that dictates the style of the meal and the tone for the rest of your tree. This pad was the first pad, the main pad on the garden, to be created. It's where we started to discover what benches and the style and construction we were going to create. It's how we started to feel our way through the stone placement, the landscape creation, and how we wanted Bonsai Mirai to really engage with the people that come to this garden. This pad set the style and the tone for everything else that's been built around it. It occupies the biggest space and it carries with it the most important elements of the garden. This is where we start to connect with it the most significant weight. Even when we start to neck down the spaces and transition from the physical garden itself to the more utilitarian areas like the workshop, we start to repeat those elements and carry that same continuity through the landscape to build yet another room. To think about the garden space as a room, to think about the physical spaces, buildings, and structures as room, and to be able to carry people through, guiding them with the width of the path, the colors in the landscape, the hardscape of the landscape, and the beauty of the landscape. The space that exists along the edges that are constantly giving them reference to how they engage with that space is a fundamental backbone and pillar of really excellent garden design. Be thinking about how you guide people, the width of the spaces that you're driving them through, the colors that you're creating to draw their eye or potentially stop their eye from moving to that space so that you're constantly informing people that are engaging with your garden and yourself how you're supposed to be engaging with that space. The third major pillar of garden design is understanding what resources do you have at your disposal. We've got to be thinking about the hardscape that creates the backbone for your garden, the rooms, the spaces, and the structures. And then you've got to be thinking about the softscape or the plant material that's going to soften that, that's going to grow and mature with that hardscape, and that's going to provide a lot of the color as well as environment around your bonsai to successfully be cultivated in that space. Let's take a walk through the garden and let's look at some of the nuts and bolts of the hardscape as well as the continuity of the softscape to be able to create that cumulative environment with the available resources we had at our disposal. The hardscape at Mirai has several different elements. We combine these natural elements to give the garden a uniform feel. We've got stone, we've got wood, and we've got powder-coated metal. As far as the stone is concerned, we utilized a locally available crushed basalt for the ground or this is a very black dark stone that allows it to accumulate a lot of heat. Oregon's very wet, very cold, and in order to be able to successfully cultivate conifers, this is a really wonderful resource that was locally available. To be able to preserve the quality of the pads that we created, we laid down a six inch layer of inch and a half basalt. And then on top of that, to be able to create a really open filter for the decomposition of plant material, we created a three-quarter layer of updressing to that inch and a half bottom. The inch and a half keeps the stone from compacting and the three-quarter allows for a really good feel on the foot as well as allows decomposing leaf matter to work through the gravel without causing the accumulation of weeds. Based on the slope of the land when we terraced the garden, we had to retain the cuts in the land that we created. We utilized a flat stacked stone that was also locally available to hold back those walls and create continuity in the hardscape. We also started to install larger boulders as a portion of the hardscape. We also started to install larger boulders as a portion of the hardscape. We also started to install larger boulders as a portion of the hardscape. We also started to install larger boulders as a portion of the walls that we built and we carried those boulders throughout the garden to maintain that hardscape and that presence of that large stone mass as a design element. This really built sort of that continuity that is Mirai and has become iconic of this space. In regards to the wood that we chose to use in the garden, we selected wood to construct our benches because we could minimize the footprint and the size of the wood that is in contact with the ground. Our benches are made of 4x6 pressure treated lumber that has a very minimal impact and a very minimal contact point with the ground. The pressure treated allows it to last longer while being submerged and it's set in three feet of concrete to make sure that we have total stability for our trees support while on the bench. The monkey poles that are spaced throughout the garden hold some of our best trees. They're recycled telephone poles that are very patinaed from what they were originally. Having that age and the amount of material that we use to build the benches is very important. The trees are very well aged carrying forward that sort of sign of being weathered over the course of time and they're topped with the same pressure treated lumber that we've used on the benches. These create really isolated wonderful display spaces for the trees. Durable, set in concrete, three feet in the ground and capable of holding the heaviest trees that we have at Mirai. By maintaining continuity between the use of the recycled telephone poles and the pressure treated lumber, we've created a consistent aesthetic at Mirai. That consistent aesthetic really allows the visual focus from the trees to be able to be used in the garden. We've also created a multi-purpose display space for the trees to be placed on the trees when you're enjoying a garden or when you design a garden to be placed on the trees. The third hardscape element that we utilized at Mirai was a black powder coated metal. You can see the accents in the gate behind me, but it was used throughout the garden and even into the workshop to create the shelves that form all of the display spaces for our pots. Metal is a really sound element and works well with the idea of wood and stone to still stay inside of that natural component. It creates consistency, it creates structural strength for things that wood and stone might not be able to give us and really rounds out that hardscape to create that design continuity. So, the final component that pulls all of these pillars, the the land, the micro climates, the outdoor spaces, the hardscape, the thing that pulls this all together is the softscape, which is a very important element throughout your garden that you choose to utilize to unify the aesthetic. Now when we talk about the softscape, we're not talking about the native vegetation, although native vegetation could contribute, but we're actually talking about a very select palette of plants and if you want to make it really accurate and really high level design, three plants in particular that you're going to use as repetitive combinations of those three plants in all of the spaces to be able to tie all of your spaces together. The three plant combination that we chose at Bonsai Mirai was the use of lavender, the use of a euonymus, and the use of grasses with lavender and euonymus to build that uniform concept of design. Now obviously interspersed throughout all of that are hints of red, hints of yellow and chartreuse, other components that carry with them interesting foliar features, leaf features, flowering features, or fall seasonal effects that give them value in the garden. The one mainstay that unifies all of that and continues to be utilized in conjunction with the hardscape, the layout of the land, the setup of the rooms to bring continuity to the entire quality of the design of a garden is that simple three plant combination as the basic foundation of our plant palette or our softscape design. Betweenlaw sightseeing Hostry Association of naturopaths Next-Action That was a lot. That's a deep dive into the creation of a facility that has been the product of now eight years of construction. But, If we're really being honest about Mirai, Mirai is the product of over 25 years of my bonsai career sort of envisioning the creation of this garden and everything that it's capable of facilitating and accomplishing. You guys have some very fundamental concepts that are going to allow you to better build and create and refine your spaces as a beautiful landscape as well as a bonsai facility to effectively cultivate bonsai and hopefully through the course of this stream you've developed some insight into some of the problem solving that you can apply to be able to satisfy some of those solutions and opportunities that present themselves in your gardens to maximize both the functionality of that garden as well as its beauty in doing so. Good luck, enjoy the garden build. I hope you guys got a lot out of this. It was fun to share it with you and we'll see you next time on Mirai Life. www.mirailife.com 
