What's going on everybody? How y'all doing? Happy Friday. My birthday yesterday. Happy birthday. My son's birthday the day before. Dad got a little overshadowed. That's okay. That's part of the game. Through six years of apprenticing in Japan, I never had my birthday celebrated once. Got used to it. I've shed it. Now I've got four boys that I invest a lot in. I need a little birthday love back, right? I need a little birthday love back. That's how it goes. Anyways, no, I had a great birthday. We had a nice celebration. Miguel and I working on big-time iconic trees in the workshop at Mirai, which is really fun. Pro calendars, broadleaf deciduous, long needle, single flush pine. If it's not out, coming out, I believe this week maybe even, to capture the grafting action that we're experiencing right now. We're grafting in the workshop. We're unwiring. We're live vein wood maintaining. We're just going incredibly deep on bonsai work that has been missed or long time needed over the course of the season. We're just getting around to it as the season calms down. Anyways, fantastic. A little late to be thinking about greenhouses, honestly, but constantly trying to build our knowledge of winter structures. It is November. We still have time. Really, when we start to talk about the use of greenhouse, it's not only protection from cold, it's that it can impact your trees, which could be wind, which could be excessive rain like we experience here in the Pacific Northwest, which could be radical temperature fluctuations, hail, all kinds of things that we can use greenhouses for. There are a multitude of designs, materials, etc. We've covered those in previous cold shelter construction. I want to focus specifically on some of the aspects of foundation, sidewalls, height, aisles, layout, conceptualization of ventilation in a greenhouse. I want to focus specifically on some of the aspects of foundation, sidewalls, height, aisles, layout, conceptualization of ventilation in a greenhouse, etc. to help you build a structure that has the capacity to serve the needs of bonsai specifically. This is what we're digging into here, Mariah Lecture Series. You know I love it. Let's get dirty. When we talk about greenhouses, we have to understand that we are constantly considering, and if you're not thinking about the greenhouse as a susceptible aspect of your property, I don't know if most of us consider the fact that our homes always are needing maintenance over inclement and we have to pay attention. Clog gutters, excess snowload, ice dams, heavy winds, loose shingles, insulation, you know, problems with carpenter ants, charrmites… there are all kinds of these things that are constantly happening. The shape of greenhouses has to accommodate the environmental influences that are acting on it. So when we start to talk about, sort of, the bare-bones hoop house, you're talking about a very low level environmental. influences that are offering any kind of compression weight. So we're saying, listen, this is not a high hail risk. This is not a high snow load area. These are low profile. So when we start to think about the hoop house, low profile, which means that, and this is a big part of what we're going to be talking about, very limited functionality out here on the edges of your hoop house. And so when we start to talk about hoop house and you start to think about functionality, what do the aisles look like, et cetera, to be able to work through this, move trees in and out, not destroy your back in the process. How are you going to water? How are you going to keep airflow moving through? There's a lot to consider that we're going to be talking about. Now, when we start to say, okay, well, I'm going to add a sidewall. I'm going to add a sidewall to a hoop house. We start to get up into a structure that has a lot more susceptibility, a lot more weight at the top of the structure. And the way that the greenhouse industry and anybody has been doing this for a long time, we've been doing this for a long time. We've been doing this for a long time. We've been doing this for a long time. We've been doing this for a long time. And the way that the greenhouse industry has come up with a design to sidestep that is to move to the semi-gable-quonset sort of shape and design, this sort of rounded or peaked roof here and this edge that has that same contour of that hoop house. Now, when you talk about hoop house, the only thing that we can put over this is plastic. When we go to, and let's just go past this to the peaked roof greenhouse, which is typically the peaked roof greenhouse, which is typically what we see, we recognize we've lost the rounded corners, okay? Now, each of these shed snow, very little snow shed, very little capacity to tolerate weight, much better capacity to shed snow if the right conditions and circumstances are applied inside of the structure, maximum ability to shed snow. We probably don't want gutters. If we don't have gutters, what does that mean? It impacts on the material of our sidewall and its construction to be thinking about these things and ventilation. And so, we've been doing this for a long time. So, we're looking at function and aesthetics, whether as a big aspect of what design that we choose. And some of you say, well, I'm just going to do a lean-to on the side of my house. Okay, cool. Are you going to do this type of a lean-to? Are you going to do this type of a lean-to? Are you going to do this type of a lean-to, right? These all are factored in to the elements acting, okay? So, I just wanted to establish your kind of fundamental shapes when we talk about greenhouse. So, you've got the roof design, you've got the hoop, you've got the semi-quonset, and you've got the peaked roof structure that we're kind of considering as a standalone structure, different designs for different elements acting on it. Now, when we start to talk about orientation of a greenhouse in the northern hemisphere, we have to understand that we've got that north, south, east, and west here. And we say, listen, we know the sun rises in the east and the sun rises in the west. And as we get farther and farther into the fall, the sun comes up lower and lower and lower. The only way that we maximize our ability for a greenhouse to be able to deliver the kind of photosynthetic capacity over the dormant season, because we're maintaining ambient air temperatures, hopefully as cold as possible, depending on the function of the greenhouse, but at a temperature that's hopefully not perpetuating significant metabolic activity, because we are not trying to grow trees in a greenhouse. Unless this is a tropical shed, we recognize that we've got to be able to at least continue some degree of photosynthetic capacity, knowing that we are keeping the trees at a temperature where they are not completely dormant. No tree goes completely dormant. So we're saying, listen, oriented east-west to take advantage of the sun, right? And all of this is readily available on the internet, to take advantage of the sun's capacity to provide photosynthetic resources to the broadest number of trees in terms of orientation. Now, this would impact your layout inside of the greenhouse. We're going to come back to that. Most common orientation. If we do two greenhouses together, everything changes. Now, if we do two greenhouses that are gutter connected or in series here, we start to orient them north to south so that we get as much moving through these as possible with that orientation. Okay, something to think about, because connecting the two greenhouses together is a very important part of the design and it can increase efficiency of heat, can increase ventilation capacity, etc., something that a lot of people don't consider, something that I think everybody should look at and contemplate as a potential design opportunity. And I'm looking at that actually at Mirai and thinking about that at Mirai. Okay, so we've got orientation, we've got exposure to the elements creating the concept for the shape, and these are the basic shapes when we start to talk about greenhouses. going to be the most inexpensive, but it's also going to be the most susceptible. So how do I start to work into this design? What are the things that I need to consider to be able to move forward with the greenhouse? You may find a prefabricated unit, or you may say, I want to go with a timber frame, right? Typically in a high snowfall area, when we start to talk about, and I'm going to go to foundation here, depending on what your material is, the foundation is going to change. High snowfall area, oversized walls on a galvanized steel frame, we say, listen, I'm going to go into a hoop house. Okay, cool. We can put a hoop house, depending on the height, the higher it goes, the bigger the footing that needs to be present to be able to anchor the hoop house, right? And we say, I don't want to anchor it. Okay, well, you're going to have to have something, tying this down to the ground. And that's something that's tying it to the ground. If you're not going to put it in a solid foundation, it's going to have to have some sort of foundation. This isn't like a tent stake. We're going to be able to do this over the entirety of winter. You're going to be out there fixing it. It's going to fail. And when it fails, it's going to do a lot of damage to your trees. So we're saying, okay, either I have a foundation here and a very rigid tie down mechanism, or I have a foundation here that maybe I just fit my hoop house into temporarily. So I have this foundation. I build a bonsai garden that incorporates the foundation into the layout of the garden. And I can construct this seasonal greenhouse and insert those pieces, put a bolt through the say thick walled galvanized tubing or some sort of material like that. And now I've got my hoop house, right? That foundation, the taller that you get in terms of that structure, the bigger that has to be because obviously now we have different forces. We have the lift and the ability for that to fill with air intake. We have the lift and the ability for that to take off. We forget to zip it up one day. We need airflow, which is more challenging in a hoop house. So we leave the door open on the front and back. And now we've got a kite. So we've got lift. We also have the outward pressure. If we do get some sort of weight, snow accumulation of moisture, maybe a sag between the ribs of our plastic, we've got this smooshing or this downward pressure that causes outward pressure here. And that also is why it demands that we utilize a solid foundation to be able to build a home. And that's why we're able to support this structure. Okay. But we recognize, listen, say I go five foot high. I'm pretty good with a, with a, you know, 12 by 12 by 12 footing on that. I go six foot high or eight foot high. And now I can walk through it without having to bend over with my trees. Well, now you're starting to go with a three foot by three foot by three foot, two foot by two foot by two foot. The higher you go, the bigger the footings become to be able to hold this at that increased height, increased tail effect, increased outward force with compression of the structure. Okay. When we move into a semi Quonset style now, all of a sudden with that height and with that different design, we have more rigidity in the peak. The whole purpose of this was to continue to keep rounded corners here because the semi Quonset is a structure designed for snow, right? This is meant to shed snow off of the sides here. And when we start to look at this rounded corner, this is meant for a plastic connection of a plastic sheeting or glazing material that can hold air, air as an insulator. So you get a double air insulation layer based on the design, being that rounded corner that can facilitate that rather terrible, rather delicate glazing material of plastic, greenhouse plastic. And that inflated air is what keeps the heat. And increases this efficiency of the semi Quonset style. And also you get heavy snow accumulating on the semi Quonset. You stop the hamster cage. That's pumping air into that insulation area. That outside area touches the warm inside area. Snow sloughs off. And then you, and then you turn the hamster cage on again and you reinflate it. It's one of the great snow shedding techniques for the semi gable greenhouse structure. Okay. Now here's what happens. There's no sort of direction. There's no gutter. There's nothing like that on, uh, on, uh, on an industrial or, uh, uh, an ag greenhouse. That's not, you know, because that would get ripped off with snow. It would have all kinds of problems. It would impact the function of the design. We recognize snow accumulation, pushing on the in now here, we're talking about down, pushing out all of a sudden. Now we're talking about out with the snow shedding, pushing in. Okay. Significant. For a greenhouse. Like this significant three foot deep, 24 inch diameter, four foot deep, 24 to 30 inch diameter footings for the galvanized pipe that would then be put in and would be connected to the rest of the galvanized pipe that would construct this big, big footings, strong footings to be able to support that lateral load, thick walled, galvanized tubing to be able to further reinforce and also the maintenance we're maintaining, uh, build up on the top of this. We're maintaining snow accumulation on the side of this, to be able to continue to use our greenhouse, but also to protect it over these inclement periods of weather. Okay. And so we start to look at this and we say the sidewall of this greenhouse, because heat rises does not need to be insulated as well. In fact, in a semi gable structure, we have a door. We understand that that door could be many materials. Um, but you know, let's say we have a poly, uh, a single wall poly door that you can see through, uh, it's got a track that it seats on here. It's got a track that it closes to. It's got an extended track that it opens with, right? That is one aspect of being able to utilize this structure, but we've got to be thinking about this. We've got to be thinking about this as other aspects of ventilation. We'll come back to that foundation. Important. Now, when we start to get. Into, uh, the glass greenhouse, you're talking about exponentially more weight, exponentially more structure, which means not only are we talking about in the peak roof greenhouse, um, the necessity for bigger structural elements to support the roof. We're also talking about a foundation here, plus a stem wall or a foundation here. And now we are starting to. Really ramp up the elements that we've got to be thinking about and incorporating into the greenhouse build the cost, the structural considerations, the more weight we carry, but let's just be really honest, very, very, very, I mean, the amount of maintenance in snow, very limited with this structure, right? The ability to handle the most snow beyond a shadow of a doubt. This structure is the most sound if well-built it's like a home where we say, yeah, maybe I need to go out and. Shut. The drive. Other than that, I'm good for most of our home, right? That same kind of an issue here. We don't have this force. We don't have this force. We are more rigidly constructed handling a better rigid material that is more capable of and durable in those elements. So the foundation is going to have to be able to hold that load. Okay. And then you come back and you say, okay, well, that's just the structure itself. What do I put inside here? Right? Maybe when we start to talk about a hoop. How. We're saying, listen, maybe this is being built over a portion of the garden that I've already got intact and there's gravel, or maybe I have this built in sort of an area off to the side and actually over the winter time, I build it over my lawn. Okay. So do we want to try and protect the lawn? Do we want to put down some straw to prevent it from getting muddy? Do we want to put down some bark mulch to be able to prevent it from getting muddy? Um, we don't want to go as far as gravel because next spring we're going to use that. For an outdoor area, we're going to take it down as temperate, right? So we're thinking about that. Now, when we get into the semi-quonset, we're saying, listen, gravel, uh, is your standard, right? An open gravel, not a minus gravel. At Mirai, we go inch and a half minus foundation on walkable areas of the garden. We go three quarter open, uh, to top it off and make it a lot more comfortable on the feet, allow it to filter some of the decomposing organic debris. So gravel, it starts to become the fundamental, uh, material of the foundation. And base of this greenhouse and the material that our trees potentially will be sitting on if we set trees on the ground. Now we could go to pavers, right? We could go to pavers or some sort of, um, concrete foundation that comes. Let's just be really clear. Concrete comes with a different environment in the greenhouse, i.e. less of the moisture from the natural breathability without concrete, without a sealant over the native ground. Which might be desirable when temperatures are really wet and cold, but when we start to warm up, turns into a desert in the spring and we say, okay, all right, maybe if I have more elements that are able to control that climate more consistently, gravel in the semi-quonset as a less permanent, adaptable, breathable, maybe pavers. But I think you save pavers for the formality of a concrete foundation, a rigid structure, a significant stem wall. Now. We start to say, okay, I'm going to put in pavers or maybe this is where I put in my concrete floor, but I have a misting system that allows me to control humidity and I start to ramp up those accoutrements that accommodate the material decisions of the design, right? This kind of greenhouse consideration of layout and each of these elements, uh, was a big part of my college career because I worked in so many greenhouses onsite in San Luis Obispo. He and I were doing some work like rolling up the door and playing with the windows. I played with them, the materials the plastics rolling up the doors rolling down, opening the vents manually, closing the vents, manually all the way to big, huge, dark houses for, for point set ios or mom houses with, uh, cross ventilation, uh, humidity coolers. And you know, the, the gamut I worked with the gamut and these are the fundamentals that sort of came from the experience. Seeing a lot of greenhouse growing operations in the California region as well as in the w lambant valley here in. Oregon for nursery culture, seeing the greenhouses in Japan and how they're used, and then having multiple greenhouses that I've used here at Mirai. Anywhere from the temporary hoop house over the redwood forest that we had for two or three years and was the bane of my existence, to the initial workhorse semi-quonset, to a much more rigid sort of peaked roof timber structure greenhouse. This was oversized galvanized pipe. I've seen it all. I've worked with it all, and this is kind of where I find that sweet spot to be able to give you a foundation, okay? So those foundations, a lot of people want to construct a greenhouse, and they want to sidestep really building it to last. The worst thing that you can do is undersize your foundation, your foundational elements, and in the middle of a massive storm, heavy snow weight, no place to go with material, no place to put your trees, have that greenhouse fail. That is worst case scenario. Worst case scenario. So think about that when you're doing this because it actually, in some of those circumstances, would probably be better to, if you underbuilt a greenhouse, it would be better to overwinter your trees in some sort of unheated garage or, you know, structure that's less ideal for the tree because of the risk that is posed to the trees if your structure fails, right? Whole structure collapses. This has happened a multitude of times. Here in the Pacific Northwest, Isley's used to have a bonsai branch called Matsunami Inn, and Joe Harris was the head of it. I mean, significant, beautiful imported trees. Joe's been on the podcast. You guys have heard from him. Very proficient nurseryman, right? Runs the maple division now. And Isley's, a legendary specialty conifer propagation and development nursery in the Oregon nursery culture. You get, you get mollywhopped with the big heavy snow. The gutters clog on a connected ridge greenhouse set up, loads up with ice, weight builds up, and all of a sudden a greenhouse collapses, crushed a tremendous number of trees, right? And just really wreaked havoc on all of those trees. And you say, would those trees, right, knowing, hindsight being 20-20, knowing what happened, would they have been safer being outside exposed to the elements and having the chance to survive? That versus the weight of that structure failing? Probably, probably. Obviously, you know, nobody knew that was going to happen. But I'm just saying, set yourself up for success with the way that you build a greenhouse. If you're going to spend the time to build it, a few extra days, a few, you know, an extra step of an extra size, oversized footing, a thicker wall on the galvanized pipe. One step up, you could get away with four by fours, but let's go with six by sixes, knowing that this is a structure that is going to be under a tremendous amount of pressure. The sidewall could be, you know, loose stacked stone, or I'm going to mortar them together. Let's go ahead and do the mortar. Yeah, it's going to take another 10 days of construction and installation. You don't want it falling apart when you need it most, okay? So foundation is a big one, right, in terms of material. And the one thing that I did not discuss that I do want to discuss, and I'm glad I made notes, okay? And I'm going to come back to foundation here. When we are designing and building a greenhouse, very rarely do people think, where does the water go, right? Like, where does the water go? Where does the water go in any of these designs in terms of the exterior, okay? You're going to have a significant amount of water coming off of this roof. Where does it all go? Is this flat level ground? And this actually concentrates the moisture in these areas, and that starts to wash out the ground. That starts to cause erosion. That decreases the significance of your footings and the structure of your greenhouse. Do you capture this? Do you build a structure that actually has gutters on it so that you have the ability to direct that water into storage tanks, and now you're using collected rainwater over the course of time? Inside of this greenhouse, right, I've got a 60-foot greenhouse. 40-foot greenhouse, 20-foot greenhouse. When you water your trees on whatever structure inside of this greenhouse, when you water these, where does that water go? The last thing that you want inside of a greenhouse when you're considering foundation is stagnant water inside of that, creating all kinds of funky biology, mosquito larva, stench that you will not want to be in there. I mean, we're talking about a greenhouse to take care of your tree. Trees, it's a greenhouse that you're supposed to enjoy too, right? That's a big part of this discussion. How do you design a greenhouse you're going to enjoy? Always have a slope to the floor that provides natural drainage. And if you're going to put in a concrete floor, you have to have a drain or a natural slope that allows you to move the water out. And if you're going to put in pavers, you've got to have those pavers both created to facilitate drainage, but also the foundation prior to putting the pavers on. That's moving water away so that you are able to exist and cultivate trees inside of the greenhouse without that stagnant water accumulating and building up. Okay, I did want to bring that up. When I moved to the Pacific Northwest, did not know much about the kind of rain we would experience here, but the one thing that I was very certain of was that I had to understand how to move it away from my structures. That has been a... paramount aspect of engineering with Mirai for all of the cool aesthetics of the rain chains and the gutters and, you know, the arches and everything underneath all of that. This whole garden was set up from the initial grading of it with a natural drain plan. Where any time I modify add a structure modify the garden. I'm constantly thinking about where does water go, where does water go, how do I keep it away from my walls from blowing them out with hydraulic pressure? How do I keep it? from my house how do I keep it away from the base of my greenhouse a timber structure that can't tolerate that kind of constant constantly moist environment how do I store it how do I move it how do I keep it from accumulating how do I prevent massive rain massive water or massive snow from causing erosion on my property and destroying what I've built right so these things with the foundation with the material all start with the ability to move water in an intentional direction handle the water that your greenhouse is going to be concentrating and do something hopefully positive with it but if nothing else not allow it to damage the infrastructure and the functionality of what you built okay foundation who talks about that who talks about that this is fundamental stuff in greenhouse construction and still in the greenhouse industry it's not done correctly inside a bonsai I want to build a greenhouse imagine all the things that you do in the greenhouse you're going to build a greenhouse you don't know that would compromise your ability to do it well the first time and that is the worst because you put the money out you build it and then all of a sudden it doesn't work that's devastating these are the small points and nuances that allow you to make that first step with confidence and see it function for you okay okay all right utilities utilities okay here's the thing I'm building a I'm building a lean-to greenhouse maybe it's going to be an extension of the Eve here I'm gonna put it at a thicker at a greater slope I'm thinking about this you know at a height my orientation is either west or south so that I've got mr. sunshine at least giving me four hours of light a day as a bare minimum through my greenhouse I've got this connected to a portion of my house where I can have a say a six-foot door or a you know seven foot door very very small but I can get into it I've also got to think about the width of my door allowing my trees inside of the greenhouse we think about this we say my car can hold hold that tree and then we start to realize well the doors don't open wide enough even though the interior space of your car can hold that tree the door doesn't open wide enough to get that tree into that space okay we your greenhouse might be able to hold that that tree is the door that's going to be able to hold that tree is the door wide enough to get it in there yeah and again another one of these like light bulb moments where it's like ah geez okay yeah right okay so we're thinking about utilities and we're saying all right I'm gonna I'm gonna build a lean-to against the house okay I'm gonna choose a location that has a hose bib inside of it naturally I'm gonna choose a location that has a hose bib inside of it because there will be times where it's frozen outside solar gain from the Sun contacting your greenhouse is gonna heat it up you know lean to we have less ability to ventilate maybe we crack the door open a little bit maybe we have a little pain here that we can raise to let the heat out that starts to accumulate or maybe we even have a small little circular vent up at the top of both sides that we can kind of open to you know passively let the heat out but I'm gonna need to water my trees here right I'm gonna need to water I need water inside of that structure okay now let's go into a little bit more complicated to discussion okay now I have a hoop house so does that mean that I need a water source inside of the hoop house well ideally your hoophouse would be incorporating maybe a frost-proof bib that allows you to have water inside of it that doesn't risk the aspects of freezing or if it is going to freeze it's frost proof so you don't have to worry about it totally makes sense but a lot of the time hoop houses aren't in a space where the utilities would be present And you're saying, okay, so then how do I go about managing that? Well, now we're bringing in water from some other resource, a cistern that's prevented from being frozen. Maybe we put a cistern inside of our hoop house so that we have that availability of water and we're using a watering can over the course of winter. And we fill this up periodically when the temperatures are not freezing and our external area allows us to access that. Maybe we keep the hose inside of the hoop house so that it doesn't freeze. We can plug it into the frost-proof hydrant on a day that's not freezing. We can get water filled into the cistern. We drain the hose. We curl it up, put it back in the hoop house. We turn off the frost-proof hydrant and it drains itself and we're good to go, right? That's a lot. If we have the utility inside of the structure, big, big deal. So then you start to say, okay, I'm not going to be trenching inside of a hoop house. So you have some degree of utility planning that you need to be putting into the system to be able to sustain this. What kind of heater are we going to be running in here? Are we going to have ambient heat from the house here and this is a cold shelter? Makes total sense. If there were even a little window that you could crack to get some intentional heat from your structure into that lean-to, all the better. Now you've got even more temperature control. I need a heater in a hoop house if we're going to have the ability to fend off those really intense cold conditions and this is the structure we have to do it. Is that a gas-powered heater? Is that an electrical heater? Do we have electrical? Do we have the ability to house gas, access gas, potentially put a greenhouse heater inside of a larger hoop house structure? This has to be considered and the utilities for it must be placed intentionally to efficiently. Right? And you could say, ah, I'll just run an extension cord from the house and I'll plug in a couple heaters and one heater doesn't get you there. And so then you have another extension cord from somewhere else because that circuit can't take it and that's the closest that you can get. And you plug in another one and that can't keep you warm. Right? And now we're out of options and it's really, really freaking cold. And you're saying, I did the best that I can, planning in the beginning of this structure, running the utilities and let's start to talk about, okay, now I'm going to have a more permanent structure. I'm going to have one of these peaked roof or semi-quonset structures. You've got to be thinking about utilities, about utilities on the interior. Okay? So we need water, H2O. We need electric for lights. We need electric for heat beds. We need electric for potentially heaters, for extension cords that allow us to do the work in that space. Okay? And most likely we're going to need propane or natural gas to run a heater that is efficient enough to be able to power a greenhouse of the size and of that functional space. Right? And when we start to think about that, if you're going to lean on electric, I'm just going to tell you right now, you're going to regret it. Right? Get gas to the structure as a utility. So here's what I actually wanted to talk to you about. These are fundamental utility concepts. What I actually want to talk to you about is, okay, well then in greenhouse design, if you need those utilities, right, and you have this structure here, right, where are your benches going to go? How are you going to lay out the organization of your plants? And this is a big question. You'll see that this question actually is what triggers the entire design of your greenhouse. Okay? But from the utility perspective, if I'm going to run benches along the side, if I'm going to run benches along the side of this, well now all of a sudden, I can't put my utility trenches over here. Unless I'm going to build cinder block benches, what kind of benches are you going to put? Are you going to put the benches in the ground? Are they going to be in footings and now you're digging and now utilities are susceptible? You don't want utilities. You can't have your utilities accessible on the interior of this piece, right, and be up to code. And if they are, they need to be in a very intense casing. So that installation cost starts to cost more. Okay, so I'm going to trench and I'm going to move my utilities maybe on the outside with a little bit of a T in to get my water in. A little bit of a T in to get my gas line up the wall to my heater that sits up on this back wall. I'm going to T in at a corner of the foundation to get my electrical up the post to be able to power the lights and the fans that are going to demand that kind of electricity. These are the moments where when building a greenhouse, we set the capacity to have the most options and functionality. Oh, it turns out the cinder block benches, I don't like them as much. I would like to put something in the ground, but I didn't think about my utilities because I said, I'm just going to use cinder block. Don't worry about it. You automatically pigeon hold yourself, right? Understand you're going to learn, you're going to grow. This greenhouse is another structure that aesthetically should improve, should patina, should materialize into an aspect of your bonsai practice that is as beautiful in its form as it is in its function. And with that, give yourself the ability to be able to guide that process, right? Give me one second. This is empowering you to have flexibility, considering their entry point for function and considering the utilities. If you saw the grid that I had trenched, once the original initial bays were created inside of the greenhouse at Mirai, the fact that I did not bury the trencher in a trench and was able to get all of the water, the electrical and the gas moved throughout that was a direct byproduct of the first build, of the first greenhouse that we built. And all of the things that I didn't know, that I didn't have a lecture like this with somebody who had experience going through it, suffering the consequences and coming up with a better plan that they then implemented and saw work. I didn't have that. So I came to this thing where it's like, oh my gosh, I need water in here. How the heck do I get water in here? Oh my gosh, I need heat. The electrical heaters aren't going to keep up. Oh my gosh, I got to find gas. I have to get a gas line in here. Oh, I can't bring a gas line in here. Now I need a different guy for this gas line and this gas line where they transition from outdoor to indoor and I need to be this deep and I need to go here and I have to get the gas line over here now because the heater is coming from, right? This was like the story of my life with the initial greenhouse. It is the story of me sitting up the first cold snap of the first winter that the greenhouse was up, turning a kerosene heater on, which is highly toxic to plants, turning a kerosene heater on for 30 to 60 seconds at a time to warm up the greenhouse in this big kerosene can and warm it up to a point where it was above freezing, turn it off so that I didn't continually run it up to 60 or 70 degrees Fahrenheit and gas all the plants. Turn it off. Turn it on. Turn it off. Turn it on. You do 48 hours of that to save the plants that are the only trees that you have as a beginning bonsai professional, you start to realize I got to work smarter not harder. This is stupid, right? Plan the utilities. Understand the functionality of the accoutrements that you're using inside of your greenhouse. Use the forum QA to ask questions about this kind of design and stuff. This is something that people don't really inquire about. It is so important inside of the bonsai practice to be able to develop your own greenhouse for your bonsai practice and to choose the right form and to choose the right foundation and to choose the right setup. And it's tough. It's tough. There's a lot of knowledge, okay? All right, let me get rid of this. Okay, so we did utilities. All right, now, walls. And I'm going to say walls, but I'm going to focus specifically on let me do that here, okay? First of all, I'm going to start with side walls. Side walls. All right, so any time that you go pick out a greenhouse structure, if it is a template or it is a kit, right, you're going to have a pitch to the roof. You need to decide if that sheds the elements, if it focuses the resources, do you need gutters, does it have to do, do you need an overhang, all that stuff, right? But there's also going to be a set height of the side wall, okay? So you've got to decide, does the set height of the side wall or does the height of the side wall accommodate your bonsai practice, okay? Because if you're a shohin, and when you think about this, okay, and the hoop house even, the size of the hoop house gives you functional space in here in the corners. The bigger it is, the farther out you have usable space, okay, that you can actually access without crawling down into that space to utilize. And if you're trying to take care of trees and you're crawling down and you think that over the next, you know, five to six months you're going to be wanting to do that, willing to do that, you're totally, totally crazy. Or for the next, you know, ten years are you going to want to do it that way? Probably not. Let's build it to be efficient. Okay, so these side walls, when I say, is it built to your bonsai practice, consider, maybe in a hoop house, your trees sit on the ground, okay? And if your trees sit on the ground, does the height of that side wall accommodate, your biggest tree with its back branches, allowing you to have a functional space, aisle, or central area to move through the trees, to water, to care for, to pull out, unwire, rewire, leaf drop pruning, to, you know, manage voles, pests, disease over the course of winter, to have air moving through this, heat moving through this, that is not blowing on a tree and getting cooked, and you've created the space to be able to do that. Okay, that side wall is a big part of that. And one of the biggest things that I see inside of greenhouse design in bonsai is that people do not give themselves enough height in the side wall. They do not give themselves enough height in the side wall. Because when you think about it, okay, if I'm going to be building a semi-quonset or a peaked roof greenhouse, regardless of the material, okay, I've got to be able to move through it. Typically, the most efficient would be to move through the center with your benches down the sides. Okay, you can stack your benches down the sides to be able to increase the efficiency of the space. That's totally fine. And you've got this central aisle, very, very functional, right? So I'm thinking this peak right here and this distance of my side wall to the door has got to accommodate the height of my tree on the structure, bench, cinder blocks, ground, stone, whatever, boxes, beer cases. It's got to accommodate my biggest tree at the highest point knowing that that side wall is the limitation to the trees I can store in there. It needs to accommodate the scale and the width of that canopy front to back without bumping into it in the aisle and without having it sit there pressed against the back of your greenhouse, okay? If we're just saying, listen, I'm going to go through the trouble of doing this, these are bare minimum dimensions. Your walkway here, bare minimum, three feet, three feet, right? And you say, three feet, that's huge. Not when you have wired branches, delicate branches, you're moving trees in, you're moving trees out, and you've got to do all of that without damaging the trees that are in the greenhouse because we skimped on the width of our pathway to allow ourselves to function inside of this tree. It's space, okay? My side walls on the greenhouse, I believe my side walls of the current greenhouse are right around eight feet. My benches are 40 inches high. I like to be able to look at my trees inside of the greenhouse. And I played with a different layout to accommodate defining branches where I actually enter my greenhouse on the far side here. I come in and I actually walk in a zigzag pattern through my greenhouse to be able to add some design elements, but also play with orientation of defining branches because our winter is five to six months long here. And that means that that is six months of that branch either getting weaker because I didn't think about that, or getting stronger because I did think about that. But that's how I handled mine. Three foot minimum, side wall height accommodates your highest tree on the benching structure that you have conceptualized and you need to have the space to at least be able to move your trees in and out with a packed house and not cause damage to the trees that you're cultivating, okay? Nobody, nobody told me about that. Nobody told me about that, side wall height. You know, like the first one, the trees were always bumping into the wall. They were bumping the ceiling, right? I didn't want them to puncture the plastic because I had an inflated roof. Students were always working in very tight quarters because we were repotting in there. So everybody was, you know, constantly, don't bump into trees, don't bump into trees, don't bump into trees. I just recognized, oh my gosh, to have a functional greenhouse, you've got to think about all of these spaces in your minimum spaces. Your minimum tolerance threshold is going to be three feet for any of those alleyways, walkways, engagement spaces that you need to avoid. Bumping into trees, okay? Sidewalls, height of sidewalls. We did aisle walkway. We did tree height. We did, well, human height. I mean, technically we could go inside of, I guess, a six-foot doorway and duck, but I would always prefer, especially if we're carrying trees in and now our tree is taller, how tall do you need it to be to accommodate your biggest tree so that you don't have to bend over and risk blowing out your back, right? I think our, and I'm going to take this back, I think our wall height here is actually nine, and I think our door height here is seven foot. It's seven foot. It's pretty substantial. And we use the Dingo to get a lot of trees in there. I think the width of that door actually, and it slides over, my greenhouse is divided right down the middle so that this massive door, it's on a barn door, can slide over here, and I have the full width of this. And I'm pretty sure 20-foot width that's wide, that's a 10-foot bay to be able to get trees in there. And believe it or not, there are trees that need all 10 feet to get into the greenhouse when we start turning and moving through the structure, okay? So that's our side walls. We've talked about roof, and the last thing that I want to talk about is just materials. Okay, because there's a lot of materials that you can use. There's structures here that have more or less input and creates a higher degree of tolerance. But let's just go ahead and talk materials. And I'll give you my two cents and some nuances of materials. So number one is plastic. And I would say plastic is the least durable. Least durable, but it is the most affordable. And it is also the easiest to install. So you're saying, listen, Ryan, you were talking about this inflated roof and it being a very high efficiency, insulator for the semi-quonset style. Absolutely. If you're going to go with a plastic greenhouse, you want to have the ability to insulate the roof, okay? It's going to cut down on your light permeation slightly. So you choose the plastic, the greenhouse plastic that has the most durability, has the ability to shed moisture so that condensation inside your greenhouse isn't raining on your trees constantly. That it has some UV protection. It has the thickness and durability. And has the ability to be inflated. Okay, cool. Great. There's a million different plastics out there from greenhouse suppliers that give you plenty of flexibility and the cost reflects all of the bells and whistles of that. I would tell you, do not, even though you're saying, listen, plastic is the most affordable, don't skimp. You get what you pay for. Longevity, strength and durability, ultraviolet protection, being able to shed, shed moisture without it raining and dripping, having it sheet off and adhere to the walls, that's a coating. That's a characteristic of the plastic, right? And so I'm willing to take a little bit of UV penetration in order to have these other features that allow the greenhouse to function in inclement weather. Okay? So this is the least durable, it's the most affordable, easiest to install. Okay, then we get into the polys, right? Now you're starting to talk about these sheets. Single wall poly would have one, would have one cell, a double wall and those cells run like this and these are these big flat sheets of plastic. Some of them, polys, you know, are corrugated. Corrugated poly doesn't have any sort of insulation capacity. It is more of a very utilitarian cover, maybe just a rain protection. Corrugated poly. Funnels rain very beautifully in the channels, easy to access, easy to get, transparent and fairly durable, right? But it is not an insulated piece when we're starting to talk about the roof of our greenhouse and how we're going to keep the heat in. Sidewalls? Corrugated poly, totally fine. Single layer of plastic on the sidewall, totally fine and we can roll the sidewall up to ventilate. But when we talk about that roof, plastic, easiest, cheapest, poly, a lot more expensive, higher efficiency in terms of better heat retention and light transmission because we're moving through less material that has a far more engineered capacity to maintain heat. A triple wall poly would have a single piece in the middle of that airspace to create two airspaces out of one sheet and further increase your heat efficiency. But installation is tough. It is tough to clean, right? Without damaging the ultraviolet coating. It accumulates sort of debris. You lose more and more light transmission each year. You can't just pressure wash it. You can't just scrub it. Or you'll scratch it. You'll do damage. You'll open it up to degradation. So it is a bigger commitment to work with poly. Biggest thing I can tell you about poly as an insulator, whether you use it on the walls or you use it on the roof, they make a mesh. Nobody told me why to put this mesh on. They make a mesh that sticks to the ends here, right? And it's got this kind of like grid in it. And they said, don't forget to put that on. And I said, why? And nobody ever answered that question. Turns out, insects like to get into those channels and fill the walls and roof of your greenhouse and make it completely impervious of light. So that mesh is a big little nuance. And finally, glass. Now, I'm going to tell you, unless you just have the ability to invest in an architectural space at a high level and happen to house your bonsai in it, you know, one of the most beautiful greenhouses I've ever seen was Doug Paul's greenhouse at the Kinnick Collection in, let's see, where was that? New Hampshire. Unbelievable, unbelievable structure. All glass. I could have lived in it. Anybody could have lived in it. It was the most beautiful greenhouse. It was like a home. If you have the ability to go that far, build the foundation, build the stem walls that hold and protect from the snow weight and use this rigid material, it is by far the lowest maintenance, most durable, most light transmission, high level of capacity to retain heat. It is the creme de la creme of greenhouse materials. But the whole structure has to be built to accommodate that weight and create function, create the ability to vent. And that's where I say, for a bonsai practitioner, this is really your wheelhouse of, say, accessibility, price and durability, availability of craftspeople and expertise that can actually install, build, install, design, build, install this structure. Or if it comes down to you doing it yourself, this is the most accessible, demands a little more expertise, probably need a professional or you better be real good at what you do as a contractor. So material-wise, I still lean right in here. You know, our rain protection and stuff on the arches, it's just regular construction plastic with a high light transmission. Works, it works. I need a temporary greenhouse, I'm always gonna lean on this. I need something permanent, I'm gonna go to the poly and really build it to last, okay? Nuances of greenhouse design, we understand that, you know, and again, we've gotta have ventilation, we've gotta have these things, we've talked about all of that. We've talked about all of that in terms of the structure, we need our moving across the peak, we need to be able to remove the heat. The foundation, who's told you about that? Let's get rid of water. What about the forces acting on this shape and what does that do in terms of materiality, et cetera? Building on the knowledge to expand our ability to be able to create spaces that enhance our bonsai practice. All right? Okay, I think we're gonna open it up to questions. That's all I got for you today. All right. Yeah. So first question here is from Treebeard Smith. It's Steve and he says, I use a simple plastic hoop house style just for winter protection. The floor covering is black landscape fabric directly on the soil. Trees go directly on the fabric. Any hazards that I might be overlooking? You know, the only thing that I see, that I have seen, have experienced myself and see is when we go directly on the soil, right? So we've got this sort of soil layout and then we construct a hoop house over the top of it. When we go directly on the soil, if there are low spots where exterior water can pool and we set trees on that, right? Regardless of whether there's fabric or not, if there is a high water table because of snow melt, because of excessive rain, because we lack the drainage in that pad that we're cultivating on, I have had issue with that. I've experienced that. It is the primary reason that I tend to elevate my trees even in the greenhouse with gravel, knowing the drainage is set. I set my trees more often than not on stones and pavers than I will set them on the gravel. Just due to the understanding that there are even times with a completely well constructed greenhouse when we get torrential rain here and we will have standing water in parts of the greenhouse where if a tree is sitting there, that can be really detrimental. Funky biology and a lack of oxygen in the container. So that's the one thing. That's all. Cool. And Manos says, in Athens, Greece climate, arid and warm, I have a semi-closed steel structure, plastic covered greenhouse with sliding door, geotextile fabric and misting, 10 by 10 by 8 foot size. Arch portions are always open to ventilate. I use it to keep rainwater away from freshly repotted trees or keep chilly cold air from recently restyled ones. Every attempt with collected trees have gone badly south. I think it gets too warm and stays too wet. Any ideas? Is it really needed? Is it really needed in your climate? I mean, I'm thinking what would be needed so the misters to give you humidity for sure because a greenhouse is much like any built structure is going to be drier, right? So the misters to give you humidity because you're going to stay warm as a very Mediterranean climate. Airflow, obviously, to be able to ventilate. You're using it to keep rain off of trees and I would also think you're using it to keep wind off of freshly repotted trees or reworked trees. It's not so much temperature anymore. We're now thinking about all of these other aspects. And maybe a structure like that whose job is not to keep things warm but it's actually to keep things dry and to keep things free of that wind post-operation would benefit from a shade cloth or something like that. Why have you had collected tree attrition going into a greenhouse? Because the greenhouse is so arid, right? It is so arid. Even if you are saying, listen, the humidity outside is, say, 15% in the fall of a Mediterranean region that has not had rain over the summer season. And inside the greenhouse is 12% or less. Or 11% or 10% or maybe it's even 15%. It's not the same 15% as the conditions outside of that greenhouse. So when you put a tree into that space without a lot of green mass to create the humidity, you're going to have failure, right? But there's another piece. Even if you get a collected tree to succeed inside of that controlled environment, when you move that tree out and it gets exposed with it's spent its energy and soft fleshy foliage, and it gets exposed to the lower relative humidity or the drying of the wind or the desiccation of the sun and all of the other elements, it is very hard to acclimate a tree that has been saved or survived inside of a greenhouse. It's very hard to acclimate it to the external conditions. And that is where most people fail. Cool. And Kathy just asked, what is open gravel? Oh, open gravel is sifted to take out all the fines, right? So if you have a three quarter minus or an inch and a half minus, the minus is all of the finer particles from the crushing of the gravel or the mining of the gravel. When you have an open, it's been washed or it's been sifted and the open takes out all of the smaller particles. So my three quarter open, if I picked it up, I wouldn't have a bunch of crap on my hands. It's very clean in terms of the debris and that allows leaves and needles to come out of the gravel. I do maintain the openness by leaf blowing all of the debris off, just the same as we do in our aggregate system in the bonsai container. I do so in my garden. But it is able to accommodate some of the small needle debris dander from bonsai cultivation and allow it to just work its way through the stone without getting caught on the surface. Cool. And Danny had a question. Can you talk about backup utilities in a bit more detail that you have incorporated? Yeah. So it became very obvious to me where I'm at, we get wet heavy snow, which brings a lot of trees down on power lines and we lose power almost every year up here at Mirai. So my choice, I have multiple backup utilities. For my electrical, I have a generator that I put in with an automatic transfer switch once power is lost to be able to power the water pump so I can manage watering my trees in the greenhouse because keeping them on a heatbed or at temperatures where they do have a slight degree of growth means they are going to need that water and hydration at some point, right? And it might be that day that you lose power and everything's frozen. But it also powers the heater because even though it's a gas heater, the electrical has to be able to power the low voltage connections and the starters and aspects of the heater that'll allow it to fire. I also have gas utilities. I have a gas utility with Wi-Fi connection that tells the gas company when we're running out of gas because if it gets really cold, part of our utility company selection is how dependable are they under crisis? What do they guarantee in terms of service? And do they have the equipment to get up here in inclement weather? But we have significant propane tanks that have been piped appropriately both in and out of the structures. Took a lot of doing. That took a lot of doing. But the backup generators and then the third piece, I have a rain collection cistern that's about 3,000 gallons that is at the top of my property and it is plumbed down to the garden and to every structure so that I can gravity feed should my generators fail, should I run out of power, should all electrical on site collapse, I still have gravity fed water. That's more of a summertime, you know, sort of consideration but nevertheless, a backup system for my garden. Cool. And Cole asks, is it realistic to use black barrels filled with water to passively heat a greenhouse at night? I've seen people mention this as an option but I'm not sure how much it would actually add heat. Yeah. So water is such a beautiful material from its heat retention capacity. It has a high heat retention capacity and I think in that, if you can heat the water up enough, right, which is that ambient air, air temperature and you're just trying to change the indoor to outdoor temperature by two to three degrees, how many water buckets does it take to impact a whole greenhouse? A lot. But definitely water is a buffering material that does have the capacity to slow the rapid change of temperature and potentially alter over the course of an evening, you know, the temperature shift by that one to three degrees depending on how much water you have. Is it a reliable source, to be able to alter the indoor environment or the artificial environment of a greenhouse enough to curb severe weather? No. No, it's not. Okay. And Danny has another question. You mentioned pests in the greenhouse. We have mice and voles here in Wyoming as well. How do you manage pests within the greenhouse in the wintertime? Yeah, this is, so anywhere where you've got voles, I, in my original greenhouse, put down a layer of chicken wire on the floor because when you create this warm space and especially when trees are sitting down on the ground, and I guess this is something for Treebeard Steve too, setting trees on the ground, rodents feed on the moist nutrient-rich tissue around the base of the trunks of our trees. Randy's lost trees to temporary greenhouses where the trees are set on the ground. I know it's a big, big issue in a lot of the cold shelters, dark shelters that exist across the northern states, and it is something to be considered. Just a really proactive heavy gauge galvanized, like fencing wire with a chicken wire over the top of it and then put your substrate on top of that is a massive way to prevent things from getting in around the exterior. Now, can you completely seal off the door in all of those areas? Maybe, maybe not, but it is something to consider because that is a significant risk. And here's the thing, you can avoid it by really putting them up on benches. That's one of the biggest things that you can do just to cut down on the amount of rodent damage in a greenhouse environment. And then Treebeard Steve just kind of bounced off of that, asking about whether or not you've tried naphtha, sorry, mothballs or flakes around a greenhouse to repel hungry mammals. I've heard that that works. I haven't necessarily. I haven't necessarily tried it. You know, part of the greenhouse for me is that it needs to be like an enjoyable experience because I have to want to be in there. I'm going to spend four months plus repotting. I'm going to be keeping a lot, you know, half the garden is going to move into the greenhouse this week, weekend, next week. And so it's really got to be an environment that's pleasurable and mothballs kill that for me. Pretty dead, boom, in the water. But I've heard it works. I've heard it works. And then Danny asks, are you able to maintain the poly sheeting on your greenhouse or will you just replace the panels over time? So I am able to, the poly that I invested in has a UV coating that is rated for 20 years. And as long as that UV coating is not damaged, I have not seen it start to yellow. I have not seen it start to get brittle and I have not seen any signs of deterioration yet. But I have seen light transmission dropping annually because there is a slight film of algae that is starting to form on the north side, the shady side of it. And there's organic debris that gets on it that I leaf blow. But, you know, pressure washing, they say you can wash it free of the big granular debris. You can probably take a car washing mitt and some very delicate soap and you can scrub them. I haven't even done that because the algae is less detrimental than destroying the film that protects that poly. So far, so good. I cannot recommend double wall poly. Mine actually happens to be triple wall poly, which I don't even know if they make anymore. I can't recommend it enough. It has created the best environment I could have asked for. We did not seal the ends on the walls and we've got all the box elder bugs that nest in there and it really bothers me in one of these days when we've got extra time at Mirai. We'll take all of the side walls down and clean them out and tape them up. But beyond that, it's been just a total pleasure. All right. And last question from Treebeard Steve. This one gets pretty specific, but we might be able to use the garden of our mind to figure this out. Okay. So he says, my little hoop house style greenhouse is oriented north to south with the door end on the north. The north end of the greenhouse is less than 10 feet from the back end of our garden shed. A row of spruces is close on the west. A line of sugar maples is close on the south. Do you suggest reorienting east to west? Do you think it would be worth it? Just an added little note is that he gets strong winds from the west and the northwest, which is blocked by a shed and spruces that are lined up. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I mean, so I think you've got to take into consideration the space. Like, what would it take to change its orientation, Treebeard Steve? If you were just talking about fundamental function of a greenhouse, getting the maximum amount of light to a single-run greenhouse, it's oriented east to west so that you take advantage of the sun that's moving east to west along the south-facing brow. So, you know, you're not going to be able to do anything if you're just going to be in the broad side of the greenhouse. But if you're not having any issues, you know, and this does come down to it. It's like, how do your trees come out of the greenhouse? Do they come out of the greenhouse ready to thrive? Do they come out of the greenhouse lethargic? Like, does the greenhouse function for you? Are your trees better off being in the greenhouse and coming out of it? Because if they're not, you know, that's the one thing at Mirai. When I had the Redwood, you know, makeshift hoop house, I'd take it down and it was a nightmare over the course of winter just to keep it functioning. And I'm not saying that that was a product of it, you know, being an insufficient design as well as anything else. But then I went to the semi-quonset gable and it became a little bit easier, but there were issues, right? And the trees and their acclimation out of that greenhouse was pretty difficult. When I went to the big sidewall peaked roof greenhouse that we have now in the poly, I progressively upped the level and functionality and the output of that is it was far easier and more pleasurable to take care of trees in inclement weather. I had less worry as a result of that and the trees came out of the greenhouse in better condition, right? Which means it was easier to acclimate them into full sun. It was easier to acclimate them into full wind. They came out in better shape, better health, pest and disease-wise and everything else as a result of the improved conditions of the greenhouse. And so maybe it's not practical, but when you think about the totality of greenhouse and all of the decisions, it really has to be convenient. I can't urge this enough. It has to be convenient to use as much as anything else for a greenhouse to be functional. It's not just about keeping it warm or keeping plants alive. We really want to think about being able to add to our bonsai practice and obviously that is sort of a luxurious stance, but bonsai in general is, right? And so we're creating these systems that allow us to do things better. And there's some ideas on the table for you guys. All right. I love the lecture series. I'm excited to start loading the greenhouse. This is the latest that I think I will have loaded the greenhouse, but it is very obvious that winter is upon us. We've got a Pineapple Express rolling through the West Coast that is obliterating everything around us. We're battening down the hatches in the garden in the event that it comes here. We've already had a little bit of wind tear some things up and we're trying to patch and mend and fortify things, but tis the season, right? For the big shift, find more time in the workshop, but to fortify your winter quarters for the winter to come. All right. I love you guys. Have a great rest of your week and good luck with setting things up for winter or continuing to perpetuate your winter quarters. 
