What's going on everybody? We're here at the Moriah Greenhouse to dissect the process of greenhouse watering. Now, if we just step back for a minute and we take a look at the broader concept of why we would have a tree in a greenhouse, there's two major reasons that I can think of that broadly apply to the utilization of a greenhouse. Number one, we're protecting whether it be sensitive or unhealthy trees from cold or number two, we're protecting sensitive or unhealthy trees from an excessive amount of moisture. Now, there also might be that third reason of we're protecting trees from wind which might justify putting a tree in a greenhouse. Any way we go about it however, recognizing that we're going to have a tree in an environment that is going to have higher ambient air temperatures, that is going to have a greater amount of metabolic activity over the otherwise dormant season, we have to recognize that watering concepts as they apply to our trees in the garden environment are now a separate consideration and the way that we handle watering in a greenhouse is of paramount importance for us to understand to maximize our tree's health over the dormant season. We're going to take a look at a handful of trees, scenarios that are offering the opportunity to ask ourselves, is this tree ready for watering or not and discuss the breakdown of that tree's story, physiology, and horticultural necessities to make that determination and apply water or not. Maintaining that balance of water and oxygen gives us health, let's explore that in the greenhouse environment. Now, right as we enter the greenhouse at Mirai, we've got a very affectionately known tree. This is a tree called Quasimodo, Rocky Mountain Juniper mounted to a Yonkuluk slab. It's a tree that carries a lot of character with it and a tree that doesn't necessarily have the capacity to stand up to a heavy snow load on the foyer mass. We put Quasimodo into the greenhouse just simply to protect it from excessive rain and the conditions of winter and watching this tree closely, knowing that it was not a health-related issue, but definitely wanting to strike the balance of water and oxygen. I've been observing Quasimodo's soil system over the past three days. Now, when we start to talk about what are we looking for when we conceptualize greenhouse watering, we're looking at two things. We're looking at the moisture condition of the surface of the moss. This is going to be the place in a greenhouse that dries out last. Number two, we're looking at the quantity of soil particles that are showing a significant degree of dryness or turning a color that would insinuate they have a limited amount of water. You might be asking yourself, how does this differ from the other trees? How does this differ from the external environment? I've been watching this for three days as it's continued to incrementally move towards necessitating water. But in general, in the soil environment in the garden, we see the top dressing dry out and we water. In the greenhouse, we see the top dressing begin to dry out. We then start to observe the soil particles, and when we see both of those things start to amass a significant degree of dryness, even if we see particles still holding moisture or we touch areas that are still showing some content, the bulk majority is what's giving us our indication that we need to water. Healthy tree, active vascular growth in the greenhouse where dormancy is not being supplied to the tree, ambient air temperature still motivating that metabolic activity. We are at a point where a majority of the moss is dry, a majority of those soil particles are showing that they don't have a tremendous amount of water being held in them, and it's time to thoroughly saturate this tree. Now one of the compromising things about a greenhouse is it empowers you to fill it full of trees. And the more trees we put into it, especially as we enter the repotting season, the more and more nooks and crannies we tuck those trees into and the farther and farther they are away from us to be able to identify moisture requirements. Now I've got two twisted trunk pomegranates out of leaf. These trees are supposed to be done growing right now, correct? I even keep them on the floor of the greenhouse. Coolest part of the greenhouse is when it rises. This is where I put my broadleaf deciduous so that they don't go into leaf too soon. However, out of leaf in the coolest part of the greenhouse, and I've got two very different moisture circumstances in these two containers. Same exact conditions, same exact location, and yet one of them is completely saturated. We see the moss fully hydrated. We see every particle of okadama full of moisture. And yet this pomegranate is showing a profound amount of water utilization. Vascular productivity continues through the winter season in a greenhouse environment where ambient air temperatures are higher. When I see peaked moss and I see okadama void of moisture, I'm probably past the point when I need it to water. It's time to thoroughly hydrate this tree. Stone plantings are the most demanding of any tree when we cultivate them in a greenhouse circumstance over the dormant. They have a limited reservoir, they're elevated and experience the most heat, and what we start to recognize is that stone holds a lot of temperature that drives the productivity of vascular tissue. So what we see in stone plantings is we see a more profound amount of root growth occur over that period of time in that greenhouse environment. Therefore, we need to be very careful with water. Now we talked about the hydration of the moss and the hydration of the soil particles as our two indicators combined with the notion of moisture. So what we're trying to do here is we're going to look at what we're trying to accomplish in the dormant environment. When I look at this particular stone planting, I see established moss curling on the edges, actually pulling away from that stone environment, and even in some of the middle regions, I see the moss coming apart. This is an immediate and obvious indication that this moss is losing its hydration, and again if the stone is holding more temperature, it's natural that that edge is going to dry up. I don't want to get into this thorough hydration immediately and that I need to pay a little closer attention and be a little bit more proactive about the watering process. Now when we start to look at benches that are elevated, we have to understand that heat rises. These trees are experiencing some of those ambient warmer temperatures. And in fact, when you dial in the heat of your greenhouse, you want to put the thermostat right at bench height. So when we look in this area where we have a lot of different species of smaller sized trees, there is a varying degree of water dynamics that are taking place here. Now as I walk through the greenhouse and I'm looking for water related issues or indicators that I may be encouraged to water, this tree strikes me right here. I start to see that that moss is really showing a significant amount of dehydration. It's not lush, it's not tufted and thick and pillowy, it's starting to lay down and flatten out in terms of that indicator of dehydration. This tree has a healthy foliar mass, it has a very small reservoir and container. This is a tree that will need water very soon if not right now. When I move next to it, having seen that this tree is starting to dry out, I notice this twisted trunk pomegranate again showing the moss laying down, not as tufted and upright and pillowy. And I see that the Akadama is starting to show a real loss of moisture content and dehydration. This is a tree that is going to be necessitating water immediately. When I dive into the interior here, this is really where we start to move from the established soil system to trees that we've top dressed, trees that are recently re-potted and we have that fresh new dyed sphagnum surface covering. The Eleagnis for example. . . . . in the late fall in terms of taking away that compacted surface of roots and organic decomposing material notice that that is really turning that lighter color as a result of the dehydration this is an immediate indication that I need to go ahead and hydrate that tree and so we start to recognize that in these soil systems that sit at the height where we're really generating our temperature reference in the greenhouse we need to really be observant of these two indications the moisture content in our soil particles as well as the moisture content in that moss top dressing whether it be actively growing moss or potential moss from a top dressing post repot or surface cleaning and that those two indicators based on the fact that we don't have Sun we don't have wind and we're in the shorter growing phase where we don't have new foyer growth being produced are the indicators that guide our thought process and how we go about analyzing greenhouse watering and determining when it's time to hydrate. our trees having explored greenhouse watering we now recognize hydration of the moss is such a major indicator the amount of water that the particles are carrying also tells us a lot and ultimately we need to recognize that this dormant cold shelter is actually a facility that stimulates a tremendous amount of vascular productivity and through our observation and now our enhanced knowledge we're going to be able to provide the balance of water and oxygen and the quality hydration necessary to keep our tree moving forward and come out in the spring season glowing and growing. Good luck! 
