What's going on everybody? We wanted to circle back to a question that came up in a live Q&A that I felt was absolutely on point and has not been delivered or addressed before. And that was the question of all of these different growing containers to work through developmental processes, right? We have all of these options. What are the pros and cons to each option? When would we use it? When wouldn't we use it? What purpose does it serve? Why would we go find that, select that, choose that, as opposed to another container type that might have a better implication or capacity to help me develop my tree? And so just walking through the fundamental options that are available and discussing where they fit into the system is the objective and the goal. To help you expand your capacity to achieve those developmental goals, the soil systems that work in these, the feeding mechanisms that apply to these, the care and work that you do. And where they should be placed in your garden to have success. Let's dive in. Okay, now first and foremost, it's tough to talk about developing material if we do not touch on the nursery container. Most fundamental container, shape, okay, dark in terms of coloration, black, right? And when we say most fundamental, it's biggest pro is it's available, right? It's available. We have these available to us. It's affordable. We have a variety of sizes and shapes. We've got taller, deeper, narrower. We've got wider and more shallow. But all of them take advantage of a very fundamental characteristic. And the characteristic of the nursery can is it's warm because of its color. And based on the height of this gravity column here, the height to width proportion, we get good water mobility moving through the nursery can that helps us maintain a balance of water and oxygen. Now, because we have that height of the gravity column, the movement of that water through the water column does create the capacity for us to use that organic or highly organic soil mix when we talk about the 70%, 30%. This is where you really see the nursery can forming the fundamental backbone of our cultivation containers, our development containers. We're taking trees after their seedling state, liner, pack, we're up-potting them, one gallon, two gallon, five gallon. Standard course of action, standard course of action. Right? Right. With a nursery container, we have the ability to take advantage of a nursery container when it is sitting on our bench, as well as when a nursery container is sitting on the ground. There is no difference to the behavior of the nursery container in either of those two circumstances. Because we have a rigid plastic bottom, because our aeration or our drainage holes are on the side of the container, not on the bottom of the container, our roots are typically directed laterally out of that container. Unless we somehow nestle this into the ground, we want to be careful with that. But just take note that location for this particular growing container to thrive exists anywhere, on the ground or on a bench. It is one of the most versatile containers, durable containers, affordable containers, variable and malleable containers in terms of size. We can cut them down, we can modify them, right? When we look at the entire scope, we see the nursery container as the reference for producing the best developmental growth in terms of organic soil. These are all variables considered. Now what is the limitation of the nursery container? Nursery containers are deeper and not wider. Yes, we can get wider containers. Yes, we can get shallower, wider containers. But ultimately, when we look at the nursery container system they are deeper and take advantage of that gravity column to allow us to cultivate with a high amount of nutrition in that soil column. We can fertilize heavily, we can use organic matter with a high cation exchange capacity. And we can water fairly aggressively in a nursery container. progressively in a nursery container based on the height of that column, okay? But when we start to look at, I want to plate out my roots, I want a lateral root base, I want to expand an abari, the nursery container is a limitation. And we see this, we see this when we deal with field-grown trees placed into a nursery container and the width of the trunk fills out the container and all you have is the space for roots to grow downward. That doesn't work for the bonsai practice all the time or in a lot of different circumstances where it makes for a tougher repot over the course of time. So we start to weigh, hey, listen, I have a sheen base tree. Nursery container is an ideal container for you. Hey, I really want to push nutrition and I want to have a dependable balance of water and oxygen. Nursery container sounds like a great container for you. I want flexibility, mobility. Nursery container is a great container for you. I want affordability. I want the capacity to have access to different sizes. Nursery container is for you. Okay, now the modification of the nursery container is what gave rise to the Anderson Flat. Okay, because now all of a sudden when we look at this solid plastic disc, we see the water exiting out the side. The Anderson Flat gives us an attempt at, right, a hint at the depth in terms of establishing, you know, potentially a gravity column to act on a wider and more shallow container for lateral root growth. We get that root system closer to the bottom. And here's the thing, the Anderson Flat has mesh on the bottom. Heavy mesh, durable mesh. Yes, definitely allowing oxygen in, water out. And this is where we see this rapid water oxygen exchange. Now when you start to talk about improving plant health, increasing the rapidity with which a plant grows, the faster that you can saturate and get oxygen moving in, saturate and get oxygen moving in, the faster that water and oxygen exchange, the more rapid we're going to be producing roots specifically. Roots specifically, right? Because we have respiration happening in that soil system. Respiration demands oxygen, demands gaseous exchange, demands water be present, but not saturated in water starving out all of that oxygen, right? So we want that exchange. Boom, water. I'm using water and I've got the oxygen. Boom, roots are growing, roots are growing, roots are growing, roots are growing. Okay, dark color. So we've got that warmth that also pertain to the nursery container. We've got that lateral formation that allows us to utilize the Anderson Flat potentially to start to cultivate more of our laterally based trees where we're getting that expansion of the trunk, we're flaring those roots out when we plant them, and we're really kind of pushing a tree more out as opposed to down in terms of the shape. Limitations. When we talk about Anderson Flats, Anderson Flats are highly unstable, right? We see this kind of flex and twist. And you know that any movement in the root system is an impediment to root growth. That would be my biggest complaint. There's a lack of size variability. There's a deeper Anderson Flat. There's a shorter Anderson Flat. Width is exactly the same. Square dimensions. Width is the same. We've got two different depths, so we lack a lot of flexibility. And that thing is gonna be flexing all around. What does that mean? Anderson Flats are not meant to be mobile containers to cultivate any of our trees in development. Anderson flats are meant to be set on a weed cloth. Anderson flats are meant to be set on a gravel. Anderson flats are meant to be set on a mulch. Now, we get that oxygen exchange, oxygen coming in, water going out. We leave that on the ground. We get the buffering capacity of the ground in terms of temperature. We get the buffering capacity of the ground in terms of water exchange, increasing the height of the gravity column by tapping into that ground. We also get the benefit of the ground from biology, having exchange with the root system. And the best-case scenario is for our roots to actually grow through the Anderson flat into the ground to access that in-ground environment. And each year, we come back and we sever those roots to be sure that we foster that root system inside of the Anderson flat. The interaction, the lateral nature, the rapid water oxygen exchange, and the warmth, absolutely fantastic. Very limited size opportunities and incredibly mobile in terms of... the container itself causing movement. Definitely a container choice that fits a certain necessity inside of your bonsai developmental goals. The colander. Now, the colander is something that came along when a majority of hobbyists in Japan, not even professionals, hobbyists in Japan started utilizing kitchen colanders from the dollar store to be cultivating black pine seedlings into shohin and chuhin material, twisted up juniper. Rapidly cultivating them in a place they need to move these trees, right? We typically talk about development, plant that thing in the ground, you're going to get it to grow exponentially faster. But if you don't have the land or if you need to be applying the technique to create the kind of detail, I want to be rapidly transitioning energy, I want to be plucking needles, I want to be wiring the trunk, I want to grow a sacrifice and cut it before it gets too big and have control of those wounds as I create those changes of direction. I want to reduce the amount of time that I have to do that. I want to reduce the amount of time that I have to do that. I want to reduce the amount of time that I have to do that. I want to reduce the live vein, I want to add the shari. I want to put movement into each of the elongating branches while they're very soft and young. I want to take it off before it bites in and destroys them and I want to wire it again while I'm turning some of that into gin. Lots of exchange of energy. When we start to talk about colander cultivation, it gives you that flexibility of mobility, of the capacity to bring it in, to put it out. It can sit on the ground, it can sit on a bench. The benefit of the colander, oxygen. Big time oxygen. Now, when we talk about the colander, when we start to talk about the soil profile for the nursery can, we're saying, listen, this is where we can get away with organic because of the height of the gravity column. When we move down to the Anderson flat, yes, we can deal with a 70% organic, 30% aggregate, but now with that shallower gravity column, I would rather go 70% aggregate, 30% organic. When we go to the colander, you absolutely positively need to be going with a 100% aggregate, an Akadama pumice lava, a solid Akadama, in your colander to maximize its cultivation capacity. The colander is not a solid pumice, right? It doesn't have heat. Pumice stays very cold. That cold, wet kind of vibe of pumice being a water-retentive component. We talk about the organics. We don't have the height of the gravity column. We want to have open oxygen spaces on the exterior portion of that colander to allow that exchange to diffuse across the root system. We want water getting out as fast as possible like this is when we start to say, hey, listen, go to that aggregate component, but inside of that aggregate component, we're talking about growing developmental pieces of bonsai in our actual bonsai soil, right? And we're striving for that shohin or chuhin size. If you want to get a bigger size of tree beyond shohin or chuhin, the colander is not the selection for you. Go back to a nursery container, go into the ground, or customize that larger wood box to be able to accommodate what that tree necessitates in the development that you're seeking. Oxygen exchange, find root productivity for smaller trees, and we talk about rapidly flushing, watering heavily, which means fertilizing heavily, right? You see the whips and you see the sacrificial leaders grown on those shohin and chuhin size trees, junipers, pines, some of the deciduous varieties in Japan or some of the more proficient growers in the western world, you see how much fertilizer is on the surface of that. Because you're constantly watering, based on the aggregate system and the amount of oxygen that's allowed, that exchange is very rapid. And consequently, we're flushing salts constantly and we can apply more heavy fertilization to drive the growth rate of that tree. But again, it's limited to the finer roots, the slower growth rate of that scalable model with that particle size that allows the oxygen spaces to cause that diffusion and concentration across the root system. Colanders are very specific to those small and medium sized trees. Wood box. Wood box. Now this is obviously, right, when you talk about bonsai as an organic practice, the wood box, cedar wood box is always going to be my preference, thin, breathable. We talk about it being a buffering component, buffers rapid temperature exchange, buffers rapid oxygen exchange, buffers rapid water exchange, increases and enhances biology being present and facilitates that entire ecosystem that we really see benefiting the health of a tree. But the biggest thing about a box is it's customizable, okay? We can go shallow wide and we can plate out a root system. We can go deeper and accommodate that tap root. We can shrink it. We can expand it. We can cut off sections of it and reuse it. A wood box is the most customizable component, especially when we get to bigger and bigger trees, building wood boxes makes a ton of sense. When we talk about reinvigorating, deciduous material that's been in a container a long time whose roots have scaled, who have lost that real epicenter, the center of energy, we put them into a wood box. We inject the sheen underneath that plated out base with oxygen, with water. We improve that balance. We regain the strength and health of that tree and we go back into a bonsai container. This is where the wood box is a customizable structure to cultivate developmental goals in trees. We're talking root growth. We're talking healing. We're talking elongation. We're talking thickening and we're talking full year expansion. This is the ultimate customizable piece to be growing those developmental goals out in. We can open up oxygen exchange on the bottom by increasing the width of the slat and using the screen, we can screw to it, tie to it, wire to it, but here's the thing that we need to keep in our minds is this has an ultimate lifespan. The longer a tree is in the wood box, the less time it has to stay in that wood box. So all of those buffering components, when we talk about a wood box, it can exist on a bench, it can exist on the ground. Does it thrive on the ground? Yes, you're putting it back in that organic system, right? But ultimately, the longer that it's in the organic system, the shorter its lifespan and we start to say, look, this is a limited time that a tree can sit in this. It's for a significant purpose of reestablishing a tree, reempowering a tree or customizing a tree, but we only have a certain number of years before we're either going to have to rebuild it or move that tree along in its process, okay? So just to recap, when we talk about developmental growth of trees, right, we're saying, listen, what you're trying to achieve in terms of the shape of the root system, the soils that you're going to use, where you're going to put it and the way that you want to fertilize it to accomplish those things all contribute to the developmental container that you are selecting. We have a readily accessible container, tried, tested and true, right, that holds organics, heavy fertilization, good water drainage, right, some limitations to the shape of the roots. We've got a more lateral root system, better water oxygen exchange and engages with the ground. Don't set it on a bench. It's super flexible. Don't move it a whole lot. We want to back off on some of that organic, add some aggregate. We go solid aggregate here. We're cultivating smaller trees. We're getting rapid water exchange. We're getting rapid oxygen exchange. Colanders are great for shohin and chuhin, not so good for bigger trees, great mobility. And then the wood box, right, buffered, breathable, customizable, a little bit short-lived, but ultimately when we think about the entirety of the wood box and what it contributes, it is still the backbone of bonsai. In terms of how we engage, we can use solid pumice. We can use organic and aggregate. We can use any soil system in terms of a wood box and have that wood box behave. It's all about the customizable space shape and the way that we form that oxygen entry that allows the wood box to meet our tree where its needs are at, okay? Pros, cons, functions, no aesthetics, right? Development is not about aesthetics. It's about getting the aesthetic development in your tree. This is a short-term goal. This is a short-term solution to be able to achieve our developmental goals, and now you have the information to make the right choice. Good luck. 
