Hello everyone, we've received a lot of questions from you on how to actually properly preserve the deadwood on some of your trees, especially the deadwood that's somewhat soft or punky. So we're going to go ahead and go through the steps here on what we do here at Mirai. What we are going to be using is of course going to be the lime sulfur and then we've got the penetrating epoxy, which is a two-part epoxy. So what we've got here is a piece of deadwood that was in the garden and if we can for a moment just imagine this of course is going to be the live vein and this is the deadwood. So what I went ahead and done is I've washed the deadwood because you don't need to see me do that. So I've washed the deadwood, now it's at that point right now that I can paint it. And what we're going to show you is, do you do the lime sulfur first or do you do the penetrating epoxy first? Well we've noticed that you use the lime sulfur first and then the penetrating epoxy and the reason why is because the penetrating epoxy is a sealer. So it's going to seal that way. It's going to seal that wood up and when you come back to use the lime sulfur on top of that, it's not going to accept it. So you've got to do the lime sulfur first so that it can soak into the wood, let it dry and then come back later on with your penetrating epoxy and seal in that color. So it's almost like the same thing if you were to paint your house or something like that or paint a bench. You paint it first, then you seal it with any sort of polyurethane or varnish, whatever you might be using. So it's always a sealer coat that you use last. So let's just kind of keep in mind with that principle there. So that way in the future if you think, oh shit. I want to try the penetrating epoxy first. Well don't do that. It's a lime sulfur you want to use first. So anyway, here's the piece of deadwood. We're going to go ahead and paint this right now and it's not going to be pretty. We're just going to show you the example and what we're trying to achieve is so you can actually see what it looks like when it dries. So here we go. So again, like I said, we're going to pretend that's still alive, right? And so I'm just going to come up to the live vein and you don't want to work the lime sulfur. And this... We don't have any questions on this. This lime sulfur is 100%. We do not cut our lime sulfur. We don't tint it. We don't color it. Just let it soak in. Let the reaction of the water and the chemical do its job because it's all chemistry. And this is a great piece of wood to use this on because this area right here, as you can see, this is very punky. So this is an area that if this was a live tree, we'd want to preserve that, especially if it was a very special feature in the design. So we're going to go ahead and lime sulfur it and then come back later on with the pit and train epoxy and seal in all that goodness so that it doesn't rot away on you, at least not in your lifetime. Okay. Okay. All right. Okay. All right. All right. All right. And if this was an actual live tree, you'd want to make sure that your rim of your pot is being wiped down continuously to ensure that the lime sulfur doesn't stain the pot. Especially if you've got an antique pot. You don't want that to happen. That's an epic failure. Try not to go over the lime sulfur more than once. Commit to a heavy application and just work yourself down. Okay, now that we've actually coated the entire piece of deadwood with our lime sulfur, we're going to let it dry. And this will be probably another few hours to go. And then we'll let it dry completely before we actually use the penetrating epoxy because we don't want any moisture left inside this piece of deadwood when we apply this. So we'll get back to it and you'll be able to see it. All right, now here we are. We're getting ready to do the penetrating epoxy on this piece of deadwood here. And a couple of things I didn't mention during the, when we were actually doing the lime sulfur. When you get done with your brush, you know, if you've got some really nice brushes, the best thing to do is after you rinse out the brush, go ahead and fill your cup up with water and just let the brush sit in there overnight because you'll be surprised at how much lime sulfur is actually leached out of that brush overnight. So anyway, that's one way you can protect your brushes and make them last a bit longer. So okay, now we're ready. The lime sulfur is already dried. Now the next step is going to be, is going to pour the penetrating epoxy. And this is the two-part epoxy, an A and a B. And we mix equal parts of this chemical here. You guys have eye protection, a respirator and gloves. I've got some eye protection, I got gloves, we got, we're outdoors, so we're going to be okay. But if I was doing a large, huge surface of an area, I would definitely have a respirator on. So we'll go ahead and get this mixed up. So you guys over 50, don't get too nervous here with me putting these gloves on, okay? We're just going to protect our hands here. So it's going to be equal parts. And I normally, if you guys get a kit of this stuff, I always mark the lids so that this way you don't reverse them and set the chemical reaction off on each one of these by putting it on the wrong way. Okay, so here we go. So we're going to do just a small amount. We're going to put it on here. Ooh, this stuff stinks. Okay. Okay. Okay. Then we're going to just kind of mix it together. Give it a few seconds here. Add a little bit of ice to this, you get yourself a little cocktail going. Again, I can't stress enough to take all of the safety precautions that you possibly can with this material here. Anyway, and we just use chip brushes. And these chip brushes, I would not use a foam brush because a foam will just completely just get all, it would just destroy the foam brush within just a matter of seconds. But these chip brushes are pretty good. good so after you use them you can just toss them so we're going to go ahead and get this ready and like we had mentioned there's a couple pieces here that were kind of kind of punky that were kind of soft so what we're going to do is we're going to take our brush and just kind of just let it touch it that wouldn't have been good don't work the lime sulfur just let the let the chemical just kind of just sit on top of the surface and soak in if you work it what's going to happen is you're gonna end up wiping the lime sulfur off and it just gonna look really blotchy as it is you're not going to you know this is the best case scenario we can do to kind of preserve this wood and when you start seeing it beat up then you know that the woods been pretty much penetrated with the chemical and again you want to stay away from that live vein if this was a live tree and you're dealing with a pot situation you want to make sure your lipid that pot is protected because you do not want this epoxy penetrating the surface of that ceramic if you get this epoxy on anything you can use vinegar which is a great cleanup method to clean up your hands the surface of the floor or whatever it might be just take your time no hurry and if you do this inside of a garage or something like that make sure you have the garage door open and you got if not make sure you have a respirator and watch that live vein you know just kind of just work yourself up to it don't stress if you touch it the live vein you know but don't do this this is the example I don't want you to do I don't want you doing that that is what you do not want to do take a look at the outside of that you know its it's all pretty solid here that was the only part right that we really want to concern ourselves with so if that was the case if that was all you need to do what I would do at this point is you would want to feather it in so here we go we're gonna feather this in go and make sure the area that is still real punky is covered on both sides again you don't want to work the work the lime sulfur the same thing if you were to stain a deck or something like that when you put your finish your your sealer on top of it if you work it that that seat that stain will move around on you it will look really shoddy so we're going to feather here okay so now what I would do is just take it and just kind of now this is just just kind of take your eye off that edge is all you want to do one there that's where it was real punky let's put this over there here just one here. and this is you know just what you feel like you know I'm not going to paint that entire I'm gonna leave that white. So I've got these edges here to kind of kind of give me that little play off the uh off the shadowing. So I'm gonna leave that like it is I'm gonna come up on this and just kind of just play with that a little bit. feather it in so you don't see that hard edge. And at this point I'm not penetrating any of this I'm just trying to get it to feather in so it doesn't look so bad. And it will dry back and you'll see it and give it a few more weeks another month or so and this will be beautiful. There it is. It's not rocket science. Nicely feathered in. Any other questions? Any other questions? 
