Wednesday mini stream what's up it's going to be a short one today we were supposed to do bonsai anatomy the anatomy component of it is is a big conversation and the piece that we're going to make is going to be a big component of future projects and so we're going to do that next week but I did want to come back and just talk about winter color as an understanding of physiological understanding an aesthetic understanding and an ability for us to see problems during the winter season when they begin to occur how do we know when it's winter color how do we know when it's normal and how do we know when we need to be doing something to respond okay so I've got two trees in the workshop both junipers today because I think junipers illustrate very clearly this different color component and there's a few things about winter color that we all need to understand right first and foremost winter color definitely not the only thing that we know about winter color but so I'm going to talk a little bit about it a little bit but I'm going to talk a little bit about it a little bit about it a little bit a bad sign and oftentimes good winter color is a sign of a very healthy tree what ends up happening when we start to see that green coloration the chlorophyll inside of a tree that pigmentation is very very weak when it comes to temperature tolerance it can burn or desiccate in the Sun and degrade it can also freeze and really decompose in the cold and so over the course of the of the fall season as we start to get cooler and cooler temperatures that chlorophyll is broken down into solutes and those solutes are held inside of the vacuole of the cell at that needles still there all that's still there all the nitrogen iron magnesium all the things that go into the construction of the chlorophyll molecules are all in the cellular structure still but they've been broken down and they've been absorbed to decrease the temperature at which the water in the vacuole of the cell freezes okay and what's left behind is the expression of other pigments that are always there in the foliar mass right there's always these oranges oranges these yellows these reds for shimpaku juniper this is a toyama juniper for shimpaku juniper we see a lot of purples right and you start to see up in here and you'll notice that there is some irregularity some of the interior pieces some of the stems are a little bit of a different color than the tips some of the upper pieces on the canopy are a little bit more uniformly discolored you notice that the pieces that have active growing tips are a little greener the pieces that are a little bit weaker are a little bit lighter right but what we do see and one of the most important things that we recognize is that we have a uniform distribution of that winter color meaning that the entire canopy is showing some sort of color change and that color change is consistent because if we just had a pocket that was an odd color that would suggest that it's not necessarily winter color that's causing that that we may have other issues impacting the health okay but beyond just seeing that universal distribution of color we now understand chlorophyll reabsorbed into the vacuole carotenoids are the pigments that are oftentimes expressed once we have that recession of chlorophyll and that's where we see it but there's another trigger to this component as well and that is orientation okay so if we're in the northern hemisphere and we see a tree turn a dramatically different color and we're saying gosh is this winter color is this okay is my tree healthy we should understand that we will definitively see the southern exposed full your mass show a far greater degree of winter color formation right and so as I rotate this what I want you to pay attention to is the transition of the color currently you're looking at the front of the tree the front front of the tree has been facing south has had the greater amount of sun exposure we see more color in the canopy than down lower on the tree now as I rotate this what you're gonna start to see is the green coloration on the north side notice how green this is notice how much more limited the purpling is notice how much more limited the yellowing is okay and I want to stay in tight here Josh and I'm just gonna rotate to the 5050 mark and you can see that green and now you start to see some of that winter coloration notice how this has more of a purpley tone notice how this has some more of that orange yellow and notice how this is very very green and this is where we can get really thrown off by winter coloration because we start to recognize oh my gosh and let me just give you that on a grand scale because it is very delineatable this is almost like a brown off color this is still that brilliant vibrant green exposure related changes based on the ultraviolet further decomposing the remaining chlorophyll that's there and the carotenoids being further expressed on that southern exposure versus the protection the shade and that perpetuation of that green coloration because not all chlorophyll is broken down and reabsorbed there are remnants that are left behind okay uniformity of the color consistency of the color and exposure having a dramatic impact all indications that the color change that you are seeing in your trees over the fall season as we start to get cooler and cooler we maybe experience a freezing temperature but not necessarily and we start to see the tree changing is this okay is this winter color how do I know three factors that you ask yourself. Even distribution, right? We start to see that orientation, and we start to understand that we have that differentiation expanding over multiple portions, top to bottom, front to back, based on that degradation of that chlorophyll, okay? Now, I want to bring in an example of a color change that will show you winter color, but we also have color change that's definitively associated with another issue that we need to be aware of, and this is where we get to draw that line. So, I'm going to move this tree out. Of course, I picked a heavy tree to come in, and with the legs, not with the back. Okay, now, you've seen this tree before. This one snuck up on me there, a little heavy. Okay, you've seen this tree before from the perspective of we use this tree to talk about phomopsis, okay? And there are some pieces in here. As I'm looking through the canopy here, I am seeing some pieces that are showing slight discolorations, which would suggest that the phomopsis is continuing to perpetuate itself. Let me just show you that for a moment, okay? Let's take this branch, for example, right? We have vibrant green, a little bit of an off-colored green, because we are seeing winter color here, and we'll see that as we continue to rotate. We have definitive black, but notice that I have some of these off-colored green, and I'm going to color bronzing shoots. Inside of this uniform winter color that's occurring here, I have these off-color bronzing shoots, okay? Those bronzing shoots are already impacted by the presence of phomopsis, and let me just go ahead. You can see that bronzing in that piece right there. Just a different color. Let me put it right next to that one. See how it's darker and it's browner, right? That's probably a piece that has already experienced phomopsis infection, right? So we see inside of this, we have this uniformity to that structure, to that shape, to that needle, and then we have one of these outliers, and we have a tree that's experienced some pathogen-related issues, right? Is it still happening? Do we have to worry about it? Should I spray? Is a dormant, you know, preventative treatment necessary? When we start to see those individual pieces showing those color delineations, now it is not broadly expanded across the crown. We have a uniform winter color that exists here, but now we're starting to see specific phomopsis, and we're starting to see specifics, and we're seeing specific impediments to specific pieces. That means we probably are dealing with an insect or a disease, and in that issue, we understand phomopsis, and we understand it's still actively working inside of the tree. Let's go ahead and treat next time conditions dry out, and we have the ability to suppress that spore population, okay? But I have another piece, right? And this one is a little bit more troubling. When we start to look at the color throughout this piece, and we see this lower living vein, we have an entire region, both this branch here, as well as this branch here, both connected to the same living vein, and they are completely different colors than the rest of the canopy. It's not individual sprigs. It is a uniform color change that exists across these two pieces. The green is washed out. There isn't really any vibrance to it, and it is very, very yellow. Now, when I look at the bottom, I see that green. This is, again, when we're losing water, when we're losing resources, right? How do we create sugars and starches? We have water. Notice the top is very, very yellow. The bottom is very green. Very common, because that chlorophyll is degrading without the transport of resources. Could this be a bore? Definitely could. This tree has had bores. Could this potentially be a root-related thing? Could be a root-related thing, right? Could it have been potential damage or something? Maybe potential damage, but there is definitely something happening. And why do we know there is something happening? Well, it is an abnormal color isolated to a specific region as compared to the rest of the canopy of the tree and its uniformity of color, and that is where we see, again, when we're identifying problems, pathogens and disease, is it broad spread across the canopy? If so, that's a root-related issue. In the case of winter color, if it's broad spread across the canopy, that is a good indication that that is standard color change due to temperature. Or is it isolated in a region that could be a disease or a pest? When it comes to winter color, if it's isolated, in a region could be disease, could be pest, or when we start to talk about vein-specific conductivity of vascular resources, like a juniper, it could mean that we have something impeding the health of that living vein and that vascular transport. Doesn't mean it's gonna die, right? But what would it encourage me to do? It would encourage me to inspect the living vein for the presence of borers. It would encourage me to potentially clean off the surface of the soil and inspect the roots that are connected to that live vein to make sure we're not having root recession or some sort of soil-related issue. And if we find nothing else, guess what? Sometimes the different sugar starch content across the different foliar masses that exist on a juniper will form different winter color, and maybe this is just the winter color for the sugar content with the hardships that it's experienced, and maybe it's just fine and it will recover, but we will definitively keep our eye on it, make sure that we investigate the situation, and make the most educated decision possible so that we are aware of what's happening with our tree and understanding of what is quote unquote normal versus something that we need to respond to, okay? Quick, simple, easy, but definitely something that not many people talk about. Winter color, and when is it okay? And we're gonna talk about this when we come to the springtime and we see needles drop, and we're gonna talk about it when we come to the summertime and we see needles drop, and we're gonna talk about it in the fall time and we see needles drop. Is needle drop okay? When is it okay? Why is it okay? Is color change okay? When is it okay? Why is it okay, okay? Two good, really good contrasting examples of a uniform change of color, orientation based and specific on a very healthy tree versus a tree that has winter color and that natural change, but we have some degree of differentiation that would lead us to take action and try to proactively respond to or at least investigate the state of health so that we give the chance and the very best opportunity, excuse me, we give the tree the very best opportunity to recover, be taken care of, and move forward in a positive direction. All right? I hope this is helpful, just a little glance at how we make sure we are reading our trees correctly and speaking bonsai with a fluency of the vernacular. We'll be here for all your questions and concerns. Have a great rest of your week, and we'll see you guys next week on the stream. Thank you. 
