what's going on everybody what is up what are you doing what do you have in your mind not what's going on everybody Wednesday mini stream uh super psyched for this one not because there's going to be some radical transformation or magic of bonsai occurring but because we really need to dig into some visual connection to the understanding of how do we identify what in the world is going on with our tree okay um and this is something that we've had to become pretty proficient at uh at Mirai because of the I would say large number of trees that we deal with and the varying species from across the different regions of of the world and uh primarily across North America which is a very diversified land mass in terms of climate and environment we have had to learn what components allow us to filter through and kind of sift through all of the potential issues that are plaguing a tree to really nail down what we can do to help the tree that is suffering okay um and so I'm going to break this down in terms of what I'm seeing on this particular tree we're going to walk through some of the information that I would utilize to identify the issue on this tree and then we're going to come up with a solution of how we help this tree to continue moving forward and to improve its state of health and that will give us actionable items through that process of sleuthing thinking conceptualizing and the resources that we have to make those decisions okay so first and foremost whenever we start with a tree that's having issue we see an abnormality that is occurring that is different from what the tree is supposed to be doing what does this mean for you this means that you have got to understand when do my trees perform the specified activities and what is that activity and what is the normal quote unquote normal of the behavior of the tree okay because if the activity is growing and it's growing slightly slower and you've just repotted a tree and you're saying my tree is growing slower what could have happened and you start to say well I repotted it this to me feels like a very clean clear cut understanding that oh I repotted the tree the energy system is being focused on replenishing roots not foliar mass we've reduced the water conductive tissue that allows that foliar mass to expand and consequently the tree cannot perform as it normally would on an annual basis perfect okay but when we start to get into a tree where we're not talking necessarily about growth and we don't have those clearly identifiable components and I just want to zoom in here go ahead and bring me in close Josh okay here we have a ponderosa pine now Jesus is going to zoom you in so that we see there's a general yellowing in the ponderosa pine not necessarily an issue especially when we get to the middle of September okay this yellowing has been present since last year so that's where I know there to be an issue but if we were saying hey my pine is yellowing some of the needles are yellowing is this an issue or not well first we look at is it the time of year where we see older needles shed annually now when we talk about a deciduous tree leaves are shed in daylight length decreases temperature decreases leaves may be burned or the green molecule molecule chlorophyll may become damaged over the growing season in areas or aspects of intense heat or intense Sun and we may never see that green return that is still a healthy plant the chlorophyll is gone from the cells no problem those leaves will fall next year it'll be fine okay that can happen but when we start to look in the fall and we start to say okay this tree is shedding needles what does a pine typically do or what does a conifer do or what does any tree typically shed if it's a broad-leafed evergreen in terms of needles it sheds its third-year needles okay so when I start to look at this yellowing my immediate thought process with this yellowing is what year of needle what year of foliar mass is being impacted and as I dig in here what I recognize as I tease through this is that these green needles right here this is this is this year's growth and the needles that are being shed are actually the two-year-old needles here now last year these two-year-old needles were the new growth last year and they were yellow upon the occurrence of growth okay so I know I have had a problem because the new growth was yellow but sometimes what a plant does is a plant takes its resources out of the second year needle and puts it into the new growth and that's where we see the second year needle showing a lot of damage or a lot of potential yellowing potential banding or potential issue okay so understanding what year of the growth is experiencing the trauma is this a time of year where we're gonna see natural shedding pines typically shed their third-year needles in the fall junipers shed their third-year needles over the summertime we typically see broad-leafed evergreens like an oak shed their leaves at the tail end of spring after that new growth is hardened and energy positive is occurring so we have these different markers of when it is normal for third year growth to be shed now all of a sudden we're seeing second year growth is showing the issue it was first year growth last year when the issue started it's continuing to show issue and as I move into this again coming back to this singular location the second year growth is actually falling off of the tree and notice that the third year needles these needles back in here these are actually staying on the tree so the tree has transitioned from historically dropping third year needles to holding on to third year needles because something happened last year that caused the second year needles to be damaged and to drop okay now this is an interesting situation because this year's needles are relatively green okay so something happened last year now I've got this abnormal coloration the abnormal coloration is is being shed and the tree is preserving its third year needles which it historically does not do this is interesting okay so we've first identified something abnormal is happening right abnormal to the time of year abnormal to the needle that should be impacted by the time of the year and we have a pattern of that occurring right it started last year on the new growth it's continuated through the second year growth and now the second year growth is being shed gosh what could have happened last year okay so now we have a time frame to reference this is abnormal this started last year and is continuing this year do I have a healthy tree new growth is healthy third year needles are healthy second year needles are dropping I'm probably okay but we don't quite know that yet let's keep going okay something abnormal is happening this is issue number one we've identified what has been injured by whatever circumstance occurred number two is this isolated is this an isolated occurrence okay I look at the lowest branches here and I see that in fact my very limited number of new needles that are occurring this year are green okay I see second needles again are yellowing okay have banding and let me just go ahead and show you what that looks like okay yellowing and have banding now this is where I want to be very very excuse me let me get those there we go okay now this is where I I want to be very, very clear that we typically, in the bonsai world, see yellowing or browning needles, and we immediately say, oh, my tree has needle cast. My tree's got needle cast. It's got those bands. It's got needle cast, okay? I can tell you beyond a shadow of a doubt this tree doesn't have needle cast, but I have banding, but I have those stripes. I have what, and I'm looking for my lens here. Let me see if I can find it in my plethora of pocket accoutrements. I have everything that says I've got needle cast, right? No, no, not at all. Did I? Yeah, there it is. Perfect, okay? No, not at all do you have everything that suggests needle cast. In fact, needle cast, as a disease, as a fungal activity, as a pathogen, very easy to spot. Number one, is it universally distributed? Because when you talk about needle cast, you are going to have areas that are highly impacted by a fungus, areas that are highly impacted by an insect, and you're going to have areas that are completely unaffected. If it's not distributed across the entirety of the crown, now all of a sudden we start looking at a different set of factors, and we start thinking about pathogen or insect. For this tree, though, I have this banding. It must be needle cast. Is it equally? Distributed across the tree. Well, it's on this branch, it's on this branch, it's on this branch, it's on this. Yes, every single branch is impacted and almost impacted to an equal degree. All of a sudden, we have our division, and now we understand if an issue is affecting the entirety of a crown, this is a damage that occurred to the root system. This is a damage that occurred to the root system. The entire tree is showing the issue. We've identified that the issue is abnormal, and the only way that an abnormal issue impacts the entirety of the tree is if the root system itself has been, to some degree, injured, damaged, or experienced a stressful situation. So I'm already, I'm already knocking off things that we would historically do to treat a problem of irregularity in our tree, because I'm willing to bet that most of us, if we saw this unnatural or abnormal tree, we would be able to treat it. And I'm willing to bet that most of us, if we saw this unnatural or abnormal tree, we would be able to treat it. And I'm willing to bet that most of us, if we saw this unnatural or abnormal banding of these needles, the first thing we would do is we would say, hey, let's treat with copper. Let's treat with, let's treat with daconil. Let's treat with a fungicide. Let's try to treat multiple times. Let's kick the living crap out of this tree with all the chemicals that we can possibly dump on it, right? And here's the interesting thing about it. Because this is an issue that occurred on last year's needles, and we've gotten green growth this year, and all of a sudden the needles are shedding, and you sprayed this with a fungicide, and all of these injured needles fell off, you'd be like, fungicide fixed it. Must have been a disease. It reinforces our interpretation of what a disease tree looks like, because the natural physiology of the tree actually fixed the problem. The fungicide actually probably impaired the tree. Whoa, whoa, what did you just say? Fungicide impaired the tree? Sure, absolutely, right? Because accumulation of metals, and most fungicides, we talk about copper, we talk about aluminum, we talk about some of these zinc-based fungicides, okay? Those metals accumulate in the soil in very low quantities, but all of the quantities that a plant needs of those metals are micronutrients. It does not need a copious quantity. So we have a tree that's showing second-year injury, right? Last year's needles are injured. It's showing recovery this year. We don't know what it is. It's banding. We hit it with a fungicide that has heavy metal. Because it's made into the soil, the tree has already recovered, and we add another component to that system that was injured last year in the root system. Because it's spread across the entire canopy, it's already fixed, and we throw another element in there, perpetuating the problem, right? So we see the affected needles fall off. We treat with fungicide. Because the needles fell off in the treatment with fungicide, we say the fungicide worked, and because of that treatment, now throwing off the chemistry and the soil again with that application of fungal heavy metals, we see the problem come back next year, and we say, I can't cultivate ponderosa pine in my region because it always has needle cast. And it actually had nothing to do with needle cast, had nothing to do with the pathogen at all, right? So incredibly interesting, okay? So in this discussion, as we dive, drive, kind of dig into this subject matter, we have to start to understand the how we first identify an abnormality, and I'm going to reiterate these. This is going to be a broken record because I want to beat this into your brain to help you solve your tree's problems. Identify an abnormality, right? Understand if it's in the roots or if it's in the foliar mass, okay? Broad spread across the canopy, this is a root-related issue. Isolated to specific regions of intensity and severity versus areas where it's not prolific versus areas where it's completely eradicated growth. Definitively an insect or a disease. Okay? So now we have that. Can we check that? Yes, okay? When we start to talk about the understanding of fungicides and disease-related components, you must, as a bonsai practitioner, have a loop, okay? This is a loop, closes up into a really handy-dandy, nice little collapsible piece. This is a magnifying glass, right? And basically, this is a pocket magnifying glass that when we have a piece of diseased foliar mass, okay? I have this yellowing needle. I put this on a white surface. I take the loop and I start to look, okay? And I'm now focused on, as I look through that loop and as I run that up and down the needle, are there any black specks that have attached themselves to the needle? Are there any bands that have sap oozing out of the band? And are there any bands that have sap oozing out of the band that have black spots attached to the needle? This is the first step in understanding, right? If there is a band, is that a band that is showing a lack of nutrition? Is that a band that's showing a water-oxygen imbalance? Is that a band that you've broken in the process of wiring? Is that a band that has been infected by a spore, the hyphae have digested the proteins in the tissue, and that pathogen has gone through its reproductive cycle and is now creating a lesion? Is that a band that has been infected by a spore, the hyphae have digested the proteins in the tissue, and that pathogen has gone through its reproductive cycle and is now creating a lesion? Where spores are being produced into the atmosphere around it, okay? We have to neck that down. It doesn't even start with looking at that band, though. It starts saying, this is abnormal, and it's applied to a specific area. That's not what we're dealing with here. It's applied to the whole tree. I don't need this loop, okay? I can check. I can look. I don't need it. This isn't a fungal issue, okay? So we recognize, ah, this year's growth, good. Last year's growth, bad. Last year's growth being shed. Now I have to say, okay. What happened last year? What happened to this tree last year? What are all of the things that I did? Where was it housed in my garden? What herbicides did I spray to the landscape or to the container? What fertilizers did I utilize? Did I repot or not? Is the soil compressed or not? Is there a balance of water and oxygen I've focused on? Did I treat with any chemicals that may have caused phytotoxicity? We have to go back into our bonsai practice and just step through. This entire process, okay? So as I kind of continue to sort of get rid of these older needles, as I'm trying to understand this situation, I'm thinking, I'm thinking as I'm looking at this, I'm getting rid of this tissue. I understand it's not a fungal issue. If the tree were wet and I were at all concerned that there was an abnormality, we would not be touching the tree while it's wet because we become the vector of distribution of spread should it be a fungus, okay? This tree is dry. I'm looking. I'm thinking. I'm seeing the same similar characteristic. I'm confirming. I'm continuing to be educated in my quest for what was wrong. And I start to think about what did I do to the soil? What does the soil look like now? Okay, now we've just recently applied a fertilizer. I have moss on one side of the soil. But as I continue to rotate, I don't have moss on the other side of the soil. This is interesting. Why would I have moss on one side of the soil? Okay, I have moss here. This feels quite beautiful. I don't have moss here. Why would I not have moss here? This is interesting. And I would never just top dress one side. Okay, this side has definitely been facing the sun, but in the Pacific Northwest, that doesn't change things. What does that mean to have moss on one side? Well, here's an interesting thing. Moss will only occur if the environment upon which that top dressing or that moss is growing has been prepared by microbial activity. Moss can't just adhere to a soil particle surface. That soil particle surface needs to be primed, right? Much like paint doesn't necessarily adhere to a wall, we have to put a layer of primer on it for that paint to adhere and do its job. Moss is the exact same way. So when I see an area with moss and an area without moss, I'm already saying, gosh, something must have happened to the microbial activity. There must be something going on. And I say, oh, oh, holy cow. I repotted this tree last year. I repotted this tree last year, and I remember now, I remember the native soil, or excuse me, I removed the native soil off of this front portion, but the back portion was the established root mass that I left untouched. That established root mass still had microbial activity in it. This front portion, this is not microbially inoculated. The microbial activity has not performed. It's preparatory process on the surface, and maybe that is consequently what has impaired the growth of the moss. Ooh, interesting. This is very interesting. So many of us talk about top dressing and how top dressing doesn't occupy the entire surface. You have to understand microbial activity comes before top dressing, right? Or, excuse me, comes before moss growth. Yes, we top dress to support the balance of water and oxygen and prevent the decomposition of okadama so that it doesn't become broken down solidified. And decrease oxygen exchange. And one thing that I notice about this tree is where I don't have moss, I have a rock hard, broken down, dusty surface. Look at that. Doesn't even have, that looks like dirt on the ground, right? You see the particles here of pumice and lava. You see the okadama broken down here. I clearly have an imbalance of water and oxygen. Okay, interesting. I'm taking in this information. We're just digesting, okay? Microbial activity in one area, a lack of it in the other. The area that doesn't have that moss is not protected. Now the okadama is broken down. Is my soil broken down back here? Oh, as I lift up that moss, what do I have below that? I have beautiful white mycorrhizae. I have beautiful white beneficial fungi engaging in the process of nutrient and water uptake. Okay, I see the white mycorrhizae in there. I identify that this area clearly has microbial activity. Maybe this is why the new growth is green. Maybe this is why last year's growth was yellow. Did I do anything else? So I know I repotted it. I see that I have a discrepancy of microbial distribution. I see I have a loss of oxygen percolation because of the compaction of the okadama without that top dressing. We are starting to get deeper into the hole, right? And we're also creating actionable items for ourself. Last year, what else did I do? What else did I do? Ah, you know what I did last year? You know what happened? I tried a compost extract. I heard it on Asymmetry, Mirai's podcast. I thought, dang, they have pretty cool trees. I thought they knew what they were talking about. I tried a compost extract and I noticed several trees in my garden really started showing weird things after that compost extract. So did we. We learned from that at Mirai. What a nightmare. Let's not do that. Okay. But essentially, that compost extract had a significant impact on our soil environments in the container. And what that ended up doing was tying up nutrition. Okay. And so when we start to get down into this, this banded growth that we're seeing on second year needles from last year, and again, let me just show you this because this looks exactly like needle cast as we go through the checkpoints, as we go through the potential causes, we start to recognize that although we want to identify that as a fungal issue, this is actually an issue caused by some manner of mineral application that tied up a certain amount of nutrients, changed the pH and the physiology in the container, and caused last year's needles to be damaged by that process, right? Lack of nutrients, nutrient deficiency. We don't typically see a needle rebound from that. And specifically, if we want to talk about the deficiency, magnesium was the deficiency that caused the yellow banding. Okay. So by that compost extract, we had several trees in the garden show this kind of attrition, right? But here's the thing. The key to recovery of a tree that has experienced a root-related issue is always go back to the fundamental foundation, balance of water and oxygen. What did we do when we started seeing this behavior? Tilted this tree up on its own. It was at a certain angle. I made that water move much faster out of the container, allowed oxygen back into the container. What could we do to make sure that the improvement continues? We've seen green needles on this growth. I actually do see a little bit, a lighter degree of banding, which tells me I'm still getting a nutrient tie up. And I'll just go ahead and put that there. And Jesus is going to blast in and hopefully we can see it all the way in. As far as you can go. Okay. Okay. Just a little bit of yellow banding. Notice it. This is one of the two that's in the middle of my finger, right at the tip there. There's a yellow banding. All right. So we still have a little bit of nutrient tie up, right? We can look at it on a scope. We can see that there's no spores. I don't see any sap or lesions reproducing that. I haven't wired it. There's no mechanical damage, no herbicides, nothing else. The only thing that differentiated a repotted tree. I see the native root system. I see the lack of microbial activity. Okay. Right. The way we fixed it, balance of water and oxygen. And you know what else we did? We went back to the fundamental forms of fertilization. Okay. We went back to the fish hydrolysis. We went back to the kelp. Maybe we returned to the bio gold, right? Now, if I wanted to add to the recovery, because over the course of that fresh repot, top dressing got washed away. Things went awry and the tree wasn't healthy to be creating root exudates that gave us that microbial activity. I got a breakdown of Akadama, which will happen to any caliber of Akadama if it is not protected by rain and by the watering process. I definitely need to come back into this. Clean off the surface area, get down to intact Akadama and friable soil. Top dress again over the fall season where I'm going to be getting fall rains, where I'm going to be establishing more fungal activity as the temperature cools and we get into that range that fungi occupy our soil sites. And just by the action of observing what has happened, I avoided the application of chemical, I utilized the knowledge of understanding something was wrong, identifying that it was canopy wide, acknowledging that I performed an operation last year that was abnormal and recognizing that there are things I can continue to do as the tree improves to not further set it back, but to help continue moving it in the correct direction. This is the trickle down acknowledgement and dissecting of a problem in a tree. OK, I don't actually have to do anything and the tree fixed itself. And yet if I did the wrong thing, I would perpetuate the problem. OK, bonsai problem identification and acknowledgement 101. Right now, I'm going to I'm going to transfer this one out canopy wide issue and I'm going to move to another common problem that we're going to see. That is often misidentified. So let me move this out. Oh. And I'm going to move this in. And we're going to go through the same process. OK, now this is another ponderosa pine. Let me go ahead and let me shift that. No, let me shift that to a more central location. OK, I'm going to focus specifically. On the the areas that I am seeing abnormal behavior. Now, let's just first go through it. OK, I've got browning needles. OK, I've got browning needles. Is this abnormal or not? Well, let me check. OK. I've got this year's growth. I've got last year's growth. The needles that are browning third year needles, third year needles. Wait, hang on just a sec. Third year needle shedding. It's the fall season. Pines shed third year needles in the fall. All of it, third year needles. Is it canopy wide? It's canopy wide. It's canopy wide. The top, the bottom, the front, the back. OK, it's not orientation specific. Are the needles that are being shed third year needles across the entirety of the tree? Yes, they are. Yep. Here, here. Yes, all third year needles. Cool. It's the time of year. It's canopy wide and it's all in the third year needles, which is the growth that the tree is naturally going to shed once it has gone through its four year growth phase. Perfect. What is abnormal about this tree? I've got a branch dying right here. I've got a branch that died. I've got another one right here that several of the branchlets are dying. OK, do I have a disease? Do I have do I have a pest? Do I have a bore? I'm sorry about this. Do I need to tilt this tree up on edge and pull back on water because I have these two branches dying? Hang on. Let me see if this is continuing. Oh, I have another branch dying right here. I have another branch dying right here. So now I've got random branch dieback. And and what Ryan has said is random distribution of damage or random dieback typically means I have a fungal or an insect issue. OK, pull back, pull back. OK. Again. We have a universal dropping of the third year needles in the canopy of the tree at the correct time of year. Beautiful. OK, all of the needles that are still on the tree are green, are healthy, are completely what they're doing, what they're supposed to be doing. The branches that are showing a significant decline. Is there a pattern? Is there a reason for this? Well, let me check. This one seems to be underneath the canopy here. This one seems to be underneath the canopy here. This one seems to be under the canopy here. All of these branches are weaker branches. All of these branches are weaker branches. Well, this one has a bud and this one has a bud and this one has a bud. And those ones had a bud. Doesn't matter. OK, think about this fact. When we transition from summer dormancy or the end of foyer growth into vascular growth, this is the moment in the year where a tree assesses are you as a branch and a needle mass contributing to my energy system or are you reducing my energy system, meaning am I spending more water and more supplemental nutrition keeping you alive than you're creating for me via photosynthesis? Or are you creating more than I'm having to exert to keep you alive? Right. And these branches being branches that are not a component of sustainable design, not in the open realm of photosynthetic productivity. Being more slender, being around stronger branches, being underneath dense areas of the tree. These are pieces that are not kicking off because they have a pathogen. They're not kicking off because I have a nutrient deficiency or a water related imbalance. These are pieces that are kicking off because the tree is naturally making a selection. You are using more than you're contributing. And this is the time of the year where we see the tree make that selection. Wow. So much relief. OK, maybe we're like, no, I wanted that branch. Yeah, of course you wanted that branch. We all wanted that branch. We all want as many branches as are possible. This is the moral of why do we seek to accomplish design, sustainability and photosynthetic efficiency as we lay out a tree? Was this branch ever really going to exist in that location? Not as long as these needles above it were allowed to grow and really thrive and accumulate density and resources, etc. Is the design losing much by these branches being shed by the tree? Not at all. We're going to take the tree's input and the information it's given us. And we're going to move into another form of sustainable design. So when we start to talk about all of these components as they move through our first instinct, our reactive instinct to our tree is not doing well is kill everything, kill, kill the fungi, kill. Kill the insects, kill, kill, kill, kill. And that actually is probably the downfall to your bone size health. That's honestly the move that causes the biggest amount of issue in your trees. I'm going to give you one more thing, OK? Say, for example, that either one of these trees had an area that was massively affected, massively affected by a disease. OK, we see the banding, we see the lesion, we see the spores. And this tree is dropping needles. Right. And I have a ponderosa pine doing this in the garden. I couldn't bring all three of them in because we're limited by space. We'll do this one next time. OK, dropping all of the needles, needle cast to shed the needles, definitely has needle cast. Right. And I'm thinking, oh, my gosh, this is so scary. OK, we had a big phomopsis outbreak on our junipers this spring. Sixty percent of some of the trees shed all their needles. Valuable trees at that rate. Not like crappy bonsai, like really good bonsai. And you think, oh, my gosh, OK, there is a response that a tree has to see the loss of of its foliar mass if it is losing that foliar mass based on a fungal activity or an insect activity. Right. And obviously there's degrees of severity to this. But the response that a tree typically has is that the stored energy and the resources it has preserved in its tissue, it utilizes to generate more foliar mass. Now, when I used to teach my students about fungal and disease activity, I would say if you cut off the infected tissue, it's holding fungal spores, cut off the infected tissue and you should stop the spread. This is this is fungal control 101 in the landscaping and gardening industry, horticulture as a whole. But we're an island in bonsai. And what I've learned is if you cut off that tissue, you cut off the opportunity for the tree to regenerate that tissue. And because it was a pathogen and not a selection of the tree, that tree will most likely regenerate. The foliar mass from that loss of the foliar mass due to that fungal activity. And you say, what's this? You mean a tree that's been stripped of its needles could produce more needles on a branch if it were fungal related? Absolutely. That's exactly what I'm saying. But what is the response to that that we have to be aware of? I lose the needles. I lose transpiration. I lose the draw of water. I have to focus on the balance of water and oxygen. Whether it's a root related issue that's all across the tree, whether it is a sustainable design issue, whether it is a fungal or insect issue that has reduced the quantity of foliage. The only way you get the tree to recover is to go back to the roots balance of water and oxygen. OK, two scenarios today, both of them abiotic issues, abiotic issues related to the containerized environment and the root system. We're going to come back next week and we're going to do one focused on needlecast on pines and phomopsis on junipers and walk you through the diagnosis and talk about the solutions to correct those issues. Be careful with how much you lean on chemicals because there is a strong chance they're doing more harm than good if it is not a fungal activity or an insect activity that we are actually treating. Understand what is abnormal. Understanding what portion of the tree is affected. Understand the global distribution or unique patterns that exist. And then go back into your record book of what did I do or how could I have created this and what will be the solution to get us past this momentary setback in our bonsai's health. I hope that helps to just go anecdotally through the process and understand how we super sleuth a lack of health in our bonsai tree. It is well within all of our grasps to be able to figure this out. And we will continue to break down these scenarios because it is hugely valuable to learn this process. Thank you all. Have a great rest of your week. We'll see you tomorrow on the Q&A. And as always, we appreciate you. Bye for now. 
