What's going on everybody? Wednesday mini stream. Heat damage ID. Ugh. I wish, you know, like, I've had the opportunity to identify heat damage on a few separate occasions at Mirai, but nothing, nothing as pertinent as what we're dealing with now. Having hit 116 degrees, having record temperatures, having, you know, all kinds of unforeseen and never before experienced things at Mirai. And it's tapped into a tremendous opportunity as the garden does serve as an incubator for us to explore, to understand, and to further our knowledge about bonsai. We are at another boundary of opportunity to understand heat damage and all of the indications. And here's the big part about this. That we're going to dig into, it doesn't look the way you would think. First and foremost, we have to understand the notion that heat damage can occur in several different regions of the tree. And this is what is so challenging about heat damage, is we may have a hot day, and we may see after the hot day, a changing of the needle color based on orientation. Now go ahead and bring me in tight here, Lonnie. Okay, now this piece was facing upwards. This piece was facing downwards. Notice the color difference of those two pieces. This is definitively sunburn and it is orientation specific. That's very, very easy to see right here. We've got browning needles, we've got sort of an unfortunate burning to the branch, and then you roll it over and you say, oh my gosh, it's still green. There's still opportunity there. Yes, that's correct. Okay, so orientation specific in a singular heat event. This was one day. That damaged this piece. This was actually damaged prior to the onset of that serious heat. This was probably the indication in terms of this tree's susceptibility to the foyer mass burning that allowed us to protect it over the really significant heat. Okay, this is Colorado blue spruce. So we see orientation specific immediate boom, one event, one side burns. We look at the other side, not burned. That orientation specific indicator is such a big part of what we're looking for. What happens? That says, listen, sunlight on the foyer mass was too intense. Tree could not keep up with water delivery. And again, when we look at the system, the physiological system of the tree, what we recognize is that in terms of the physiological system, the needle mass and the chlorophyll specifically inside of these needles could not keep up with, stay hydrated and cool itself. To the point that it could maintain its structure. So when we see this burn, what we're seeing here is we're seeing a decomposition of the chlorophyll based on extreme light intensity and warm temperatures. Okay. And that again does not completely and totally destroy the tree, but it does create orientation specific indicators. All right. Now, when we get into specifically heat, okay, I'm going to show you this Doug fur, which is taking on some characteristics. Okay. That I think we typically would start to associate. Let me just show you that the white's a little bit intense. I'm going to show you here. Come on in closer. Hey Zeus. Okay. Because what this is showing is it's showing older needles that are shedding. And I have to be honest, there was about twice as many needles. They kind of fell off as I was walking down here. Notice the yellowing and inside of the yellowing notice the banding. Okay. There's some yellowing, there's some red, there's bands. There's like a Brown tip on one of them came. Most of us would diagnose this as a disease. Most of us would diagnose this as a pathogen. We would start chemically spraying. We would start applying some sort of broad spectrum fungicide. And we would say, oh my gosh, this is a total nightmare. Now, inside of this, this is heat. This is not sun. Okay. This is not sun. This is heat. That's causing us. How do we know that this is heat? Because the new season of growth right here is unaffected. This is unaffected. It's completely intact. All of these needles are completely. Supported, but the second year needles, last year's needles are the ones that burned are the ones that are expressing that banding, that striping and all of the things that we typically associate with pathogens. Okay. And so the tree is making a decision here. The tree is saying, listen, which piece am I going to afford all of the water to cool this piece? If I have to choose between older needles and younger needles and the tree is saying younger needles, more photosynthetically efficient, more stable. More support and resources being given to that cuticle sustainability, I'm going to protect that as much as I can. It's freaking hot. It's freaking hot. And these older needles are burning and like the system's going, the older needles are burning. The older needles are burning. And the tree is like, I can't hold them together. And all the resources are pumped into that first year growth. And we hope, we hope and pray that that tree can tolerate that heat and that sun exposure for those first year needles to get by unscathed. Okay. And this is a very, very common aspect of really intense heat when we get that set in high temperature at, in the evening times and then during the day times that sun plus that perpetuation of heat because the tree simply cannot cool itself. And now it's making decisions. All right. Chlorophyll isn't degrading. Chlorophyll isn't burning, right? There just simply isn't a cool water source. We water the containerized environment and we say that cool water should cool it off. No. That cool water. Goes into the container. The container is warm because of warm nighttime temperatures, warm ambient air temperatures, as well as any sun exposure that is hitting that container and warming it up. And we know that in a conifer, the time it takes for a water molecule in the soil to get to the tip of the branch on a pine, seven to 10 days on a juniper, 10 to 12 hours, right? On a deciduous tree, 30 to 45 minutes. 30 to 45 minutes in a 100 degree container. If you put 60 degree water on it, it's still going to be 100 degrees by the time it gets to the tip of that branch. There is no capacity to remove that heat and cool that system. And the second year needles become the sacrificial lamb of that really intense heat. And so when we start to see this and we start to see this banding and we start applying chemical applications to this, we're actually doing things that are counterproductive to the success of the plant. We're actually doing things that are counterproductive to the success of the plant. We're actually doing things that are counterproductive to the success and the recovery of the tree because chemical application coats the first year needles with an opacity that reduces the ability to photosynthesize, right? It also applies chemicals to the tree that change the biology, that change the chemistry, and that start to amass themselves on the foyer capacity and photosynthetic surface areas that we hinge on for vascular productivity to give us the resources for the tree. It also applies chemicals to the tree that change the biology, that change the chemistry, and that start to amass themselves on the foyer capacity and photosynthesize, right? It also applies chemicals to the tree that change the biology, that change the chemistry, and that start to amass themselves on the foyer capacity and photosynthesize, right? It also applies chemicals to the tree that change the biology, that change the chemistry, and that start to amass themselves on the foyer capacity and photosynthesize, right? It also applies chemicals to the tree that change the biology, that change the chemistry, and photosynthesize, right? It also applies chemicals to the tree that change the chemistry, that change the chemistry, and photosynthesize, right? It also applies chemicals to the tree that change the chemistry, that change the chemistry, and photosynthesize, right? a heat event comes with these indicators is the biggest focus now i'm going to show you a meltdown of the roots okay and this is very similar very similar to what we were seeing with the doug fir where we're saying listen this just can't keep up with the heats but now this is where the roots cannot keep up okay this tree had a significant root issue we repotted it in the spring it's been working hard to recover we got that heat and suddenly everything except for the very tip the very newest piece of growth completely deteriorated okay if we have this kind of devastation as a result of heat temperatures or sun it means that our root system has been significantly compromised and cannot keep up with the needle load that it has and it just took that severity of events to wipe out all of those pieces and you see it's sustaining that newest growth chances of this tree surviving with that minimal amount of foliar mass still remaining on the tree slim to none slim to none this would be where heat and an already pre-existing condition and this is where we say listen why do we push so hard towards the balance of water and oxygen why do we talk about the balance of water and oxygen being the key to ultimate health because ultimate health balance water and oxygen means we have a root system balance of water and oxygen in the root system is what allows or creates the environment for new root growth to occur new root growth is worse the stress response the water allocation nutrient uptake enzymatic reaction with microbial activity that causes the chain of events to compartmentalize and upregulate the behavior of the tree to be able to compensate for that intense heat that intense cold that drought that wind that sun etc and help the tree to recover and when you lack that immune system when you lack that ultimate health because the balance water and oxygen is not right and now the quantity of roots that support the tree are not there and then we experience one of those tolerance thresholds where that tree is being challenged or compromised tree can't respond tree can't respond that's where resistance resistance to intense heat is a part of ultimate health in the presence of that root system this tree did not have it consequently it suffered okay so when we think about this we've got the intensity of the sun breaking down chlorophyll we've got heat causing a tree to make natural selection of where the water goes and we have an indication of a lack of ultimate health that has significantly compromised the viability of the foliar mass that exists okay another example and these trees are not far enough along from the heat to be able to see it on camera but we have an actual burning of the branch or the physical trunk of the tree right dehydration of the vascular tissue causing the loss of any branch that was on that physical vascular structure that was burned and there are a few ponderosa pine after the heat dome that are just starting to show a discoloration in the pieces that are at the uppermost portion of the tree chain facing the most intense afternoon sun without foyer masks, covering them and cutting the intensity of that light. I had no idea I needed to be protecting a tree from this, let alone a pine that has massively thick bark. How could I have known? I just didn't, I didn't even think about it, right? When that comes to full fruition, we'll bring those in and we'll do a supplemental piece on heat protection from the perspective of physically exposed vascular tissue. We know it on deciduous trees that sunburn occurs if we leave that really thin bark, high water mobility Japanese maple after pruning exposed to the sunlight. I had no idea that was possible on pines, apparently it is. And if we look at the mountain environment, junipers on the mountain, pines that are old and have a lot of deadwood on the mountain inevitably have their deadwood facing up and their live vein against the rock or beneath their foyer mask, or else they cannot tolerate the kind of heat accumulation on the water conductive tissue, boom, it gets zapped, dries out, cooks, xylem is destroyed, phloem is destroyed, cambium is destroyed, tree is dead, right? And there are portions of several ponderosa amari that are going to die as a result of that heat, okay? But let me talk to you more about one of these additional indications that we started seeing in pines that really led me to think about, wow, beyond just orientation and exposure, making sure that people understand that heat damage can look several different ways. Here's what we're seeing. We're seeing banding. See that banding? Let me just change that. Yeah, there you go. See that banding on that? Now, typically, we would look at this and we would say, do I have dothostroma? Do I have lofodermia? Do I have needle cast? I've got these spots. I've got these red spots. I've got red band, right? It says red band, dothostroma, right? That must be a bad thing, okay? Now, we've got to be very careful. This is where understanding, number one, environmental conditions is so important, okay? What is happening in the environment? Okay, number two, understanding when these indicators started to show up, are we paying attention as we're watering and knowing our trees, right? Because the worst thing to do is to be sort of recognizing that we're just barely getting by watering. We got to rush off to work. You know, we got home. It was dark. I couldn't see. Next morning, we asked our kid or our neighbor or, you know, our partner or spouse to water for us. And then three days later, we're looking and we're like, oh, shit. What just happened to my tree? Right? And when did it happen? And why did it happen? Okay? But if we stay in touch with our trees, right? And we all do our best to do this. If we stay in touch with our trees, we notice when that happened, okay? This is a very healthy limber pine. This is a limber pine that was not repotted this year. Why does that matter that it was not repotted this year? Well, any tree that was repotted this spring, we recognized after the first day, 106 degrees, that those trees that were repotted, since we recognize vascular productivity and new root growth occurs in the fall on freshly repotted trees, they're existing on the root mass that we put them back into that container with, an impaired root mass to say the least. All those trees came into the shade. Okay, but established trees, they sat out in the sun or they sat in areas where we could hopefully protect them, rotate them, shift them, wrap their containers in tinfoil, all of the things. And I'll come back to how to protect trees from heat in just a moment, okay? But this tree was not repotted, right? Everything is going swimmingly well with this tree. Healthy, great flush of growth, amazing needle distribution, energy distribution, all the things that we love to see, okay? And as we got towards the end of the second day, 112 degrees, the second day, as we got towards the end of the second day, I started looking and the old needles, as I touched them, the old needles just started falling off and they're still falling off right now, right? Old needles started falling off and I started saying, oh no, that's not good, okay? Now, older needles better than newer needles. Older needles suggest that there was a water allocation issue in the tree. The tree had to make a selection. But in the needles falling off, this banding and this indicator of that commonly accepted fungal diagnosis of dothostroma, right? And so when we're looking here and we're saying, oh my gosh, I've got banding, I've got spotting, I've got dothostroma. Well, I know that we had just experienced that heat. I know that the heat, prior to the heat, I was not seeing that banding, that spotting, and that needle sort of indicator, allows me to recognize that that too is an indication of heat. And I started thinking about this and thinking, oh wow, if people don't know that abiotic issues can cause the exact same visual indicators of pathogen presence as a pathogen can, then we really start to get into a cycle of treating trees that are not suffering from a fungus and actually impairing their ability to move forward, okay? And so I bring this tree and the pine as a single indicator so you see that there's a pathogen presence. So you see the health of the tree. You understand that, and then suddenly I've got this discolored and dothostroma-esque needle, and I'm saying, wow, this is really, really interesting and something we need to talk about. Now, here's the other thing that we want to look at. What is five-needle pine susceptible to? Number one, not dothostroma, right? Five-needle pine largely thought and largely behave as a resistant variety of tree to dothostroma or red band. So to see indicators of dothostroma on a five-needle pine is very, very important. Okay? So five-needle pine would be to suggest that it is so weak in the root system, it has no immunity, or that we have something else acting on the tree that's causing that indication or causing that similar expression, if you will, of stress in the tree. And that was where heat became that discussion point, okay? So we have, in terms of all of the indicators, breakdown of the chlorophyll on the spruce where we actually see one side take on a very discolored appearance, okay? We had the dothostroma. We had the dug fir where we saw the banding, the yellowing, the browning of the older needles, okay? This is to say the tree is making a natural selection. We had the completely and totally destroyed and cooked older needles as well as newer needles and just the living tip on the subalpine fir. This is to say we have a root-related issue. And then we looked at the pine and we saw, oh, wow, even on a pine these indicators that oftentimes are expressing a symptom of a pathogen, are in fact the response and the result of too intense heat. And again, just the same as we looked at the dug fir and the older needles suffered, older needles suffering on the pine and expressing these indications is a discussion of heat damage. How do we stop it? How do we stop it? How do we prevent a tree from being damaged by heat? Number one, balanced water and oxygen in the roots, okay? A freshly repotted tree that spring is going to be far more susceptible to heat in a bonsai container than a tree that has established itself over the course of years. Number two, a fall season of root growth than experiencing heat the following year, okay? And we already talked about that because the majority of root growth occurs in the fall. If we repot a tree and we're going to experience heat, any repotted tree needs to be protected from an intense heat spell, okay? So we can move that into the shade. We can move that indoors. Do we need to move it into an air-conditioned environment? No, not necessarily. And in fact, that would be counterproductive in all honesty. Just get it out of the direct intense sun, okay? So number one, we start to talk about how do we stop it, move the tree, protect the trees that we automatically are lacking health or we know have susceptibility. Number two, cool down the temperature in the container, right? The roots breaking down, the roots overheating, is going to be directly related not to the temperature of the air, but the temperature of the contact of sun with the container. Oh, how do we do that, okay? We can put a wood board up on the south side of our benches. That covers and shades the container. We can wrap every single container in tin foil. This is a very common technique that a lot of people in higher elevations, this is a Colorado technique that I learned long ago. This is also something that people in the Pacific Northwest have started to do as the summers get warmer to be able to continue to have success with smaller containers on more water-loving species like a hemlock, like a spruce, like some of our deciduous and broadleaf varieties. Okay, wrapping the container in tin foil to deflect that heat, big way that we preserve and lower the temperature in that root zone. This will allow the water that we water with to stay cooler, to be able to remove that heat energy as it moves through that tree, but it will also prevent the temperature of the container from getting to a point where the south side, southeast side, if you're in the northern hemisphere, or the south-southwest side in the northern, north-northeast side in the southern hemisphere are going to heat up too, okay? So we start to recognize, ah, this is an avenue that we can continue to. Ah, be able to work with and help our containers, okay? So move it, protect the container. Number three, rotate the tree. Say, for example, I cannot move all of the trees at Mirai, and Troy and I certainly could not. We could not move all the trees at Mirai. We have, you know, eight or nine hundred trees here. Ah, for three days we had intense, intense heat, right? Um, we didn't even have enough shade on site. I've spent ten years at Mirai trying to create enough sun to have health in the garden. Suddenly I had too much sun and I needed shade. I didn't have any more shade, right? I eliminated the shade, or at least I reduced it to a degree that we couldn't function in the facility to water and everything else and put all the trees in the shade. It just wasn't possible. So what did we do? I started rotating the trees. As I was watering, every time I watered in this intense heat, I would rotate the tree. Water, rotate the tree. Water, rotate the tree. I might not be physically watering that specific tree, but as I was passing every tree checking water, boom, rotation, rotation, rotation. Why did I rotate? So that the same side of the tree did not accumulate heat energy on the needles and on the physical mass of the tissue, that the same side of the container did not heat up because I didn't have enough tin foil to coat every single tree, right? So rotation of your trees to change the orientation so that over the course of that time, there isn't one area that's experiencing all of that intensity and amassing that heat energy, right? Think about heat energy as an accumulation. It's not like a laser that just burns you right when it touches you. It's the sun and the sun and the sun and the sun. It gets hotter and hotter and hotter and hotter and does more and more damage and damage. And then you rotate and it's like, ah, now I'm not facing the sun anymore. And that piece of the tissue cools off and the next piece starts to experience that. Just rotating your trees over the course of an intense heat day will save your trees an exponential amount of damage if you cannot physically put them in the shade, if you can't contain the heat energy, or deflect the heat in the containerized environment, continue to change the accumulation of heat energy and the exposure of the tree to that heat energy and it will go a long ways towards helping you weather that storm, okay? So we've got the big physical move of completely removing it from the sun. We've got some moderate sort of protecting of the containerized environment so we continue to allow cool water to move through that system and remove the heat energy. And then you've got that last piece, which is I can't move it. I don't have the resources to be able to shape it. I can't rotate it. How do I go about this? Rotate. Rotate, rotate, rotate, rotate. The hotter it gets, the faster you've got to rotate, okay? Every 30 to 45 minutes at 116 degrees, I probably at that temperature, if I rotated every 30 to 45 minutes, I probably could have cultivated even a heat-sensitive tree in that temperature, right? Just by changing the exposure and not allowing the heat to amass, right? Obviously, we took sensitive trees out. We left the hardy trees in. We didn't rotate some of them and they suffered. A big, huge study in what heat can do, the damage and the tools that we have to protect our trees once we start to experience or should we have to respond to an environmental factor of that nature, okay? Really big piece of the puzzle for bonsai cultivation because things aren't getting cooler and we're going to have to learn how to adapt more, right? I wish it hadn't happened, but it did. And we're learning, and we're going to continue to share that with you guys. Hopefully, this builds your skills, expands your awareness, knowledge, and understanding, and gives you the tools to be able to weather that next significant heat event. Come back to the live Q&A tomorrow. If you have any questions, we will be here to answer everything that we have the capacity to put some sort of solution to. Otherwise, we'll continue our process building our skills. Love you guys. Have a great rest of your day. We'll see you tomorrow. If not, we'll see you on the livestream next Tuesday. Rigida. Love it. Bye. 
