We're going to go ahead and install the soil warming cables to the chicken wire and what we're using for material here to actually tie this onto the chicken wire. We've got our soil warming cables, screws, zip ties, and plastic clips. The reason for the zip tie is just a zip tie it to the actual chicken wire itself. The instructions are very clear. You do not want to put these on here tight. You just want them to be loose and I don't know what the reason for that is but if they're if they're telling me not to make it tight I'm not going to make it tight. We'll just roll this out. We don't want to put a cable here and do another cable run like that. That would be incorrect. You want to make sure you've got at least a four inch distance between the cables. you Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. So here you see the finished heat bed. Troy did a great job with the construction and really bringing it up to a point where we can use it for the rest of the winter and feel confident that the heat bed is going to be successful. And I just want to come back and kind of pull all of the concepts that we utilized to create the heat bed together so that you have that base foundation of tools in your belt to be able to construct one of these and utilize it yourself. Now, to stabilize and level out the ground, we've placed a very thick layer of high-density foam. On top of the high-density foam, we put a three-quarter-inch sheet of plywood across the totality of the bed to create a level surface that's rigid and isn't susceptible to the heat of the cables or the heat of the mat. Now, here's where mats and cables differ. If we're dealing with heating mats, we would want to be placing the heating mats on top of the plywood and covering them with construction plastic. When we're dealing with heating cables, we can actually place the heating cables inside of the soil, inside of the bed. And this is where our construction needs to be accurate so that we do what needs to be done to protect our source of heat. Again, the mats would need to be placed under the plastic so that they're not submerged in water. The heating cables need to be above the plastic and actually in the medium of the bed. We chose to use a mesh with heating cables attached to hold the cables in place so that they don't rise up to the top and they're not damaged by settling the trees into the bed. We've built ourselves up roughly a four-inch deep bed so that we have a depth that we can settle the trees into for more heat or set them on the top for a minimal amount of heat recovery after repotting or trees that are unhealthy and we're trying to perpetuate or generate root growth in. We've utilized a significant amount of pumice, not screened, fine particles and larger particles in the pumice to get even heat distribution through the moisture that's being held in the pumice so that the heat that the tree experiences is wet, humid moisture and wet, humid heat that allows the roots to stay hydrated as that temperature facilitates their growth. Now the last piece that we need to focus on in terms of utilizing our heatbed to its fullest potential is the discussion of temperature. the discussion of temperatures. We have our thermostat set for 90 degrees Fahrenheit at the bottom of the bed. What that gives us, one inch down where we settle the container into the bed to make sure that we have medium around all of the air spaces, is it gives us an even temperature of 80 degrees Fahrenheit. You'll have to experiment with your bed to understand how the heat moves, where the heat is at the temperature that you're looking for, but 80 degrees Fahrenheit is that perfect temperature for the root zones to maximize root growth without being too hot to damage the roots. In addition to that root zone temperature, to maximize the effectiveness of a heating bed, air temperatures should be kept as cold as possible. Over the course of this winter, the air temperatures in the greenhouse will stay roughly 36 degrees Fahrenheit. As temperatures start to warm up and we get 40, 45, 50 degrees Fahrenheit, that warmer air temperature starts to reduce. The cooler we keep the air, the more effective the root growth is going to be in the heating bed. Warm roots, cold air, that actually propels the tree to produce roots based on this bottom heat. So the cooler we keep the air, the more effective the root growth is going to be in the heating bed. Now you guys have all of the tools, materials, construction concepts, and the environmental conditions that allow you to maximize the use of a heat bed to generate root growth over the dormant season. This is a major tool for you to utilize to get your trees to health, to generate new roots, to recover from repotting, to help sick trees get better over the dormant period. with this technique, the world of bonsai and your ability to have trees recover during the off-season, is elevated to the limit. to a significant degree. Put this to use, good luck, and we'll see you guys in the spring with healthy root growth and stronger trees. 
