With the onset of warm weather in spring, we start that process of integration from trees that were overwintered in the greenhouse to protect from those freezing temperatures or trees that we've kept in the greenhouse after the repotting process to allow them to recover their root system and start about regenerating those roots that we removed to get them into the bonsai container. This process in terms of the movement of trees into the outdoor environment is a very pivotal moment of success in the spring season. Now inside of this greenhouse, we have so many trees and over the course of the past two weeks, the weather went from being in the freezing temperatures and snow to now hitting 75 degrees at Bonsai Morai. Trees are starting to push buds, deciduous leaves are starting to open, and a lot of the trees that we've integrated into the heatbed or have since moved off of the heatbed to start their integration into the process of eventually being movable outdoors are ready for that next step in that next transition. Now as we're in here, moving about, I want to talk about each individual location in the greenhouse. Why did we put trees there? And from that location, how do we go about the process of actually moving them step by step through that acclimation period from the indoors, whether it be the heatbed, to the bench, to the external environment, or from the bench to the external environment in a shady location, partially sunny location to the full sun exposure that they'll live in for the rest of the bonsai year until next winter. This process is very important. It's very necessary to have a high level of observation, err on the side of caution, and give the tree the most time you possibly can to acclimate before assuming all is good and moving it on to the next location. Let's kind of start in the back of the greenhouse. Let's dig into the heatbed. Let's look at the indications of the trees on the heatbed as to why we would be thinking about moving them off. And then let's follow the process through each location and each stage of the tree's recovery from the indoors to the external garden environment. The heatbed location in the greenhouse is the place where all trees that had a severe repot and need a little bit of extra TLC come to have the heat in their roots generated to produce that recovery situation. All of these trees are sitting on a heatbed that's kept at right around 80 degrees Fahrenheit. And that temperature between 70 and 80 degrees causes the metabolism in the tree to focus its energy on root growth, compartmentalization of any cuts or breaks or reduction of the root system, to produce new roots as a result of that temperature really stimulating that movement in the tree. From this location, the trees on the heatbed have to be the trees that are taken care of and transition the slowest from their movement inside the house to outside the greenhouse. We're going to be emptying this heatbed, so to speak. But in order to empty the heatbed, we've got to clear space on the benches because these trees move from the heatbed up onto a bench still in the greenhouse, still under the protection of the barrier that is. Keeping heat in, keeping wind out, and limiting the amount of sun that's pulling water out of their foliage mass. When we move these trees from the heatbed up to the bench, we're going to be leaving them on the bench for two, three weeks. And we're going to be observing how their foliage mass holds water, whether or not they continue to grow. But before we can move them, we still have to make sure that the trees on the heatbed are actually in the condition that allows us to take them off of that stimulus for root growth that is that heat mat. And what we're looking for when we analyze this is, is the presence of the buds swelling or even the potential for just a slight degree of new growth to be occurring. The other factor that we're looking at in the heatbed is looking at, is the tree using water? Is it adequately drying out consistently? How long is it taking it to actually become necessitating of water? And that sort of drying out process, that utilization with the combination of the foliage mass giving us indications, tells us that the root system is beginning to recover, that new root growth has occurred, and we need to triage that by raising it off of the heatbed onto the bench, allowing the tree to interact with the regular flow of daylight length and temperature, before we can ever take it outdoors and integrate it into the garden environment. We will be moving this entire heatbed over the course of the next two weeks, still putting other trees on the heatbed that we come to repot over the course of the next two weeks. But the integration into a bench or onto a bench in the greenhouse is that factor that we've got to be aware of and take great care in observing. After their transition off of the heatbed and prior to them ever being moved outdoors. Once I start looking at trees on the heatbed, the first factor that starts to indicate they're ready to come off is when I see their water utilization increase. Now often times when they start utilizing water, the color will come back into the tree. The green will return and the dormant color will dissipate. Beyond that, I know I can be sure that new root growth is occurring when I start to see the actual tips swell, change color, and potentially even begin to elongate. When we look to these smaller trees, the smaller trees tend to respond to the heatbed even faster than the bigger trees. Just because of the small soil mass that exists around the roots and its potential to hold that heat and really translate that into new root growth. These smaller trees have been on the heatbed for only two weeks and they're already showing signs of recovery, bud swell, color change, and the presence of that new growth tip. I feel confident that any of the smaller trees on the heatbed that are using a lot of water after a period of two weeks have already begun to initiate root growth. If we look in the corner here and we see the Sierra Juniper, this juniper is showing signs that I may have even gone too long on the heatbed. The tree is producing new growth tips and I would prefer to move it off of the heatbed before that happens so that I have an easier time acclimating it into the outdoor environment without it having produced foliage mass in the greenhouse. It's not an issue to have it produce that growth, but it just means I'm going to have to take the process of acclimation up onto the bench and eventually to the outdoor environment. A little bit more slowly so that that soft new growth that started in the greenhouse can harden off adequately between those steps to be able to endure the sun and wind of the external environment. Now the use of top dressing post repot is one of the best ways that we can get a true gauge and indication of the moisture level in the container and whether the tree is actually utilizing water or not. We have a tree that's been freshly watered right here on the right. This is a rocky that's been historically drying out. Consequently, we're having to water it more and more frequently as it produces new roots. Now the tree on the left is also a tree that's been utilizing a lot of water, and you can see that this tree is at a point where it's in need of rehydration. The fact that the timing and the space between waterings is starting to shrink tells me that there's more root growth and more water being moved through the container. Now if you look at this bottom corner of the root mass, you'll see that the moss is still wet on the top dressing down on this lower corner. This is a location inside the root system that does not have roots, and roots have yet to be growing in that portion of the soil mass. Anywhere where the native root mass exists inside of that, we see a drying of the soil mass, and this would encourage us to water, keep those roots hydrated, and continue to perpetuate that balance that allows the tree to further recover and produce more roots. Once we start to see this consistent drying over the course of one, two, three days in the greenhouse, we know it's time to take the tree off of the heat bed and move it to the bench surface. This bench is full of junipers and pines that have recently come off of the heat bed and are awaiting their transition into the external garden environment. Now once we put them on the bench, they're going to experience a lot more temperature fluctuation. They're going to heat up more warm in terms of the foliage mass during the day. They're going to experience more intense sun, not being back in that mass of trees that exists on the heat bed. They're going to have a little bit less humidity, not being as close to the ground. And all of these things allow their roots to start pulling more water to supplement that loss of water. It's going to cause their foliage mass to form a cuticle that allows them to harden off. And we're going to watch and monitor very closely how their foliage mass continues to behave, whether they continue to use that water without the supplementation of that bottom heat, and whether they continue to move forward with the swelling and potentially even initiation of growth in the buds. Observing the tree as it experiences this change in factors is going to be our indication as to how much the roots have recovered and whether or not we can start thinking about moving the tree out into the wind and sun of the external garden environment. This limber pine's been on the bench for roughly four weeks and its candles are beginning to elongate. It's been drying out consistently, its color has stayed very beautiful, and seeing that elongation of the candles is a direct indication that it's time to start integrating it outside of the greenhouse. When we see that new growth starting to form, the last thing we want to do is let that new growth open up inside the greenhouse where it's very protected and in a low light situation. Once new growth starts, that lack of cuticle and the susceptibility to wind and sun increases with that soft, fleshy growth. It's best to get these trees out of the greenhouse before we start to see new needles form and as the candle elongates. Now when I move this off of this bench out into the garden environment, I'm going to place it in a very shady location that also has a limited amount of wind exposure. Wind and sun are the two biggest elements that cause damage to trees freshly repotted or in the acclimation process, and by protecting them from the extremes of those two elements, we give the tree the opportunity to reorganize its root system, strengthen its cuticle formation over its needles to reduce the water loss, and really start to build its system up to be able to integrate into full sun. Let's go take a look at that dappled, protected environment that we're going to be placing this tree in so we can understand that transition from the bench to the external environment. Now when we're moving trees from the bench in the greenhouse to the external environment, we want to find a location in our garden where we have some protection from the wind and where we have a minimal exposure to afternoon sun. This location right next to the greenhouse actually uses the greenhouse as a screen from the wind. We get morning sun as it just crosses low on the horizon of the sky, and then we've got very big trees on the right side of the garden that protect the trees from the afternoon sun. This is the location where I'll be moving all of the trees. However, we also want to pick our moments when we transition those trees into the external environment. Today is a very windy day. This is not the perfect day to be moving trees out, and in fact, I would always choose a very calm day, particularly cool weather, potentially a little bit of rain, although not prolonged rain. Just those elements that help the tree adapt to the external environment and the exposure to things that can be removing water from its foliage mass, but aren't so severe that it's going to create a shock for the tree that could potentially dehydrate it and push it into a downward cycle where the roots can't supply the foliage with what it needs. This location has served as the primary spot for the transitionary period from greenhouse to outdoors for 10 years at Mirai, and it has been a perfect location to give us all of those factors that we need to acclimate that tree and begin to harden off its foliage and its new roots to its life in the bonsai garden. Regardless of whether we chose to put a tree in the greenhouse because it needed cold protection or because we were helping assist its recovery from repot, the staged approach to acclimation is the same. This location in the garden now has a lot more sun and a lot more wind, but is yet to be in a full sun location that fully draws on the tree's necessity to hydrate that foliage mass. The bald cypress is elongating its buds and continuing to move forward with its spring process of foliage production. This is the second staging approach outdoors before we expose it to the complete line of elements and that full sun that really draws that water out of the foliage mass. Assuming all continues to go well as these buds elongate, it'll be placed on its bench in another week and will allow it to produce its foliage mass in full sun, harden off, and really generate that energy that we see needing to be produced over the course of spring to maximize its quality as a bonsai. 
