Hey! Woo! In the house with my man, Peter Warren. Super pumped you're here, brother. I'm meeting. Good to see you. I've missed this guy a lot. Man, I feel like this stream is a long time in the making. When Peter was here doing the azalea last summer? Last, yeah. Yeah. There was interesting dialogue that happened around maples and deciduous trees and sort of one of the big things that you guys have asked for and we talk about a lot is deciduous work and there's nobody better to be educating us, right? He's going to be humble and awkward about that, but it's real. There's nobody better to be educating us about deciduous work and in particular the Japanese maple. In addition to all of his other skill sets, Peter's got a lot of knowledge to drop on us tonight about this and so I'm super pumped to have him in the studio. We got Kendall on the mic this evening. What's up? Got Mr. Arthur producing the stream. Hello, everyone. Got Rick. Ricardo on the detail cam as always and we have the Jedi Lime mealing about in the studio but doing his thing on the audio and before we get started, just wanted to talk about Q&A. Kendall? Thursday. Thursday. April 5th at 12 p.m. 12 p.m. Pacific Daylight Time. Bada bing, bada boom. 12 p.m. Be there, be square. Ceramic sale still happening. Ceramic sale going on. You guys are taking all of our ceramics. Ceramics and I love it. Please continue to take. It's awesome to support these ceramicists and utilize their work. Put it to good use. I'm sure they love it. And so happy that you guys are taking advantage of that. Got some awesome podcasts. Aaron Packard on the podcast last week. We'll have Mr. Warren on the podcast this week, of course. That should be interesting as always. What else do we have? Forum happening and continues to happen. And I do have one piece of business to... Confront before we get started. Okay. Peter came in. I showed him the juniper that we repotted that he designed. He said, you really threw me under the bus on that stream. And I said, did I? And he said, yeah. Ryan, we talked about what I was going to do with that juniper. And you said, yeah, great. Go for it. Signed off on it. We looked at the roots. We looked at the roots. We did. I totally spaced it. So I have to eat. We looked at the roots. There was a promise. There was a promise. I have to eat crow on that one. I definitely... It brought it all flooding back. And I was like, oh, yeah. Shoot. Anyways. Masterful job by Peter. Beautiful opportunity for me to learn as a bonsai professional. Seeing his work. It's in that pot and looks awesome. I hope you're happy with it. It's okay. Okay. Okay. It's very good. It was the best I could do. Right? It was sufficient. Thank you very much. All right. Okay. So I'm going to... Give the floor to Peter and let him rock out. You guys enjoy Peter's knowledge on the Japanese maple. Just a little side note. We've also sort of been cracking the whip with Peter and doing some work on repotting Satsuki azaleas. That's going to be coming up in two weeks. And all I have to say is you're not going to want to miss that stream because it is incredibly informative. And so look forward to that. But anyways, the floor is yours, man. Okay. Well, thank you very much. Thanks for the invite back. It's always a pleasure to be here. And I appreciate all your kind words. Yeah. Not warranted, but hey, there you go. No, we're totally invalid. Who's going to get the last word? Yeah, right. Exactly. So this is an old Peter Adams. I know. So this is like from a British bonsai perspective. This is kind of like some quite dangerous territory that we're going into. I can't, you know, can't sort of go against his wishes too much because, you know, his name carries a lot of weight. So rightfully so. I mean, he kind of, he literally wrote the book on Japanese maples. Cool. Passing of the torch here a little bit. What's that? Passing of the torch here a little bit. Peter Adams to Peter Warren. We don't go too much against his wishes. But I think we've got some pictures of what he was looking at doing. Do we have those, Arthur? Yeah. So this tree currently resides at the Pacific Bonsai Museum. And Aaron Packard has. Oh. Aaron Packard was cool enough to, when he heard we were doing a Japanese maple stream, send this down for Peter to just work his magic on and really continue to evolve the tree and move it forward. Do you want to see that picture? Do you want to show us those pictures? Let's see what we got. So this is winter 2000. Do you want to put the mic up to your mouth, sir, and just give us that narration? So here we have right at importation. It seems like an image of bread as it's brought in from Canada. And then it looks like a year apart. And these 2002 and 2003 was planted in a Gordon Duffet pot. So is this like first kind of first styling sort of iteration and first few years of development? It's looking like it. Very cool. This one is a little smaller just because it's vertical. But this is 2004 and then 2005. I think. What you can tell from the second picture, the bottom picture there is the importance that Pete was putting on the on that lower branch, making it grow up and sort of come like a bit like a second trunk. You know, that change of angle that he's done there was to sort of bring that a little bit more prominent. Oh, interesting. Yeah. And you can see on the top image the negative space that exists between the crown and the lower branching. You kind of filled that space with that piece. If you go down to the picture that he drew. OK, so this is like he's the artist's impression, as it were, of what he was hoping for it to come. And I think the important points to note are that sort of the lower branch on the left hand side, how that's sort of coming up like a second trunk and the roots on the right hand side. Those are kind of like two of the most important design features that Pete was looking to try and to capture. And then this was on the cover of, what is this? Is this a Bonsai Focus? No, this is his book, I believe. Oh, this is his book on Japanese maples. That's not, that's not, that's a different tree. Oh, I got you. OK, but this tree came from that book or it was in that book? I believe so. Yeah. OK. Yeah, very cool. So it's, you know, one of the interesting things in my mind, and I don't know how you feel about this, Peter, but particularly working with museum trees that have a history behind them, it changes, changes the way that we as professionals approach these trees. And it'll be interesting just sort of to hear your sort of hear your impression of that. Absolutely. I mean, when you have like legacy trees like this. You have to kind of respect that legacy, absolutely. But not be, not be shackled by it. And so, like, if there's definitely a change for the better, you shouldn't be afraid to make it. But it's not like decisions that you make lightly. Just come in and just chop branches off willy nilly because you can't, you know. So there was an original design sort of concept by Peter, which was to really kind of like make the most out of this, this very low branch. A lot of people may have been kind of looking at sort of cutting that one off. But as the material sort of stood, there was, there were no real sort of large branches along, along this side. And so cutting that off would have just ended up with a, with a massive space in between there. And so he's, he looked to utilise that and sort of brought this up almost like as though a second trunk. So we could imagine this is like a twin trunk tree, although this is a branch and not a trunk. That's something I talk about quite a lot with the, with students and things like looking at those sort of tree structures within trees. And you can almost, you can almost make like a twin trunk tree from, from like halfway up. When you look at a lot of deciduous trees growing in nature, they grow up, they split into two, and those sort of two major sort of lines, branches, sort of fight against each other to try and grow up and become the top of the tree. And, you know, this one branch in itself has a tree-like structure. And we could, we could air lay that off at the bottom and we could have something that looked very much like a tree. And so Peter sort of understood that clearly and looked to utilise that. And so we're not really going to sort of deviate too much. There would be no, no value at all in cutting off that lower branch at all. So that, but it's a question of like how are we, how are we going to best sort of utilise that and make his, his vision sort of come true. Because one thing that's definitely sort of developed over the last sort of slightly different perhaps I think from the image is this branch that's coming out here. That's sort of definitely sort of sticking us very much in the, in the, in the, coming towards the front of the design, sticking us in the outer. And this back, the back section of it is kind of like, it's, it's kind of escaping off towards the back. I mean, it's pointing off towards me right now, the sort of the central line of that branch. So it is kind of like escaping off towards the back a little bit. Another thing I think that's sort of changed a little from, from his ideas is how prominent this branch has come towards the front as well. So that's something that we might want to look at. I don't know what's happened here, whether or not that branch has been growing out to, you know, this is like some kind of, you know, maybe there was some kind of root grafting going on there to sort of improve the nobari. So I think from a design perspective, I mean, ostensibly we were going to talk about maple refinement rather than sort of focusing on design too much. Because this is the sort of correct time of year to be looking at refining the sort of the tertiary branches, the branch tips and looking at how we deal with that. But we do need to look at some design aspects of this. So we're going to start off by, by sort of exposing the nobari because, I mean, it's the same with any tree, but very, very, very important part of deciduous design comes from the nobari. How the, you know, the roots come up out of the soil. You can throw that on the ground if you want. There appears to be quite a lot of sphagnum moss growing in there. I don't know if that was deliberate in order to try and kind of like get some roots to come out. It looks as though there's been some, some deliberate scarring underneath there. So I'm guessing that the previous work that was done, work that was done on it was sort of, you know, this has been cut underneath here to try and stimulate some root growth coming out of there, but that's not been successful. Okay, so underneath here, it might be a little bit difficult. Let's see if I can't get some of that crap out there, but can you see that there? So somebody has come in and kind of cut through that root going across there, that's sort of calloused over a little, and we can see some of the heartwood going in under there, so somebody's clearly tried to try and get some new roots coming out of there, because that is one of the major kind of faults, I think, I would say, or issues that we need to deal with, rather than the big fault with this tree, is that the nabari is lacking in place, it's clear there's, maybe there's one root come out from there, but we've got a big gap in here, and I think that must be the reason why this has been sort of, maybe that was thread grafted through. In order to develop some nabari on this side, which could, I mean, I wouldn't want to bet my entire career on it, but it could be one of the reasons why this is slightly more developed than the rest of the tree. I mean, it's much of a muchness with how far developed that is, but we've got some extension in these younger shoots in here, which we don't have on the rest of the tree so much, everything's still just on the... They're just opening up, whereas these have actually opened up and come through to, we've got the first set of leaves, can we see that, are we seeing that okay? So we have that first set of leaves, and then we've got another extension coming out of there, that's just on this one shoot here, the rest of the tree, we don't have that. So that, well, we have it here, so maybe that's not quite true, but that's, you know, it could suggest that that has been a different sort of variety of Japanese maple, or even the same. Yeah, so that's a different variety of Japanese maple, but just ever so slightly different genetics that's been grafted through there. So that's an important point to consider when you're grafting in branches and things like that. You know, if you need... The best way to do it is to, if you need a branch anywhere, is to do something like this, which is to grow out a long branch from inside the tree, and then if we needed that for approach grafting, grafting it in somewhere like that, because then you know you've got exactly the same DNA. Okay, so that's one point to consider, although, you know, kind of clutching at straws a little bit there, can't be 100% certain. It's always tough, isn't it, to know? Unless you've done it yourself, you don't know. Yeah, when you work on old trees like this, it's like, it's a little bit of a Pandora's box, you know, it's like, in a little bit of a sort of a time capsule slash box of goodies and mysteries, you're doing your best to suss it out, but it is interesting. But the thing is, I mean, if you are just sort of grafting in the roots themselves, and you're not worried about what's on top, then it can be kind of, it can be any seedling of, you know, Japanese maple. It's not a concern, you know, what foliage type it is. Obviously I asked me, you know, the same family and ideally the, you know, so if you do this is just normal Japanese maple, then you grafting in Japanese maple. If it was a, you know, a Shishi Gashira, then you would be wanting to graft in Shishi Gashira, because each of the sort of different sort of sub-varieties have aль have their own slightly different bark characteristics and things like that and so you could end up seeing some of those differences in the long-term development of the tree. So we're just sort of exposing the nebari down here, we've got one very strong root that's come from this section here. Now the development of deciduous trees has got to happen both above the soil and below the soil concurrently. When you see the Japanese maples that you see in the top exhibitions in Japan they have this phenomenal nebari and that didn't happen by itself. People working on that, repotting every couple of years, combing the roots out, controlling the balance, controlling the strong roots, allowing the weaker roots space to flourish, until that very balanced, even root system got created. And in doing that, it enabled the top of the tree to become nice and balanced, fine branching system. So unless you start to build that up, it doesn't have to be like a perfect Nibari, but it has to be the right type of root system. So we're looking at trying to avoid big, thick, heavy roots. And this is the same for all deciduous trees, really. We're looking to avoid any big, thick, heavy roots and looking to really maximise the finer roots, the finer feeder roots, the lateral roots, just so that we get finer branches on top. Now, just looking at the branching structure on this tree, we know there's a fairly good root system underneath there. But more work needs to be done to try and improve some of the root system from a visual perspective. So we've got a big gap underneath here. There's no surface stability. There's no roots coming out there, giving it a sense of stability. We've got a very young root in here. Peter, does this tree fall into a specific sub-category of Japanese maple? I don't know. It's too difficult to tell at this time. In terms of species? In terms of species. Is that what they're asking? I think so. Yeah, I mean, it's too difficult to tell. I mean, the leaves would need to really come out. Do we have any information on that? Let me take a look. Okay. Let me take a look at Mr. Packard's email. I think he just said it was just Japanese. Yeah, I think as far as everybody knows. Japanese maple. Just a standard Japanese maple. Yeah, I think it's just a regular Acer palmatum. But let me... Acer palmatum in training since 2000, acquired by the Pacific Bonsai Museum in 2015. And it's been in Peter Adams' hands the entire 15 years prior to acquisition. So that's all the information that they have. Okay, so we've got a very sort of strong, young root coming out here, which there'll be... I would almost guarantee there'll be a large proportion of a finer root system will be on that. And what we'd definitely be looking to in the future to try and do is to try and get some side roots coming off of that. Okay, so pruning that one back the next time it gets repotted will be an important part of the development. We've got a tiny little fibrous root kind of coming out there. Okay. I have to try and be careful not to damage that. But until that root gets kind of held back, there's going to be no incentive for the tree to start sending out other roots. Because it's just like, well, I've got all this fine root system here. I'll just use that instead of trying to send out some fine... these weaker roots down there. So we've got to hold that back and try and make the tree grow roots elsewhere. Now, health-wise, the tree investing a ton of strength in a root like that, does that compromise the tree's health and refinability as a bonsai over time? I'd say the health of the tree, because it's got a healthy root system. So as far as the tree's concerned, it's fine and it's healthy. All it's going to do in terms of the refinability is perhaps make it a little bit more difficult to... it's going to definitely make it more difficult to build up the bari. And you might start to see it slightly more difficult to build up the finer ramification. Although, I mean, just looking at it, what it's been worked on over the last couple of years, it doesn't seem to be an issue with that. But that root will definitely need to be looked at and held back in the future. I would also definitely be looking at trying to... rather than trying to kind of like ground layer roots coming out of there, maybe look at grafting roots in. If it's not going to sort of send it out by itself, I mean, it doesn't appear to have calloused over very vigorously. And so perhaps that root... perhaps this section of the tree... perhaps this section of the tree... perhaps this section of the tree... perhaps this section of the tree... perhaps this section of the root is not being used by the tree. And so trying to graft in roots to something that's not being fed from above is going to be very, very difficult. You know, it's like trying to graft into a dead piece of wood. It's not going to happen. I mean, it's still alive. It produced callus, but it's not functioning with a lot of vigors, what you're saying. We've got one tiny root coming out from that area. So there is something going on. And is that directly below that kind of void area of branching on that side of the trunk? That's coming out from here. Uh-huh. So not from this area that's kind of like tucked down and underneath the trunk. So this will have been a root that kind of like is tucked down, gone underneath, and just got lost in the mass on the inside. And what should have been done much earlier on, you know, the first repot when this was done was that should have been sort of cut back really, really hard, very similar to what we talk about with the azaleas, just so that we're not having those roots that are kind of getting lost underneath. So we could have a lot of fibrous roots. Fibrous roots, kind of around here, right at the back of the tree, that were coming from that, sort of coming underneath that. What we really got to look at developing is all of those roots coming sort of horizontally out, but laterally out, laterally out, laterally out. And that can require some quite drastic repotting. A couple of trees that I've done, you know, sort of field-grown trees in the UK, I took a chainsaw to the roots, grinding away with a little chainsaw attached to it. Or attachment to a rotary power tool, just grinding away, just getting them sort of ground down so that the only roots that we had were coming out. You can be really quite aggressive with younger deciduous trees when you're repotting. The older they get, the older they get, the less aggressive you can be. But when, you know, in that sort of first early repotting, you've really got to sort out that root system for success. Okay, so what I would definitely be looking at would be trying to develop some more roots coming from here. I mean, we've got another couple coming out from this section, but there's very little coming from around here. So basically the tree just sort of comes down to here and starts taking the nutrients. So, you know, developing roots out across here. We've got very little coming further around. But that's something that you'd need to really look at in repotting, and it's not something we want to be looking at today. Would you approach graft during the repotting process then if you were going to approach graft to try and add roots there? Yeah, yeah, that's definitely possible. You could also do it like, I mean, if you've got enough space like in here and you've got the right-shaped whip, you know, the right-shaped seedling, you could try doing it now, not necessarily during a repot to try and get it into that. That would be possible. Okay, but we've also got problems around the back here. The same thing, that's been tried to be done. Okay, so we've had no new roots sort of coming out from there. And that's not a sort of reflection on the person sort of doing the technique, so much as, you know, where the tree is focusing its resources on in terms of the roots. So if it's not really sort of taking many resources from here, then even if you open that up and sort of look at the roots, you can see that there's not a lot of new roots coming out from there. So that's not a sort of reflection on the person sort of doing the technique, so much as, you know, where the tree is focusing its resources on in terms of the roots. So, you know, we're trying to do that kind of ground layer where you put some root hormone on, pack it with sphagnum moss, if there's no traffic going up and down there, there's going to be no new root development. Okay, so it's not necessarily a reflection on, you know, whoever did this, so not calling you out. Paul's curious how you're going to hold back the older root. Hold back the older root. Well, this big one down here. I mean, it would need to have a look at, you know, what's going on underneath there. You need to sort of take the whole thing out and kind of like almost bury the whole thing and have a look at it, which is something that the older the tree gets, it's a more and more risky process to do. If we were going to do that, then what I would look at doing is just kind of like giving it free growth for the year before, build up the energy, build up the energy, not worry about the branching structure, and then get in and attack it. But it would be a case of sort of taking it out and really taking all the soil off and getting in and it's like open heart surgery or open intestinal surgery. So it's quite a big operation to do. And you prepare, you're saying you prepare for that. If you're going to do it, then you build the tree up. Be fertilizing from the spring onwards, letting it grow, getting it full of energy, and then have a go at it. And would you say that roots behave a lot like the branching in terms of a branch wants to, this tree wants to be a big tree, the branches want to grow long. If you don't prune them back, they're going to get bigger and bigger and thicker and thicker. The root's the same. So on this back root that you say is quite young and coarse, and you say you have to manage the length of that and prune that back to get it to laterally produce roots right in there. I mean, it's almost exactly the same as you handle the branching. It's all exactly the same. There's hardly any difference between them. Nice. Okay, and that's one thing that a lot of people just fail to really kind of appreciate with the repotting. Everybody looks at repotting. It's being like refreshing the soil and being some kind of like horticultural requirement when it's just as important part of the starting process as wiring the branches, as pruning the branches. And so not being afraid to have, I mean, the gentleman we always kind of refer to in Japan who was like a Japanese maple master, this guy called Ebihara, and he could take a seedling to cockafoo level in 17 years. Unbelievable. The tree looked like it was 50, 60 years. And sometimes it would take him two days to repot one tree. He would just be combing all of those roots out. He would have it all exposed for two days, constantly spraying it, constantly making sure the roots didn't get dry up. But he was literally physically placing every single root in the direction that he wanted to. And the trees always survived. And so sometimes you need to do that big surgery. Ebihara was intense. Who was it? Ebihara. Was intense. Intense. Sounds intense. That guy was intense. I mean, he could Frankenstein. Yeah, he could Frankenstein anything, but it was, you know, not necessarily long-lived. So Tom has a question. He says, would you ground layer and just create a whole new Nibari? Well, I mean, that's essentially what's tried to be done. So cutting through that, you know, the roots there and packing it with sphagnum moss, that's essentially what's been tried to done, ground layer. And that has been partially successful. And so perhaps, you know, have another guy doing that in some of those areas. But, you know, and then the next repot, making sure that these roots have a lot, you know, we do have a few roots coming out from there, you know, making sure that they've then got the space to kind of grow. So holding back other roots that could be attached to this section. It's impossible to say without getting into the actual kind of the heart of it. But we would definitely be looking at favouring any of those roots that are coming out, maybe having another guy sort of doing that ground layering. And definitely sort of, you know, coming back in and holding back something like this. OK, so that's kind of exposed the Nibari. And it is quite an interesting one. We have this big kind of like hollow in here that I've been sort of digging out at. And we've got another couple of scars that we might need to sort of look at dealing with. We've got some deadwood in there, which isn't really a big issue for me in this aspect. It's kind of maybe give it a bit of interesting character. It's got to this sort of stage. We've got close ups on that. OK, like we're not going to get that to heal over unless we graft in something, you know, big and thick and grow it out. We're not going to get that to sort of heal over. And to be honest, I mean, why should we? I mean, not every maple has to come in with this perfect Nibari, you know, this spreading out and everything and be without that kind of character. Yes, we want to work on getting, you know, a well-balanced root system. But we can still have that, you know, a well-balanced where we don't have any strong roots coming off of here. We don't have any strong roots coming off of here. All of the roots are kind of at the same strength. But it doesn't have to be this perfect elephant's foot plate Nibari. That's not what we're necessarily going for. And so actually sort of working on this and making it a bit more of a kind of a character feature could be something that we would work into the design. So I'm just going to try and dig out as much of that sort of deadwood as we can. And it's something. And it's something else that we've got to look at around here as well. So we've got one big wound. This is where, you know, a branch had been cut off previously. And that could be one of the reasons why, you know, some of these roots along this side have been less sort of incentivized to send out roots, why they're not been working quite so much. Because they would have been perhaps the roots that were sort of directly feeding that branch that would have been cut off a long time ago. And so now there's no sort of direct line. There's no direct line of any foliage above it feeding those roots and allowing them to grow. Do maples work linearly like that? When branches are very low, I would say absolutely. Interesting. And when you do cut back big branches above, you will see dieback. So like here, we've had a big prune back here. We've not had any dieback. I don't know if this branch had been. grown before that had happened, but quite often you will see maybe just a little kind of like V of dieback after you make a big, big cut. And so there is a certain amount of linearity to the live vein movement, particularly the lower down you go on the tree. But, you know, once we kind of like get up to here, it's not as kind of like delineated as you would do with, say, you know, junipers and other trees and things like that. But we do have a big wound here, which is calloused over very nicely. It's calloused over at the top and sort of at the bottom. I think it's probably reached a kind of like a point where it's not really going to. OK, so it's calloused over nicely at the top and at the bottom, but it's kind of like reached a point where that sort of central core of the heartwood in there is kind of rotted away a little bit because it was a big wound. And that's not going to callous over and become. Complete, OK, because there's nothing in there for it to callous over. And so what we're going to look at doing now is just putting a bit of some putty, some epoxy putty in there just to kind of replace the wood that was there so that callous can sort of hopefully join up and sort of complete itself. Like a putty that fully hardens and gives it a backbone to roll on more or less. And we've got the same same situation coming up here. So. So we've got a little this is an area like this one down here is basically there's there's no water can collect in that. So the rotting of the wood is kind of like stopped. But up here, you know, rainwater, water in the tree and such like this could be an area where water would collect in there and start to kind of like rot out the heartwood, which isn't going to affect the health of the tree so much. But we could end up with a big hollow trunk if we weren't careful, which could be an interesting character feature. And I have seen some trees that are like that. But in this case, we want to try to avoid that. So we dig out all of the kind of the decay, a bit like going to the dentist. I have a very dentist like tool to to do that. Yeah, that looks serious. Oh, yeah. I once bought about 15 of these in Japan and I was going to bring them back and give them as gifts to. But to my customers and I rather foolishly left them in my I had my carry on luggage. So I'm going through security and they're like they pulled my bag aside and I was like, oh, it's it's just a stone. I had a suicide in there as well. It's probably just a stone that you're seeing on there. That's fine. It's fine. And they're like, they bring out all of these lethal weapons. And like, what are these? I was like, oh, OK, but you can go and check them in. I was like, keep them. Just keep them. Yeah. Take them home for you. Kids. So what we're going to use to fill those two gaps is sort of an epoxy putty, two part putty that you kind of mix together, available from all good home stores, et cetera, all good retailers. It's a two part putty. So we have A and B on there. We mix it together. It becomes hard. We pack it in there. And as Ryan just said, it kind of like gives it a backbone to kind of. Callous over. Dude, I'm so pumped you're doing this. Why? Just because I think a lot of people have, you know, I think a lot of people have questions about this. And, you know, I think sometimes you see people use cement and cement on deciduous trees seems to be counterproductive towards that rolling process and stuff. And so it's cool. It's cool that everybody gets to watch you do this tonight. Well, the cement, I mean, field growers would have used that. So Korean, Chinese field growers and some Japanese field growers would have used it in the past. But, yeah, the cement doesn't really work too well because it sucks moisture out of the tree, basically. And so this is a much kind of better way of I mean, some people will put what's the stuff, the putty, the wound sealant type thing in there, but that shrinks as well and sort of flakes away. And so this is really the best type of product to use to fill that up. So you mix it up until it becomes both components and mix nice and tightly together. And then we pack it in into that hole. Also, like a plus on the safety measures today. A plus. Yeah. Way to wear gloves, man. Like the biggest warning on the label of that epoxy is like, don't let this touch your skin. Don't let this touch your skin. Don't let this touch your skin. Don't let this touch your skin. Yeah. Pretty much. I've never read the safety instructions, but. You're way ahead of it. Yeah. I just know that using it and then you start touching stuff and your tools start sticking to your hand. It's just. Your skin starts falling off all of a sudden. Well, there's that too. Troy doesn't acknowledge that. Well, actually, maybe Troy. I don't know. He wears gloves. Does he wear gloves? Yeah. I must be the only one. Ryan, you're not really known as a safety guy. Safety guy. I need to up my game. I need to up my game a little bit. I do. I had on eye protection when I was weed whacking today. You had on goggles? Yeah. While you were weed whacking, but not when you're having a chainsaw in your hand. This just doesn't work out like that sometimes. So we want to get this just underneath the callusing section. Get it packed in as tight as we possibly can. Push your knife in. And both of these areas. Well, I mean, that one at the moment is on the front of the tree. And thankfully, this is this is colored very sort of similarly to the, you know, the bark of a maple. So it shouldn't stick out too much. You can get various different products that are slightly different color. There's some that work under water. There's some. There's all sorts of different stuff out on the market. Uses body filler. All sorts of different things. OK. Yeah, that looks good. Looks nice. Kurt says, would you want to use antifungal on the deadwood before putting this epoxy on? I mean, if it was rotting away, then yeah. But essentially once I mean, it's once this gets over the top and hardens it off and, you know, it's it'll be fine. I've never I've never seen any any issues with not treating it before. Before doing. You feel like I feel like work on deciduous trees and and, you know, specifically Japanese maples, but also maybe not specifically Japanese maples is a lot of this kind of like just watching you work on it, sort of analyzing these situations and exposing the roots and really. Do you feel like it's a lot of that really detail oriented finer work to really create a beautiful deciduous tree? Deciduous. Working with deciduous. Deciduous trees is something that takes a long time. There's no immediate kind of gratification. And it is all about the fine details. And as much as I love Japanese maples and like look like working on them, the best trees that I have, like within my bonsai sphere are not in my own home because it's so time specific, like some of the work that gets done to it. And we'll get on to that when we start looking at the pinching of the new shoots and things like that. You know, if you don't hit it at exactly the right time, you know, you can essentially like you lose a year. And so a lot of the maples that I have in my own personal collection, as it were, are things that are kind of like being rebuilt and where I'm just looking at just letting them grow and healing wounds, working on the Nabari for a couple of years, making sure that kind of like primary branching structure is, you know, I'm getting the right thickness and taper to those branches. And there's no work being done on kind of like the finer ramification because I'm just, you know, I can I can hear them growing at the moment. And I'm here, you know. Ryan, I've heard you describe Japanese maples as finicky. Why is that? I mean, I think it's exact. So there are no Japanese maples at Bonsai Mirai for the exact same reason that Peter just Peter just discussed that you do. You got you have to be there. You have to be on it. You know. And I'm sure when Peter gets into the pinching and sort of the work to refine the tips and stuff, he'll talk about that. But also, you know, Bonsai Mirai produces a lot of coniferous trees that have rougher bark and we wire trees and then the wire stays on for a fairly long period of time. And you don't suffer on rough bark trees because those wire scars disappear and the bark builds up over it and you never see it. But on a Japanese maple, if you leave that wire on too long, you'll see that scar for the rest of that tree's life. And I think that's where the finickiness from my perspective exists in Japanese maples is it's really that they're unforgiving. You make the wrong cut at the wrong time. You get dieback, like Peter said, and and you leave the wire on too long and you'll you'll never be forgiven for that. And it's just not in our realm to be able to pay that close of attention to a tree. It definitely suits a very kind of, I'll say, OCD type personality. But somebody who is very. You know, that attention to detail. So people like accountants, you know, accountants, accountants specifically, you know, that kind of person, somebody who's like craftsmen who are very kind of like there's a lot of attention to detail and they can go through and just, OK, do it. And they're just on it all the time. And so the deciduous people are very good at deciduous trees are generally kind of like that type of person. I'm not I mean that with all due respect. You know, I'm not saying that it's it's a bad characteristic. I've got a little bit left there. So but, you know, it does require a very different mindset. It requires some who's good at long term planning, someone who's got a long term vision and knows exactly how to sort of work on it. So. Rafi says, so is there a chance that the epoxy putty will never be covered over and then it will eventually it will that's that's the plan. But. The way that the calluses were, they would never have healed over completely because there was nothing for them to heal over onto. What's that? What's that stuff called? What about fix it? Stick all purpose bonding putty. Boom. Fix it. Brought to you by brought to you by causes skin and eye irritation may cause allergic skin reaction. Gloves. There we go. Boom. So this is it's essentially going to give the tree a reason to heal over. Yeah. So hopefully the you know, but the how much it's calluses over depends on how much activity there is directly above it. And so maybe that's as much as it's going to go down here because there's nothing sort of really obviously directly kind of like flowing down from above it. And then if it doesn't heal over, could you just sort of dig it out? I mean, that's something to look at in the future to see how that to see how that goes. This one, I would imagine, would heal over very easily. Because there's there's plenty of stuff above it. We've got this branch underneath it, which we've never really looked to cut off. And so the chance of that one sort of callusing over really quite nicely will be greater. And then how long how long do you think it will take to heal? The older a tree gets and the more refined it is and the more you kind of like I definitely sort of like you're looking at holding it back and working on the refinement, the longer it takes. So when you're making kind of like big trunk chops, big branch chops, that's that's really kind of like one of the first sort of stages. Of development with the deciduous, you know, you look at getting the taper to the trunk, the movement in the trunk that you want. And you may be doing that by cutting back once or twice in the trees sort of life. And during that time, you want to be making sure that, you know, those wounds heal over. And that's essentially what kind of what has been done. I'm sure that's what Peter was kind of planning on, because if you look at a lot of the trees that he created, they are very much kind of like he understood the importance of kind of that. You know, the stages of going through, you know, you work on the trunk and that primary branching structure first. You get the you get those in place and then you start working on the on the refinement. You can't do them all at the same time. So. Thankfully, with with kind of if we're going to keep the front of the tree kind of like here, this one at the back, we can't see too much. We can see that one there. So it might be a bit of a bit of concern for us from a style perspective. If it doesn't look like it's going to heal. Over in the next couple of years, then maybe we take it out and start thinking about maybe making a character feature out of it, maybe carving it up a little bit. It depends on what happens with those roots. So you're giving it the best chance to heal, at least at the moment. What we've done now is going to give it the best chance to kind of callous over another technique that you can use to to to help it to callous over is to cover it with aluminum foil. That's one sort of thing that both people in Japan and I've used the technique that I've used. I hope I might have some in my in my bag. You want some? I can go grab some if you've got some. Yeah, I'll go grab some real quick. The theory behind it. You ask different people different things. Nobody really kind of like has come up with a phenomenal explanation as to why it works, but it does tend to help sort of callousing over. I mean, essentially, the theory is that it reduces the heat in that area and it's going to reduce any kind of like direct damage. Sort of sunlight. Damage to it and allows for quicker callousing. So what we could look at doing that on some of those two there. And David David asked, have you ever or do you believe in scarring the edge of the callous to have it heal quicker or perhaps putting graphs above or over the wound to sort of move traffic? Yeah, I mean, there's definitely something that you would perhaps look at doing with making sure that you've got like a branch directly above it. If the trees are a lot younger in the development of a lot younger. In its development, it always kind of try and plan out the major wounds in that way. Generally, if a tree is really vigorous, you make a big cut, it's going to send out sort of shoots from from the area, which is what's happened here. That would be my guessing anyway, rather than it being sort of grafted through or anything like that, you know, wounds being made and that that's happened here. But in this case, that's not going to help to call us that over because the energy that is generated by that branch is going to sink down, not going to go back up. But what this branch has done is stopped any dieback. So if you are making like a big sort of chop, trunk chop, then sort of planning it so that you've got branches above and below is always the quickest way of getting it to callous over. And yeah, I mean, if you you can make it sort of rewound it and get it to sort of callous over. That is something that people do with great success. But I think in this case, this is quite an old callous. We're just going to have to hope that. That it goes over. I need to be sticky. Maybe I've got some in my back. Yeah. Sticky. Sticky back. Existed. Boom. Came prepared. Should have got it out earlier. So we're going to add some bling to the tree. So this is they use it for like ducting plumbers. Electricians. Maybe it's easily available in hardware stores. Just kind of shiny aluminum tape. Where are we at? Sticky. And so what we're going to do just have enough to kind of like cover that. I love how I ran all the way up to the house and bought it, brought a big. Peter's like, oh, I have it in my bag. Yeah, actually, you know what? That's not what I need. Don't make you work. I wanted sticky aluminum foil. Yeah. That's a little bit of bling. Jeff has a Japanese maple with hardwood exposed down at the soil line and it's starting to rot. So would this epoxy trick? Do you think it could work with this situation? Contact with the soil? Then no. Yeah, so that this is just going to, like, wake up moisture from the soil. It depends on the situation. It could work. I have to see the tree in person. But if it's in contact, I mean, like, all that stuff there, you know, that's been exposed there, that's just going to be constantly in contact with the moisture and just wicking it up. But if it's in a situation like that, then maybe what you could look at doing is making, excuse me, back to you, making a character feature out of it. There's no reason why you can't have a hollow trunk maple with lots of deadwood on it. The reason why we're kind of like looking at. You know, really working on the wounds here is that this isn't that type of tree. OK, so we'd like to try and get those to heal over nicely so that we can't sort of see them so that we get a little bit more of a smoother trunk line. OK, but if like half the trunk is dead, you've got like a massive wound and it's kind of like hollowing it out, then just go with that. OK, so we've looked at work. We've exposed the Nabari. We know what's going on there. We've looked at sort of dealing with those two relatively major wounds. We don't have to worry about this one up here. We've got that on the close up, you know, because there's a branch attached to that. There's loads of stuff happening above it. And so that's that's callusing over it quite nicely, you know, by itself. OK. OK, so we don't have to worry about that. That's just going to sort of call us over by itself. The only thing we would. And that has been dealt with very nicely. And in the fact that it's kind of like ever so slightly sort of concave, so it's not proud sticking out from the trunk. So that's going to once that heals over, that's going to heal over nice and smooth. So we can just leave that as it is. OK, so now what we need to start looking at is how can we now sort of take this forward, visualise the design that Peter was thinking about and, you know, what are the major issues that we have with the design? Now, it's kind of. A tale of two trees like the from here upwards on the main trunk, this is like a kind of a quite an orthodox looking tree. The branches kind of got kind of like almost sort of horizontally. It's getting starting to get a little bit kind of like clunky up at the top. It's very sort of dense with some thick, heavy branches up there. And then we've got this branch down here, which is kind of like it's very unorthodox. It's got a lot of very interesting kind of characters, a lot of sort of dynamic movement to it. And so it's kind of like the two aren't really sort of talking to each other very, very well. And as we sort of saying earlier, this one's really sort of sticking out of the back quite a lot. And it's not as prominent as I think it should be because this is a very characterful branch and we should really be looking to kind of like design the tree around that. And so with that being the front there, I mean, as I said earlier, this is this is coming out towards me here. OK, so we'd like to try and get it a little bit more. Towards the front, OK, but then we start bringing it round and round and round, and then this branch is kind of covering the trunk and maybe the upper section of the of the tree is not quite as interesting. Then everything is kind of like going across to that side a little bit too much. And so one thing that I was looking at before we started, I was perhaps one of the better ways to kind of get this to its fullest would be to perhaps look at it from this side. What the thumbs up, I'm into it, I'm into it, yeah, I'm into it and what that not what I think matters, but I'm just saying, like, I'm into it and what that what easy and what the by doing this, by looking at from that side a little more, what happens is we kind of solve the problem of having this branch sticking out towards the front. We solve the problem of having this big sort of scar visible. But yeah, and then again, we we create a bit of an issue by having this scar visible, so it's, you know, six and two threes. We solve the issue of having that kind of a little bit visible, although we did say that could be a character feature. So it's all kind of like different things in the balance. And then we have the same issue with the lack of roots here in the lack of roots there. So they're kind of like from under Barry perspective, it's it's kind of a bit much of a muchness. The other big problem that we have with flipping it round to that side. Yeah. Is that the apex and everything is going definitely kind of like moving away from us quite a lot. So if we look at perhaps just tilting it up a touch, bringing that top towards us a little bit more. And then looking at it from that perspective, then it looks kind of good looks like it looks a little bit better. But then we look at it. From that side, and it's kind of like, well, that's actually kind of interesting as well. Hmm. This is quite a difficult tree to make make some make these big decisions. The big I think one of the big issues that we have is this big branch here. How horizontal that is. Okay, we can't remove it from either either side and really kind of like end up with a with a much better tree. So I think what we would want to be looking at doing is kind of like dealing with this helps thinking about. Maybe. Be lowering it trying to get it off the off the horizontal. Okay, one one way of doing that would be to look at changing the angle here. Perhaps that's solid. Okay. So looking at from that side, maybe giving it a little bit more character. Looking at from this side, we start to see it a little. We start to see a little bit more volume to it. Okay, because one of the issues that we have with quite a few branches on this tree is that everything is just kind of like in one plane. So we have done if you kind of get a close-up of this, but we've got three branch three kind of like major secondary before secondary branches on here. One two three four and they're all in on that same plane. That's kind of happening in a few areas of this tree where things are just all on the same plane. So we're getting these very sort of flat branches. We don't have that in this section at the back. Or, you know, on this section. Everything is kind of like moving upwards and outwards, upwards and outwards. And we've got this very natural looking image here. But the rest of those branches because they've been so flat. That's what's making it out of making the two sort of not talk to each other. And so that's one thing that we could be looking at doing is to try and get some movement within that some adding some extra volume. I think this isn't going to be part of the tree, the design at all. But we're not sure why that was kept for root grafting purposes. You know, if you wanted to develop this and have this as a secondary trunk, you know, like a second trunk things. It's going to take way too long. Okay, it's going to take way way too long to sort of bring that as part of the development. But there's clearly been some reason why this has been allowed to develop. And I'm guessing it's from a root perspective. And so I'm not going to cut the whole thing off right now, but we're going to just kind of like reduce that down. We've got stink bug. Just so it kind of like not of our, you know, it's not it's not sort of sticking in our eyes quite so much. So we're looking at perhaps a different front, perhaps a different angle change. Okay. So that's one thing that we want to look at. The other thing is what's going up in the top. We've got quite a lot of sort of thick heavy branch. Now, it's not the greatest time of year to be making big cuts off of the off of the trunk. Okay, but we're going to look to try and reduce some of the the weight up here. The real. Character of this trees is down in this branch with the lightness of this this branch. Okay, the delicacy of it. That's where Japanese maples have the greatest character character. The the sort of the taper to these branches, the delicateness of the branch tips. That's what we want to be getting across the whole tree. When we come up and look at the top here. We have very little tapers to these branches. They just kind of like grow out the same thickness of the at the end. They are at the base and we have no second. We have no sort of. Twigging there's no delicacy up in the top here. We have some of the branches do. But then some of the branches are sort of very very very heavy. So we'll do is just look at some of those branches removing those if we can. Bear in mind. It's not as I said, it's not the greatest time of year to be doing it. It might bleed quite a lot. But we'll try and take some of them out. Okay, so we've got this one here and get close up on that maybe. This is this is basically been one of the strongest branches in the tree. This is sort of grown up. It's been cut back quite hard quite hard. And we've got multiple buds coming out from from the nodes in here. Lots and lots coming out. And if those perhaps they weren't thinned out enough and that area just had more foliage on it. It had a lot, you know, like maybe there were there were ten leaves on this as opposed to four on here. And so that one got stronger. And then it gets stronger and stronger and stronger. It just sort of cannonballs down. And so what we're going to look at doing. You're seeing where we can sort of cut that back to now. Realistically, what we're going to be looking at doing is sort of taking it back to to where it's all forks off to a branch of slightly less thickness. Okay, so we have that there. Come in. Okay, just take that back. Raffi wants to know what that little tool is you're using. This little tool here is it's sold as a wire cutter. Okay. But it has a slightly angled blade. Okay. It's very very good for cutting for pruning deciduous trees because it's like it's like a small version of the branch cutters and you can also cut through through wires. So it's very good. Multi-use tool. And you can kind of get in and do quite delicate stay sharp to the tips unless you drop it on the floor. Try and cut through steel nails as somebody did and it's just it's very good. Very cheap as well. And then Matt said so when would be the best time to remove some larger branches off the trunk? I would always be looking at sort of doing that. Generally, I do most of the most of the big pruning kind of like in in in August not in August. You know, autumn in the fall kind of immediately after the leaf pruning. It's it as long as it's not going to start as long as it's not going to bleed and it usually bleeds round about now, you know, as the saps all kind of like rising up through the tree. So are you worried about any bleeding as you're doing this work? We'll see. I am worried a little bit but we're going to do the best we can and I mean even if it does it's not like the biggest issue with the tree. We just want to try and minimize the damage that we sort of create the amount. So I mean is the amount of bleeding proportional to the branch that you yeah, and there's a smaller branches are safer. Yeah, so big deal. So we're not really we're not going to look at cutting anything off the trunk if we can help it. No big thick branches are coming off today. No. Yeah, and it to be honest. It doesn't really need to I think the biggest thing that we need to take off is this one here. The water that you see falling on the floor from the pot not from the tree. Not bleeding that much. I'm not worried at all bleeding at all. Don't worry about don't mind the water. So with the thickness that we have going on up here. We've got this branch here, which is which is a big chunky branch. We want to try and reduce that back down take off some of the wood that's on there. We have this the separation that comes to here. It starts coming down now, particularly with branches up in the apex. We want those to be coming upwards and outwards up and out. It's not going to drop down like an old pine tree or like a you know, the sort of traditional bonsai medium. So what we're looking at doing is really accentuating that upward movement there. So having that branch in there is definitely kind of counterproductive towards that. So that's going to come off. And just immediately sort of taking that one off. You we can see that upward movement there makes it feel. That was kind of underneath there. Yeah, that really did. I really did accentuate that upward movement. That was great. And that's the thing with the trees. And it's all about the line. It's all about being able to read the line see the lines and when you get once you get down to the sort of refining it just taking out little stubs. Tiny little stubs all across the tree makes a huge difference. In cleaning and clarifying those lines and stuff. Yep, clarifying those lines. Brian wants to know if you can. Treat the cut branches to prevent bleeding. You can cover them with with wound sealant, but it'll still bleed underneath. If you do then sort of start suffering a lot of bleeding then basically kind of like cut through the roots. That's that's the way to kind of stop it from bleeding. But I'll show you bleeding cut off your water transport mechanism pretty much but it's not at the moment. So we're good and Douglas is wondering if you subscribe to the theory. That bleeding weakens the tree. Well, yeah, it's basically losing moisture out of, you know, that we don't want to be losing. So yeah, it definitely would be. So again, we've got another big course area up here. Okay, we can see just from the density of new shoots that are coming out of here that this is way more dense than than than anywhere else. This is this is a big cluster and this was in a similar kind of position to the other branch that we cut off up there. So you could kind of like almost safe to assume that this side was facing the sun a little bit more. It's kind of an assumption that we could make and probably true. And so what we'll do here is we'll try and take that one back. Okay. Now what we've done here is we've cut this one back to a very sort of small side shoot. Okay. And so the taper on this branch now at the moment is quite poor. Okay, but what we have next to it is another small side branch of the same kind of like level of. Magnitude of like how much is on it. They're both kind of like at the same sort of point now. So if we if we develop those but those out at the same rate, then we can kind of counteract that poor taper that we have at the moment. Okay, so we're going to look at developing those two out. Maybe letting them grow a little bit more to get a bit more thickness. So that that taper in that in that branch sort of balances itself out equalizes itself out because we've gone from. From sort of thick at the base medium tier to very thin. Right. So we now need to just thicken those bits up just so we were getting a little bit better taper to that. And again in the same area of the tree. We've got another big sort of strong looking branch in here. How far can we look at realistically sort of look at taking that one back? Taking it all the way back down into there is a big cut. And so when you're making sort of big cuts like this, what you need to do is look at what's around it. Okay, because we need to. Have. Good balance, you know, all the sort of the tertiary branches around it needs to be kind of like of a similar. Similar length similar strength all in that sort of same category. Okay, and. You know, by taking that one out everything kind of balance itself up. There might be a little bit of a lack of taper to that. But at least then everything is kind of at the same sort of starting position. Okay. And we don't have this the movement that we have in that branch. I don't know. It's going to be the best way of seeing that. Maybe can we use that the props the best way to see it like the kind of the movement in that. Perhaps is just a little bit too. Vertical here. It comes at the angle that we've got it. If we put it back down to its original angle, then it's definitely going to be way too vertical. Okay. And what we want is the one the branch is deep. We want those. There's secondary branches and even sort of coming out of the tree. We want them to be sort of coming up at nice kind of like 45 degree angles. Nothing nothing going up to vertically. Nothing going out to sort of flat. Just that nice sort of 45 degree. And I'm naturally going upwards and outwards towards the light. And that's perhaps going to be a that's perhaps just a little bit too vigorous and forceful. And because it's so forceful these kind of you just feels like he's trying to dominate everything. All right. So what we'll do is we'll look at. Taking that one back to that Junction there where we've got these two side branches coming from that same node. Okay, that are of similar orders of magnitude. So they're both both kind of like they're both sort of come out and then split off into two. This was perhaps got a little bit more on it. Okay, but they're not way out of keeping with each other. That making sense. Yeah, it's great. You like your stream of conscious decision-making is I think. You know, like you're working through the problem and like making these decisions and you're sharing that with us. And it's freaking awesome. Keep keep keep just keep rocking. So yeah, go. Raffi's wondering if you'd comment on Walter Paul's hedge pruning technique. I think he's made all the comment enough. There's lots of different school. Hey, there's lots of different schools of of ways of doing things. You can hedge prune a tree by all means. You can fertilize it with chemical fertilizer grow like crazy hedge prune hedge prune hedge prune it and it's just ends up being a hedge. Or you can try and build something that looks bit more delicate something that really accentuates the the the natural characteristics of the species. And I think Japanese Maples really look when you see them in the wild growing out in gardens generally because that's where the way you see the most. They look slender and elegant and. Delicate. One thing actually that is a good point. One thing that I think perhaps a lot of people don't necessarily kind of associate with Maples is because we because we see so many of them in this sort of standard form. Elephant nebari and it kind of moves up branches down that that that they grow like in the wild in the crate. Some of the craziest places in some of the craziest shapes. You see cascade ones. You see ones growing off the sides of mountains. That's they're called mountain Maples. They were growing pretty harsh. They were growing in very weird environments. You know the roots on them were a good down to like minus 20 C which is I don't know what that isn't fair but it's it's very cold and so they are kind of trees that will survive in very weird environments and grow weird and wonderfully just you know they don't all have to form in those elephant foot nebari and just standard forms you can get very slender elegant ones with just you know like literati style ones. And there's some very interesting ones out there. That aren't edges. John wants to know if you have any particular varieties that you love or recommend each variety has its own sort of different little kind of characteristics and the interesting points. So some of them are for example, like Benny Chidori are ones where they are beautiful when they come out. These are these sort of bright sort of salmon pink colors. The show Joe is the obvious one. Things like that. She should go share a very interesting and how you approach them is something is very different. What we'll do is when we sort of maybe start thinning some some of the branches out a little bit more look at and talking about pinching and things like that. One of the things that actually that will talk about it now is an appropriate point is looking at. Appropriate node length. And one thing that you sort of tend to see with some people who are a little bit too OCD. It's that the stink bugs in this country is that you tend to see node lengths of the branches that are too compact. So the sort of the next stage of this work that after the pruning that we're going to do and we'll talk about it is is when you sort of start pinching. The new growth. And the kind of like the the amount you're going to want to let it grow. So you know when you have this new growth sort of coming out of here the amount that you're going to want it to let that grow will depend on a the sort of the style that you're looking to try and try to achieve also the size of the tree. So the smaller the tree is the smaller you're going to want the type of that node length is that you're going to want to want to achieve. And so some varieties are naturally going to have like so shishiguro shira. For example. Very very sort of compact growth the Kashima. Kotohime and things like that. They've naturally got that real sort of tight growth. And so the appropriate node length for those is really quite short. Whereas for other species it may be slightly longer and for certainly for bigger trees you're going to want to have an appropriate sort of node length which is this tree generally does have this hasn't been pinched back to aggressively. But just sort of let's just go through and look at some of the other pruning decisions that we're going to want to make here. We have a bit of an issue. We see that. Again how cool sort of course this area is here. So we've got a bit of an issue here. We've got that on the close up camera. And I like here where it sort of comes out and this is somewhere where it's been pruned back quite hard and multiple buds have been allowed to kind of grow from that one point. And it's becoming quite a congested node. So we could look at thinning it out. So taking off some of these bottom growing shoots down in here. Okay. Rubbing those out. Okay, but because we've had because that shoot underneath was allowed to grow so much. It hadn't been Removed previously. We've ended up with quite a sort of course lump on there. Okay. So what we're going to try and do is trying to cut that as flush as we possibly can. So the line of that branch then sort of comes up nicely and we don't lose that lack of taper. Okay. You are literally kind of like sculpting the tree as I'm putting my hands in it will be really sort of quite careful. Because at the moment all of these these very very delicate buds and shoots are opening up. And so they're very easy to damage which is been realistic. We should have been trying to do this a little bit earlier in the year or immediately kind of like after leaf drop in the fall. But doing this in the spring is okay. You just don't want to do it and we tried our best to keep pushing right? And then we hit like 64 degrees this past weekend and it exploded and there's nothing to do. I know I'm not. I'm not blaming anybody. But it's you know, we can do it and like wiring this tree at the moment as well. I mean like it's it's possible to do it. But it's like wiring, you know pines when the candles are extended you only want to do it. If you delicate if you got if you're confident the ability to kind of like wrap the wire around the branch is not damaged. Those those delicate elongations then fine. But other than that, you just like okay, just just stay clear and do it another time. And so actually I thought I was going to have to cut. That whole section off in there, but we've now managed to sort of cut that. So the line of that branch now sort of comes up tapers very nicely into there. So rather than cutting that whole thing back now, we're going to come back and look at the node. This is really difficult to sort of show but we're going to try and look at this node here where we've got one two and then three. We're going to cut off this the most youthful shoot that we've got in there. Okay, the other option that we had if we weren't able to really kind of. Like get that line in there. We weren't able to sort of sculpt the line of that branch would have been to come back and cut into that. Okay, but in doing so we would have lost. We would have been reducing the the taper to this the this branch as a whole. We definitely want to be looking at the splitting that into two every single node. And that's one of the important aspects of. Deciduous trees and avoiding that the heaviness. Notes going through making sure that we only ever have two shoots two branches coming from one node. Mike wants to know if these trees put out new buds on old wood. Yes, they will do and we see that here. We're seeing that here. Okay, so we've got we've got buds further down. In here. We've got all these shoots coming. This is. This is a shoot that's come from from a wound. We've got new shoots and things coming from the inside. They'll only do that if there's a lot of vigor at the tips. Okay, if you've got a lot of foliage at the tips and the tree is sort of super healthy. There's lots of energy flying upwards and downwards upwards and downwards. Then you'll start to see those coming out on there and you will even get them on the trunk. So yes, they will do. But only if it's healthy and there's lots of lots of energy production. So, that's. That's another thing that we're going to start to look at is those adventitious buds that are forming on the old wood. So can we maybe look at where's going to be the easiest one to look at? Perhaps in here. Okay. So we have this Junction of the two branches. Comes out splits into two here and the first place generally that trees look to sort of send out that adventitious. Buds at a Junction where there was a lot of energy flow going through it. Okay, so you're always going to get these kind of buds that are falling at the Junctions of branches and we've got one underneath. We've got one here. We've also got a couple on secondary branches. Okay, it's great. So what we're going to do is just rub that off rub that one off on the box. We don't want those branches to be falling so close to that node. Okay, and then we come slightly further along and then we've got another bud here. Another one coming off at the top and then we've got one growing underneath. Okay, we definitely don't want that little bud there. Okay, then we've got a decision to make about these two here. Okay. Realistically. This is going to be the the best place bud for the future of the tree. This one's already this one grew out last year and it's sort of split into two here. You know, that's come to two nodes that happened last year. Why do we not want that one? Why do we want to favor this one? Okay, if we have this branch here, it's basically going to be doing. Exactly the same thing as the branch, which is further along doing it is doing. So it's going to be growing pretty much identically in the same kind of direction. In fact, it's actually sort of growing ever so slightly off the underside of the branch. Okay, whereas this one's growing up upwards and off off the top of that branch. Pretty much that kind of like ideal 45 degree angle or it will be once a little bit of wire gets put onto it. Maybe in the future. And so what we'll do is we'll replace that one with the bud. That's. Coming upwards and outwards off the top of that branch from exactly the same position. We come along, we get to the next Junction. Okay, we've got a little bud growing for out from underneath. We've got one growing in the crotch in that branch division there. Then we've got another little shoot coming off the bottom, which is very, very close. It's slightly separated, slightly separate from where those two grow, but it's still too close. It's still too close and we allow all of those to grow and develop on and eventually that that whole. Area is just going to become too thick and we're going to have a sort of reverse taper at that one section. So going through and being sort of forensic with how we deal with all of those is the key to success with deciduous trees. Just sort of going through and just rubbing out all of those little buds that are forming in positions where we don't want them. Going through and you rub them out and then you come back. A week later and they'll be new buds in the place. And then you got to do it again. Particularly if you've got a healthy tree. Which is why it suits retired people. People are at home all the time. People who enjoy little bits of work and that's the that's the key. The people who this is the kind of work that you will have the most success walking around your garden every day. Once a day 15 minutes. With a cup of coffee or tea or whiskey or whatever you want to drink. Pick your poison. What have you. Pick your poison and just going through it and just just going and when you see it just go and rubbing it off. Rubbing those those little buds off. Okay, just being fastidious. Nice. Good use of the English language. Well, the British as you know, we invented it. That's right. You told me that this is the pure form the pure form of the English language. And the more you do that the more delicate the branching system will be the less of those ugly nodes you'll have. Okay, and the more natural the branching structure will be. But it's about making decisions like just constantly kind of like which is best which is best which is best which is best and the difficult one thing that some people fall. Into the trap of is just always doing the same thing. And then it can become a little bit kind of like mechanical and repetitive. And so you've got to be fastidious but also not too obsessive as it's it's a it's a very difficult balance to kind of like strike which is why there are so few really good. Deciduous trees that are kind of like grown outside of Japan. I think because people either become too mechanical and too stuck on a pattern and I fall into that trap as well. Or they're not putting enough fastidiousness. It's either too much or too it's really hard to balance the strike. And it's a part of it is about kind of restricting your your natural urges one way or the other. David's wondering if you could sort of come back and talk again or a little bit more about your plan for the older horizontal branches. Okay. Well, we're not really made any sort of firm decisions on where we're going yet. We're still just kind of like looking at refining those branches because whatever sort of design we look at we're not we're not cutting any major branches off the tree. So this work needs to be done. So what I'm going to do is kind of approach that first and really sort of simplify all of the lines. So we're getting a really clear idea of what we've got and then we can come back and look at how we're going to attack that. So we will get to that. Would you consider this kind of like the general maintenance of ramification and branching in a maple like it seems to me and as you do that, I'm just going to kind of talk to you and you can say yes or no or correct me if I'm totally wrong. But like you look at the design and some of the big overarching concepts of stylistic things with this tree because obviously it it's offering different potentials and has different challenges and that's part of the styling process which you can never just do one thing without thinking about styling. And so you're like we're going to talk about Japanese maples and really weren't going to talk about design, but it's just like inherently it happens, right? And then it seems like you've identified some some areas where there's issue, but we're not at the appropriate time of year to potentially prune back some of the branches that you want to cut there. There could be bleeding there could be things you don't want to cut branches off, but you might make bigger decisions at a different time of year. Essentially, but I think even with the design of this tree, I don't think we're really going to gain anything. By cutting major branches off. I think the only thing that you could really look at is it going to benefit the trees this branch here. I think that's the only thing that you could even potentially consider really sort of cutting off. But even if you leave it, would you shorten it or would you leave it that long? I mean, I mean my initial feelings right now is that I don't want to cut that off. I kind of like it. I like the the legginess of it. I like the elegance to it. I like the movement that it has it within it. I'd like to try and find a way of utilizing it. That's just, you know, the first sort of thing I looked at and that's one of the reasons why I started looking at this is a potential front because then it comes out towards the back. It's a great depth branch from over here. Yeah, it's a great branch. That's really interesting that you find value in that length and that delicacy and stuff. And that's like that's one of those big transitions from sort of this routine power bone side mentality and you're looking at it and you're like, no, I don't want I don't even want to reduce it. I don't even want to cut it back. Like it's not. It's that's really cool. I think a lot of people get fall into the trap and this is, you know, Japanese bonsai did this of just compacting everything getting everything powerful and compact and getting everything in and everything. And that's one of the things that we talked about with the juniper that that you did the repot on previously is that like your initial thought was to compact that and my initial thought was to elongate it. And I don't know if that's. You know, do I learn so much from you on that tree? I really did. You gave me you just offered a different line of thought. And I feel, you know, I feel like watching you work that tree really made me a better bonsai practitioner. Just having that different perspective. I mean, just just now with that back branch, my immediate thought would be okay. I'm going to shorten it and then hearing your perspective on I like that length. Like that's cool, man. That's really cool. It's really valuable for people to hear that. And then I mean, he adds something slightly different and that was what was so saying the issues that this tree had was the the differences between you know, the the orthodoxy of this section of this trunk and the unorthodoxy of this branch of this section. You know, like this is so now. I mean like realistically like if you came in and just shot that trunk off there, that would be an awesome looking tree right in here. Yeah, just take me with a chainsaw. Chop that off. Boom. That would be a funky looking tree right now. Yeah. Yeah. It'll be like a massive gap. Super funk. Funky, funky. And so let's, you know, how can we really kind of maximise that? Let's try and get those two kind of like working with each other a little bit better. And like the biggest issue with that is the straights, particularly of these two branches. Perhaps one of them comes off in the future, perhaps not. We'll figure that one out. But essentially the biggest thing that we want to be looking at at the moment, no matter what design we go along with, is how we can kind of balance up the delicacy of the top section and the bottom section. Once we've balanced that up, that's going to give us a much better kind of idea of whether or not we need to keep those primary branches. Because part of the imbalance that we were seeing was just like the density of the top section, particularly up in here where there was just so much going on. And trying to keep that consistent density throughout the tree is, you know, a fundamental part of kind of creating any bonsai. You never want to look at a tree and have one area of foliage like way denser than the other if you can help it. Because your eye is always going to go towards that area of density. You want to try and keep that consistent throughout the tree. That consistency in that pot, where you have positive space. Yeah. Positive space has equal density wherever there's positive space. Because otherwise you're always going to go to the heavy area. Yeah. And that's what's happened here. We're always going to those, you know, the heaviest, part of the tree. It's super fascinating for me to watch you work with this tree because there's a lot to consider in terms of Peter's original concept and then what the tree has grown and there's parts of it that may not have been a part of his original concept, which is unavoidable because you can't ever maintain a tree. They continue growing and changing and so you've got to adapt and adjust. But it's like watching you go through and sort of make these, you're making really fundamental changes to improve the structure, which is going to be necessary regardless of what you choose to do design-wise. Yeah. And it's almost like watching you just kind of get to know the tree and become familiar and really find those nuances like leaving that lower branch. You like that lower branch. You see something beautiful about it that doesn't, that exists outside of maybe a more formulaic approach to the formation of the tree. It's really, it's really beautiful to watch that happen. And I think this is where you start seeing, like your decisions there are really, I think like a Peter, Peter Adams has done a lot to this tree, but now it's taking on, those decisions are sort of Peter Warren's approach to the current state of this tree. And that's really where the artistry seems to be. I'm really impressed with that decision. Anyways, not to stroke your ego or anything. The tree's basically been petered is what you're saying. Well, I mean, it has been petered and continues to be petered. I appreciate that. Thank you. I mean, like whenever I approach a tree, you always get like a first impression. It's like, okay, there's something about it which kind of like stands out. And for me, it was this lower branch. Then looking at those pictures of Pete that Peter had, that he drew and like the starting decisions that he made, that was one of the character features that he was really looking at bringing out. And so we were on the same wavelength, definitely there. And so that, you know, that's good. But it's that then how do you then maximize it? Okay, so maybe we do look at changing the front completely around to the other side. We're still kind of keeping in exactly the same vein as what he was thinking because it's maximizing what's bringing character to this side. You know, what's going on down here. But it's just looking at it from a different perspective. And perhaps that's kind of what you were kind of getting at. Well, a different perspective based on what the tree has continued to evolve. Yeah. And changing it. It's changed to give you beyond maybe where, you know, Peter had seen that when he drew those drawings. It's continued to change in ways you can't predict, right? Yeah. And I think what, I mean, basically the reason for that kind of happening is this branch here and then sort of the positioning of it. Ideally, that would have been, if that branch had been sort of coming out from just a little bit further around, maybe sort of 15 degrees, maybe 15 to 20 degrees round rather than sort of coming out to the front, that would have been, we would have always been out of look at it from that side. But just that's dominating and it's dominating towards us and which is pushing this even further back. Interesting. And so like the issue with this whole tree is kind of like, is risen because of the way that branch has come out and developed. And the silver lining is that interesting branch on the, where you're at on the right. Yeah. Just, just really got a lot of character in it. Yeah. I mean, so can we, can we, can I try to wrap up some of the knowledge that you have been conveying as you're working just sort of, sort of so I can grasp it in my own mind. Okay. So basically what you're saying is, listen, if you want to remove bigger, thicker branches, ideal time to do that is when they drop their leaves in the fall. Or, you know, like if I was ever going to remove this one, I would do it like in a two-stage cut. Um, particularly because there's nothing below it. Uh-huh. Okay. So what, if I was going to look at removing that, I would sort of cut halfway through the top of the branch. I'd take a B section out, the top of there. The bottom section would be, would be connected, still connected to the tree. This branch would stay alive. It would still be demanding moisture coming up from here. It would still be feeding the live vein coming down. And in doing so, what would then happen is any of the energy that's flowing down from the top of the tree would come down. Above that, uh, that cut that we've made, start to callus it over, uh, and then would sort of continuous path down, um, down sort of the trunk. Once that callus is formed, essentially, it's just like a bypass, sort of going around there. Then we can sort of cut that branch off in its entirety and have zero fear of, of kind of like dieback along there. And the callusing of that wound would then happen a lot easier. Would, would you cut that? Would you still make that, that even in a two-stage cut, would you do that? When it's dropping leaves? I like, uh, I'd, I'd cut, I'd, I'd start doing that. Uh, you could start doing that now because you've got, you're not worried about bleeding and things like that. And then just once you've seen that sort of callus formed, you know, it could happen in a couple of months. It could happen in two years. Once you felt that that callus above it is sufficient, then you can go through and cut it off. So if you cut the wedge out, it wouldn't bleed out of the wedge now because you still have water moving to the tip? Well, I mean, by the looks of what's happened is it's not bleeding at the moment, wherever we're cutting, so. Oh, wow. Okay. You know. But if you, so just to be safe, though, for the water, bleeding sense of things would, just basic, Japanese maple basics, would you rather prune in the fall than in the spring? Um, I don't, yeah, I tend to see much less kind of damage happening. Okay. Doing, doing big stuff like that. What about after this first flush hardens off? Is that an, is that a time to prune? Yeah, I mean, if you defoliate and then, then come in and, and, um, uh, you can sort of cut off. That sort of time as well. Okay. All right. So that, that's like the bigger branches. Now, as far as like doing some of the finer work that you're doing, um, this is, uh, a maintenance of Japanese maples, if you will, going to each junction where you have forks or you, and you've got threes and fours or twos, you're trying to get twos at every fork. Yep. This is work that you would be doing also in the fall. You, any time that you come to, you know, to work on a maple, any time. Okay. Defoliation, looking at it in the garden, just any time you approach, you should be looking to make sure that it's, that it only ever sort of splits into two. And your, your decision-making process is based on making that ideal decision to get the best pair of twos that give you the best branching structure and the most beautiful transition of taper, line, junction, all of that stuff. And so the, the considerations that you have are the, the other branches around it. Okay. So what's, what's happening? You can also con you know, it is possible to wire the branches and move them around. Okay. But I don't personally like putting too much wire on the finer branching structure because it then starts to look very artificial where the Japanese maples look their best is if you've got sort of curved branch curves or primary branches. And then the secondary branches are, they start to come up. We start to see straight lines, a connection of straight lines. And then once we get to the, to the branch tips, all it is, is just in between each node, it's just straight, straight, straight, straight connection of straight lines. And then we get a sense of age because the branches, you know, the primary branches, they will curve. They were initially straight change of direction, straight change of direction, straight. And as those branches thickened up, they, they, they, they thickened up on the inside of each of those curves. And so you get that kind of like curved feeling to it. But then once we get out to the secondary branches and the tertiary branches, that's when, you know, these branches are, uh, four, five, six years old, imagine on, on a, on a bigger tree. Um, and they're going to be straight. And the, the changes of direction, they've, they've not thickened up enough to start bringing that curve out. So if we start seeing curves all the way out to the, to the branch tips, it just looks very, very artificial, very, very bonsai like. Um, and it, it, it doesn't really sort of capture that elegance and the grace that, that Japanese maples can have. Mm. Yeah. Bishop asked if you could prune in late winter right before the buds swell. Uh, you basically, the reason why we want to sort of prune in the fall is that that's when it's looking at redirecting a lot of the, you know, that's when the buds is sending energy to buds and things like that. And so you don't want to let it send energy to buds and then just cut them off. Really. Oh, interesting. So that reaccumulation of the pigments. sort of reallocation of all the hormones and stuff and it's going to various different places and so that's kind of a good time to get in and great great and so and pruning late late like sort of late winter as the buds are swelling that is the premium premium time for for bleeding and so then you've talked about um you talked about this and i'm assuming you're going to come back to it but that is the the pinching process to refine the tips after you've done this sort of pruning i'm assuming you're going to come back and sort of show that and your yep your decision making process so you've got you've got kind of big structural pruning happening at times where it's not bleeding you've got multiple stages to that pruning maybe a two-step wedge let the tree callous redirect its water flow and then fully remove the branch um but and then you're talking about that time when it sheds its leaves reaccumulates those resources being that being a good time to be doing pruning because it it sends the energy that is reabsorbed to buds that are going to be functional next year but then in this spring spring season you know coming back to that idea of now this growth is coming out and and this is really a time of year where you're trying to manage and direct the strength that the tree is pushing into those new buds is that am i understanding that correctly absolutely yep and that's where the pinching process is going to come in to come in to be dictating inner node length as well as transitioning energy from strong to medium to weak or interior pieces yeah and that's where the the idea of kind of like how frequent deciduous trees aren't something that you bring into putting your works on your bench and just do work once and then put them out like you would do um with a lot of uh with a lot of conifers you can bring it in do do the majority of the work put it on the bench it's fine um it's something that you do need to do that kind of work and then you're going to be able to do that kind of work like walking around in the garden just pinching a little bit today i'm going to pinch a little bit tomorrow i'm going to wait until the day after tomorrow it's that very very little and often little and often accumulation of of the work which is why it's very unsuited for you know why a lot of people find it difficult to really achieve the the levels of refinement that they want to because maybe they can only work on it um once a week uh at which point the um maybe the node length has become excessively long and so one thing that is absolutely essential for trying to sort of control that spring growth is one of the most important tools for deciduous development but also for for bonsai development and one of the most important jeez there's another one um and that is they're invading us okay one of the most important like tools techniques skills areas of understanding to help you achieve that is fertilization okay so absolutely if with this kind of refined tree okay when we're looking at controlling that node length making sure that things aren't going to grow out as those buds open up and extend out they're not going to extend out too much all right so if we start fertilizing this tree now what are we doing what are we telling it to do grow we're telling it to grow what do we not what do we want to not do you don't want it to grow excessively and grow out of our control uh and for it to extend off before we get the chance to to to work on it and so a refined japanese maple refined trident maple should not be fertilized in the spring we shouldn't even be looking at fertilizing it until you're going to be able to do it in the spring much later on in the year we're not looking at pushing growth we're looking at restricting it and so why would we fertilize it's just completely counterproductive okay so up at the top here we've got some some quite strong lengthy nodes okay perhaps a little bit too long okay but we're going to leave those to because it's going to depend on which side we're going to end up looking at that's the front okay so we're just going to leave those for the time being so yeah fertilizing in the spring is basically you're just causing yourself issues causing yourself problems it's going to increase everything that we don't want to increase okay so managing the vigor of the tree is is what we're looking to do paul asked if this is essentially a quote-unquote clip and grow once you get towards the the finer branching uh the the twiggery then as much as you can i would always recommend to do that um partially because it gives you that sort of natural um looking branching structure and partially because then you know if you wire all these tiny little twigs out it means you've got to take the wire off as ryan was saying earlier if you forget to do it you've got then just just cut them off anyway and so my personal take on it my personal kind of um aesthetics what i like to see in them is not wiring the once we get to this refined stage wherever possible we are going to put some wire on on this tree just to to um to to create some some depth to some of the branches um but we're not really going to look at wiring any of the twigs so wiring some of the prime maybe some of the secondary branches would be good but tertiary branches you just unless you were there to take the wire off exactly at the right time you may as well just not bother and most of the you know the the best growers traditional old school growers of deciduous trees in japan use very very little wire for yuen who makes the best deciduous trees in japan for ua he was you know just their stuff is just and all they do is clip and grow it's the twigs just fun you know just phenomenal kind of delicacy to the twigs you think you think takiyama is the top yeah personally for the style old school source looking style yeah And one thing that they have down is the DNA of the trees, like the trident maples that they grow. It's the best leaf quality. And they just, everything was just grown from cuttings. Interesting. Really, really good. And any of the great kind of trident maples that you sort of see kicking around nowadays with the real tight highly ramified branches all came from there. So could you talk a little bit about how you handle Japanese maples in development, how it's a different approach? So with handling Japanese maples in development let's just look at this branch here and then we'll get to that. So we've got an area around here which is still kind of just looking at it from a distance, it's still just a little bit on the denser side everything else is kind of like coming into the same level of density and we still just got just a little bit too much on there and this branch in here is an issue and or what's going on up here is an issue now we've either got to cut back to that branch there or remove that there's just too much going on up in here the thicker branch that we have has very very good natural changes of direction so it comes out we have a short node 45 degree sort of change of direction and these are all kind of like very sort of short nodes got great taper to it it's not sticking too far out from the silhouette of the tree and so taking all of that back to just a weaker branch a thinner side branch where it's just going to be a continual straight line would actually be kind of detrimental to the to the character of that branch up in there and so in order to create some space up in there rather than cutting off that thicker branch what I'm going to do is take off this thinner bit in there and that's going to give us that balance of the of the sort of the density that we're that we're looking to achieve up there I hope that was clear okay so looking at the development of trees younger trees younger in development you've got to have a kind of a a good plan okay so if you've got a seedling you've got to decide early doors what you want that tree to be do you want it to be you know a 60 centimeter tree with a trunk like this or do you want to be a 15 centimeter tree very very thin you know what what do you want it to be sorry it's all metric just uh one for the europeans out there you have to get your calculator out and convert it um a lot of europeans watching right now yeah two foot versus if it was 15 centimeters uh six inches wow on the fly boom um and like how you and you've got to have a good plan right from the start okay and you've got to tell the tree what you want it to do okay so it's not no point just like putting in the ground seeing what happens because it's just going to grow like it like it wants to uh so you've got to have a clear plan okay i want the tree to be sort of 60 centimeters okay i want to be two foot tall and i want to have nice taper and i want to be like thick what you're going to want to do is grow that out until the trunk is kind of like a third of your desired thickness okay just as a rule of thumb you until it's about a third of how how thick you want it to be then you're going to want to come in and cut it down to about a third of your desired height all right and then what you're going to want to do is kind of like cut it back to where you've got a bud a node and then you're going to grow that out and you're going to grow that big tall and strong and that's going to help heal over that first trunk chop and then that's going to grow up the bottom section is then going to grow out to say two-thirds of your desired thickness that middle section is going to go out to uh to to you know to give it some taper then you're going to make another trunk chop to where there's another button then you're going to grow that one out and maybe you cut it back again and then start working on the branches but it's the idea where you're basically going to be making a couple of trunk chops that's what's happened here and in order to get some of the the taper to it we had a lot of branches growing out at the top here so rather than making like a big trunk chop what peter had done with this has had multiple branches kind of growing out of the top in order to get a bit of thickness in order to help heal some of those wounds and then he's then he's removed them okay but it's working on that sort of desired trunk movement thickness taper first and as you're doing that then sort of starting to think about the the primary branches the primary branch structure and things like that uh and so you do exactly the same with the branches you grow them out you cut them back to a third of your desired length right out again cut it back to two-thirds of your desired length then you start working on the um the secondary branching structure the the sort of the the ramification and things like that but if you don't grow it out cut it back you'll never get that taper and you can do it you know you can grow it out just allow them to grow out very very thick and cut them back really quite hard right out again it's very when they're in that young stage and you're fertilizing them heavily and they're growing rapidly it's very easy to do those big dramatic chops yeah so how is the fertilization schedule in that case you're not really stuck sort of that concerned about node length okay so you'd be fertilizing it from the spring you're pushing it and pushing it and pushing it and even if for example you've got like a branch where you know the primary branch where that first node is perhaps really really long then you start getting into the the sort of the secondary branching sort of stage of development and that node is long and you can't get anything in there it's dead easy to graft something back in exactly the right position that you wanted to okay the difficult thing is to get thickness taper that's the first stages you know and then the rest of the you can sort of do kind of like quite easily afterwards so it's at the same time sorry and at the same time you should be working top and bottom of the tree don't let the roots just do whatever they want even if you're putting it in the ground you've got to get in there and undercut it every two years maybe dig it up undercut it prune back the roots really hard it'll take it because the tree is pumping full of energy put it back in the ground that kind of thing like you've got to be working on the roots as well as the top of the tree like a construction of a tree it is it's absolutely it's a construction process and it it's it's logical it's methodical and it will do what you tell it to never heard it but you've put so concisely well i've never heard it just broken down so concisely but you've got to have a clear idea of what you want to do you've got to have badass i mean there is a certain amount of kind of the tree is going to do what what it wants to do and maybe there'll be a certain amount of rolling with the the punches as the tree sort of develops along but you've got to have a clear idea and you've got to tell the tree what you want it to do could you um sorry and then you've got to be able to shift through the gears of um you know sort of fertilization and like how quickly you work on them like when you've got them in the ground or you know in a big pot in your lane and you can just kind of ignore them just let them grow out and just come along every now and again just like okay boom maybe that's a bit too strong okay cut this here you don't have to be as as intense and as time specific with the work but then once you get to the ramification stage that's when you've got to completely shift the mindset and then you've got to like be really kind of like okay i'm going to really hold you back as much as i possibly can i'm going to be on top of you all the time right so it it requires that sort of shifting in in mindset sorry no you're good could we mark the old front and the new proposed front away some chalk okay um i'm closer to wplan flying over this one and but they're uh it's still been super intense uh could we mark the old front and the new proposed front we have some chalk okay i haven't got any we wrapped it through a black where so we're gonna work it through it for us we got two friend's works two there are a couple of cards there are some for the uh vd as well as a chalk okay uh let me just finish off with um just a little bit of pruning here i think he's still thinking on what he wants oh we're still thinking on it i think he's still working yeah we're still kind of keeping the crowd keeping the mystery i love doing doing demonstrations in america it's hilarious i never never like hey can we get to the end thanks could you just tell us everything you're gonna do and i've never i never mark a front and i hate putting like you know this is the exact front because as long as sometimes things change you know things change and you try and make it out the bend there's always a best front but sometimes you think you come again or you come around again and it's like well i think i like it from that perspective and so loosey-goosey and so and so like being so specific so early on in a tree's development it's just kind of like don't you know easy what just like be be a little bit be a little bit less attached easy just be a bit more flexible a little less needing to know that's such an american thing peter we have a hard time fighting that yeah hard time letting go this is my front right here i need all the information right now i had a very interesting like last no two years ago in in october i did a there was a big event in france uh salia the bonsai sound show tiger rushi about tiger was there uh and and and he basically sort of said a similar thing he's like i've just seen this tree for the first time and you're expecting to make make all of these like life-changing decisions for this tree i i've not lived with it for a while and he's just like in order to make and i'm gonna i'm gonna design it today with uh giving a couple of different options for for the future and whoever then takes it on can then make those decisions well after they've lived with the tree for a while i was kind of i was translating it for him i was just like that was such a cool thing for you to say and i just recently kind of like had that highlighted to me i had a just planted up a a texas that's all i'm doing at the moment it's just going through and rubbing off like unnecessary clustering the the same as i've been doing before i had a taxes a collected taxes a rare hen's teeth it's a uk yamadori taxes and it's got this phenomenal base real tight loads of deadwood on the base and it was all just long and lanky and it was all just a bit scabby and there was nothing about it but when i got it it was a tiny little bud right at the bottom right at the bottom i thought wow this is going to be a phenomenal show here i'm just going to chop everything off and just make it all really close and tight compact to this this bit of deadwood but I've got to use all of the rest of this foliage just to kind of like grow it out, build up the roots and then I can cut all of this off back to this one shoot and redevelop it. I've just had it for a couple of years and every time I had it on the end of a bench, every time I walked up to sort of see the tree, it had fallen off. It had either half fallen off the bench or just kind of like hanging over or it had fallen on the floor. Every time I walked up to it, it's just kind of like hanging on, just tipping over like this. I'm just like, damn. But then every time I sort of looked at it, it's hanging off the end of the bench. It's like, actually, that might make a really interesting cascade. And then sometimes it'd fall on the ground and it'd be at an angle. I was like, actually, that might make a really interesting kind of like windswept. And so I lived with it for a while and while and then I came to repot it just the other day with Bonsai Egypt. He came over and we did some repotting and we were in a root, a rock planting mood. Had this thing, planted on a rock. It looks phenomenal. I cut that bud off that I'd been so desperate to grow everything. Cut that off and it's just like, boom, there it is. But if I'd have made that decision really early on, I would have just ruined all of this unique character to it. But it was that living with it and the tree was just telling me, it was literally throwing itself off the bench saying, I want to be a cascade. I want to be a cascade. Just that living with it for so long. What do I have to do? Tell me. Stop trying to grow that bud. I'm here. I'm here. It literally was like that. And what Tiger said just came all flooding back to me. I was just like, damn, I'm so glad I didn't rush into making that decision. That's interesting. You know, it's an interesting balance too. You can be handicapped by that, you know, like waiting and waiting and waiting and being like. Yeah, I've got a tree that's like that. It's completely handy and it's just doing nothing. I've just got to go in there and just chop three quarters of it off and just go with it. Yeah. Bonsai. Gosh. Such a wonderful art form. It's never the same thing. You can never approach everything the same. You've just got to be super flexible. Just take everything on its own merits. Isn't that such a beautiful way to maintain like just a diverse approach to it too? You know, like what you were saying. It's hard. It's hard to fight your natural tendency. And, you know, we are ingrained to sort of lock into patterns of approach. So we can, our brain can function more efficiently. It's like a part of being a human and having the capacity to take in all the stimuli and not be overwhelmed by it. But at the same time with Bonsai, to continue to be able to maximize each opportunity, you've got to be diverse in your ability to seize those moments. Yeah. How are we doing time-wise? We're pretty much at two hours. It doesn't even matter, man. Just keep rocking. All right. So what we've got to look at, we've basically thinned everything out. And we've got that sort of consistent density across the tree. So now what we'll look at doing is really sort of thinking about those big decisions. At first I was, you know, I was really looking at making this the front before we started the live stream. I was thinking, I've got to make this sort of come into play. And the only way to do that is really going to sort of to look at it from here. But the more and more I, you know, been sort of looking at it, and the more those branches have sort of come into balance, I think the best thing to do is to continue to do that. Yeah. So we're going to continue with that same front. And we're just going to look at bringing this branch down across there. Okay. And so we'll do use. Do you need other gauges? No, we'll just use this big boy wire here. Oh. Go big. Put your big boy pants on. Yeah. It's so fun to get to watch. It's so fun to get to watch you work. Okay. The other thing we're going to do is we're going to leave this shoot here. Because we may want to use that for grafting at some point. I got some outstanding questions for you, if you want to, if you're ready. Yeah. So Matt says, could you treat different branches differently on a refined tree? For example, if you sort of have this underdeveloped branch, treat that as development, but the rest of the tree is more refined, so treat that as refinement. You do that mixed bag approach. You can do, but what I would look at doing is kind of like really putting the brakes on the developed branch. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Because otherwise they're going to kind of like come to completion before the other one sort of catches up. And so by the time the rest of the tree is kind of like finished and you've got this branch, which is then just sort of start. You want everything to be kind of like going along at the same rate. Everything to sort of start at the same, from the same starting position. And then Douglas says, if you have a tree in refinement and you repot it, should you let it grow out to recoup energy or could you still pinch in the spring? Once you get a tree sort of in refinement, the way in which you'd be looking at repotting would be a lot less aggressive. Once that root ball starts to kind of really mature and you're not really worried about working on the... The nebari and things like that, you'd be doing a lot less aggressive repot. And so allowing it to kind of like grow out wouldn't necessarily be necessary. What you would be looking at rather than sort of allowing it to kind of grow out would be the defoliation aspect to it. So defoliating a tree is essentially weakening it deliberately. You're taking away its ability to regenerate, to generate energy. And sometimes you want to do that, OK, to get a second flush of growth where the leaves are smaller. But generally... You're essentially just kind of like weakening the tree. And so defoliating completely is... Generally, it's not something I ever really do. So bending this branch, we just want to be just massaging it, just putting little bits of movement in. Not focusing all on one position. Kim asked about the white dots on the trunk. What are the... The white dots on the trunk? The sort of white... Well, we've got basically as the bark gets exposed to UV, particularly as it ages. OK, so it essentially becomes sunburned. And so what we see here is, you know, this is definitely the older part of it. And we just start to see some of that coming up. So maybe that's what you mean. Some of the white spots up in here. OK. And that's just the areas that have been kind of exposed. If you look on this backside, there's like white spots on the mature bark. Oh, here? Yeah. I don't know, lichen probably. That's just maybe a little bit of a scar. Spots of lichen, perhaps. Huh. Just age. Yeah, just age. There's nothing really to be too concerned about. What we're going to try and do is just bring this branch a little bit further around, a little bit further around. What we could do is just pull it. OK, but we've got nothing really to pull it to because this one's going to move. If we try and pull those together, it's not really going to work too well. This is where it's going to snap. Midstream. Boom, snap. So just making very soft massaging movements across. OK. So the wire that gets applied is not too tight. OK, we don't want it to be really tight up against the branch because then we're going to cause scarring if we're not careful. And that's why using sort of big heavy gauge wire will kind of like counteract that. Because it gives you the gauge to move it with a little bit looser application. Yeah. You can double up the wire on one technique. I would be to double it up with putting the second wire. We don't really need to with this. We're kind of getting that down. We're getting a bit of depth to it. Definitely sort of coming towards me a lot more now. But if we were going to put a second gauge and we wanted to put big movement into the branch, then one thing to do is to put the wire rather than tight up against the existing wires, to put that right in between. That was a technique that Ebihara particularly and a lot of people in the industry have done. And I think it's a technique that's been very popular. And I think it's a technique that's been very popular. And I think it's a technique that's been very popular. And the Satsuki world would use for bending real super brittle branches. It just gives you more points of contact so that any sort of potential snappage, there's wire pressing up tight against that branch and stopping it from snapping. But we've got that roughly where we want it to be. Sort of coming down there. And what we would look at doing is maybe just trying to bring the weight of this, the flow of this branch definitely in towards this section. Rather than out here. So I'm just going to reduce this back a touch more. Okay, not that branch there, but just really the apex bit here. Just taking that bit off, really kind of bringing the focus of it around towards there a little bit more. How then do we deal with this branch here? Okay, sorry to say, but I think this needs to come off and we need to replace it with this branch here. This one at the back. This is a much better position. Okay. It's going to enable us to really kind of look at the front kind of from around about that sort of perspective position. Okay. And we're going to look at getting rid of that one and working with this branch in the back there. Can I ask you a question about that? Yep. So coming back to that idea of a branch being in development where the rest of the tree is in refinement. Yeah. If you do choose to eliminate that thicker branch and use that smaller branch, is that smaller branch kind of more in development? Is that a developmental stage where the rest of it's in refinement? So everything that are on here is going to want to be left to grow out and then everything above it or the rest of it, we're just going to be looking really kind of like holding that back for a year. And so once that decision has been made, then we can look at maybe coming back and some of these branches above it, we can maybe look at taking that one back a node or two and a bit more kind of aggressive with how we cut them back. Let's go even further back than that. Okay. So now we've got to imagine that that branch has disappeared, okay. This is a little bit more of a kind of a dynamic tree. It's got a bit more sort of flow and movement to it. And we would then also be looking at some point in the future, to maybe take that branch off the horizontal, okay. But I'm going to leave that decision for Aaron to make, okay. Realistically, I think that's probably about as much as we want to be doing. Chris says, how are you going to deal now with the uneven Nibari? The uneven Nibari. Okay, so the uneven Nibari. Part of Peter's design was to have this root as a character feature. And one of the reasons why I like the idea of tipping it up and making it a more dynamic design is because that then brings this into much more focal. This is the root that's kind of like holding it down, stopping it from falling over. So having this kind of account balancing the movement of the tree really will bring that to the forefront. And so how we would then sort of deal with it is that we would like to try and develop some of those roots. And then, as we said before, hey, how are you doing? There's my boy. So, yeah, so we're looking at really bringing that as a character feature. So that's part of the reason for that tipping. How we would then look at maybe improving is really looking at how we could then strengthen up the roots in here. OK, with that slight change of angle, all of this area here, which is perhaps dead, maybe we're not going to get any roots, that could be buried a little. OK, so we're really looking at building up the roots on this side. And that's one of the reasons, I think, why that had been allowed to develop. It's going to help those roots to strengthen up. So that tipping over is going to help us solve the issue of having very few roots there and really bringing this root to the character as part of a design feature. OK, so we're going to be looking at kind of like somewhere, like in there as a front with that branch removed. I'm going to let Aaron make that decision. Can you, since it's not bleeding, would you do a wedge cut now and start the two-step process? I can, as long as he doesn't mind. Is he watching? Oh, snap, we're going to see this. So, realistically, I'd like to be looking at it from that side a little bit more. Do it. Put yourself in the right position to have it. You're going to get the bold spot. OK, so we're looking at that line. That's the line that we want. Have you got the close-up? OK, that's the line that we want. Because that carries on the line of the trunk coming up here and up into there. So that's the line that we want to be cutting out. So this first cut that we're making is going to be at that angle. I'm almost like wanting to come straight off there, try and join up those lines. We want to go about halfway through the diameter of this branch. OK, it's still got a bit further to go. There we go. If you're not careful, we're going to end up cutting into that callus a little bit too much. OK. I'm going to take a bit of that wedge out. There we go. OK. There we go. OK. There we go. There we go. There we go. OK. OK. OK. OK. OK. OK. OK. OK. Trying to get it to join up is, it's like, when you, okay, that's not going to come out. Now the way in which this branch is kind of coming out, if we're not careful we're going to end up going through the trunk a little bit too much, so let's maybe make a little bit more of a cut along here as well. Don't know if you're going to be able to see that. I mean, it is creating quite a big wound on the front of that tree. All right, so maybe this branch is going to... Need to stay on a little bit longer. Really make sure that that callus on top heals. Okay. Have we got a close-up on that? Are we seeing it? Okay. And so what we're then going to want to do is make sure we try and get that top wound as smooth as possible, so it heals over beautifully. Okay. So a very sharp knife, just going and making sure that that wound that we've got, that's going to heal. Okay. It's going to remain on the tree, as it were. It's sculpted to the line of the trunk, and it's as sharp and as clean as we possibly can make it. If you cut your finger with a razor blade, it heals over beautifully. If you cut it with a rusty saw, you're going to end up with a big scar. Okay. It's a little bit bigger on the backside than I was hoping. Okay. But... Does it concern you? No. It doesn't concern you, but you're like, ah, if it just were a little bit smaller. Yeah. Take some of that wood out. Okay. This is probably going to be like a three-stage cut to get rid of that whole thing, just because of the way it is, how big it is and everything. There's grit. There's a putty down there. I don't know which one you prefer, but there's that. Same. It's callus mate. Callus mate is the best. It is the best? Yep. I'm a callus mate man. Sponsored by callus mate. You're a callus mate man. How do you buy? Callus. Callus. Callus. Callus. Callus. It's the mate that helps things callus. Abraham asked about the Van Mier technique for healing. What are your... The what? Van Mier? The Van Mier? Yeah. Technique. He'd have to tell me what that is. Okay. So... I, too, am not familiar. You, too... Is that Hans Van Mier? I, too, am not familiar with Van Mier. It's in quotes, Van Mier. So, I'm assuming that's a name. Yeah. I don't know. So, if he can tell us, then... Would you... Would you aluminum foil over the top of this or not necessary? Yes, but you'd want the callus mate to... Dry up first. Dry up first, which will take a while. All right. So, we're going to imagine that branch has disappeared. And so, in that interim time... So, say it's going to take us two years to get rid of that branch. In that two years, we're going to grow this branch out in its position. Okay. What makes this a nicer branch? Basically, slightly lower down the tree. Coming out off of that change of direction that we have here. Okay. Trunk moves up across there. It's going to come into a much better position. This is still flexible enough for us to be able to put some movement into it as well. Okay. There's one little shoot at the back that we can now get rid of. Okay. So, the next thing to consider is the pinching of those new shoots. So, these shoots are just starting to open up now. So, over the next week or 10 days, they're going to really sort of start to extend out. And we're going to want to get on and sort of begin to pinch out that central shoot. Once we get that sort of desired node length. So, obviously, the top of the tree is going to be much more vigorous. Okay. These vigorous areas that we have, they're the areas that you're going to want to look to first. In terms of pinching out that central shoot. So, we're going to want to pinch out that central shoot quite quickly, okay, before it gets too long. Weaker areas, this branch here that we've now decided is going to become a much sort of more focal point of the design. Things like that, we're going to let grow out and extend and extend and extend. We're not worried about that node length. Some of these weaker branches on the inside there, they probably will just open up and maybe stop. Because they don't have enough sort of stored energy. There's not enough sort of vigour in those to really sort of get out and extend off too long. Okay. So, the first area of concern is the apex, these strong coarse areas. We have reduced the vigour in them a little, okay. But they're going to grow very, very rapidly. So, getting in there and pinching out at a suitable length, okay. So, not getting in there and pinching out immediately. Because I can do that now if I had a pair of tweezers. I could get in there and I could open it up and I could pinch it off now. But that would give us much too short of a node length, which would be inappropriate for this size of tree. So, you let it open out, get to about this kind of length and pinch out. So, we can sort of see that. So, it grows out. Okay. We can see the first pair of, here we go. We've got that first pair of leaves. We're getting to see the second. So, we're going in and pinching it out. And then we've got like an appropriate node length. That's going to elongate a little bit longer as things harden off. Okay. But we don't want to get in there too soon and have that too short. We don't want to have it too long. It's like Goldilocks. Okay. If this was a Shohin size tree, we'd be getting in there, we'd be literally opening the buds out, pinching that center out. Okay. If it was a much bigger, more delicate looking tree, we'd be allowing it to elongate a little bit longer. Could you talk a little bit about how you're going to handle the apex or sort of elongate it? How we're going to handle the apex? Okay. Well, the top of the tree, the only real big issue for us is kind of like how strong this section is here. Other than that, if we just build up sort of the ramification up in the top there, we should be okay. Okay. There may be one or two branches that we need to remove. There's a couple of branches which are coming from very sort of similar positions here. As they sort of thicken up, we might want to come in and remove one of those. At the moment, it's not really doing too much harm, but it's just about building up twigs. Okay. So just as they open out, this is an area that if you, I mean, at the moment, we'd probably be looking at trying to hold it back because we've still got a little bit more development to do with this branch. We're going to be looking at sort of cutting that one off. And so we've got maybe like a couple more years before we can really look at ramifying the whole branch. The whole tree all over. So for the next couple of years, all I'll be looking at doing is making sure things don't get too coarse up in the top. Not really worrying about defoliation and building up like a real sort of twiggy section up in there. Just making sure things don't get too coarse. Then once that branch is kind of like come into play and this one's gone, then we can start looking at really sort of building up the ramification. So we're still kind of like not quite at that stage perfectly yet. But as things develop, it's just going to become a lot more kind of rounded and mature. So holding things back definitely like this branch here would end up becoming perhaps a little bit more compacted. But we've got a couple of issues with the roots to figure out. We've got a couple of issues. We've got this branch situation to figure out. And so we're not quite at that stage where we want it to worry too much about that finer branching structure. Okay. Does that make sense? Any questions? Are we done? Two hours? Are we over time? Blasted past two hours. Okay. Sorry. Yeah. Sorry for keeping everybody up. Absolutely not. Don't apologize. That was awesome, man. That was awesome. And so I just got a text from Aaron when I turned my Wi-Fi back on with a big, like, go for it. Thumbs up. Yeah. So that was good. That was good. That wasn't, that was good. The text didn't come through. That was like, wait, no. Peter, stop. You're fired. Well, I mean, to be honest, like, what we're doing here is really trying to visualize what Peter Adams was wanting. And that branch is basically just going to stop that entirely. And so, I mean, I think it was the right thing to do. Hmm. Very, very, very, very, very cool. Impressive as always, Peter. We really, really appreciate you being here with us and sharing the knowledge and a whole new level of appreciation for Japanese maple and sort of the process that creates them. We good to go? Yeah. I have maybe one or two last questions. Rafi's wondering how many years until this tree will be showable in your estimate? I would say sort of five years and you would be looking at really kind of like close to it being there or thereabouts. The root issues that, you know, just the thickening of this branch. And then, you know, the primary and secondary branch structure across the rest of the tree is there. So it's not like you've got a whole lot to work on there. A couple of years of kind of work. Working on the refinement, you know, maybe defoliating some of the more vigorous areas to build up a bit more twigs would speed that up. But, yeah, I'd say within five years, this would be easily completed. Just the only thing that would kind of like hold that back is like what issues might be under the soil. Hmm. Okay. But then, I mean, with the roots, how it is and kind of like what we've decided. We've decided with that just that slight change of angle. You know, if the soil level came to here, okay, we're hiding some of those issues anyway. Okay. In terms of sort of pot selection, you know, that kind of change of angle, that kind of change, it's not going to be too difficult to achieve. That's well within the realms of everything. So five years and it would be easily ready for display, I would say. And then on less vigorous trees, Matt's wondering, could you let them grow out and then prune back to one to two pairs of leaves after they harden off? Yes, but the only issue with that is that then you might have like elongated, like the node length might be too long. Okay, so, yeah, it's a difficult one because everything that you're doing with them, like, you know, you're pruning back those, that new sort of spring growth is basically restricting its ability to photosynthesize. And so you are deliberately weakening them. You can allow them to extend off, and if you are going to allow them to extend off, then absolutely no fertilization. Absolutely, because it's just going to get too long. Japanese maples have got like a, once you get them into that ramified stage, they've got like a limited lifespan of like how long you can keep them restricted and contained and restricted and contained. Because, as I was sort of saying previously with the satsukis, those branch tips become lignified. The more restrained it occurs, the kind of like the less energy it has overall, and it just kind of slowly weakens and slowly weakens. Then you start to have branches dropping off and stuff like that. So every so often, you might need to just say, okay, right, I'm going to lose some of the branches. I'm going to cut back the structure a little bit. Then I'm going to rebuild. I'm going to allow it to grow out a little bit, build up a bit of a head of steam, cut back again, and then start working on that. The finer branches. And then Adam said, where I live, Japanese maples could be a little iffy and Korean maples fare better. Do you think there's a noticeable difference in culture between the two? Never worked with Korean maples. Yeah, it's interesting. I've never heard of a Korean maple. I've heard of Japanese maples cultivated in Korea, but I've never particularly heard of Korean maples. I've seen trident maples that are like Taiwanese trident maples that are a little bit coarser. Well, trident maples are originally from China, anyway. Oh, okay. All right. So that's interesting. The Japanese trident maple, the Japanese native trident maples, the Miyasama kaide, which has much bigger leaves. Whereas the trident maple that we use for bonsai originally came from China. Used to be called tolkaide. You look in a lot of old books, it might be called tolkaide, which basically means from China. Wow. I was having this conversation earlier, just a couple of days ago. With Akiyama. Trapping barns. Because we were just talking about the importance of the leaf size and the DNA. And how if a tree's got bad DNA, you're just ice skating uphill. You just can't get it to ramify up. And how Fuyuan has the best DNA. Because they recognized that early on. And they just built all of their trees out of a variety. A little sub-variety that had the perfect characteristics. Ice skating uphill. I've never, have you heard that before? No, I was just wondering. It was new. Swimming upstream. Ice skating uphill. Swimming upstream. Same thing. I love it. It comes from Blade, but he has some profanities in there. Ice skating uphill from Blade. Like the vampire movie? Yeah, Blade the vampire movie. On that bombshell. Peter, thank you very much. No. It's been my pleasure. Pleasure. Very much appreciated. Thanks for staying up. Thank you guys. We'll see you at the Q&A. And if we don't see you at the Q&A. See you next week. Bones high hard this weekend. Go hard, guys. We'll see you next week. Thank you. 
