Mariah Live members, it's that time of year where we start to get into all of the nuances of repotting and one of the consistent themes that we've had over the course of the past few seasons on Mariah Live is this notion of how do we put a tree onto a stone and what do we use to adhere the roots to that stone so that we get the best possible optimal growing conditions on that stone. Now one of the deviations that we've shown everybody to be able to compensate for a lack of Kato or a lack of muck is the ability to use sphagnum moss as that retaining component in conjunction with soil to form the walls on a slab planting. We're going to be digging more into vertical stone planting and in order to effectively plant a tree on a vertical stone, although sphagnum can be utilized, if we can source a good resource for Kato and really secure that element, understanding how to mix Kato into making an effective muck mix for rock planting is a technique unto itself and one of the things that we're going to be doing is we're going to be using sphagnum moss and we're going to be using sphagnum moss and we're going to be using sphagnum moss and we're going to be using sphagnum moss and we're going to be using sphagnum moss andました sponge and plant sapling which is one that I want to dialogue with family and break down the techniques for. Now, in front of me I've got three different components that we utilize in order to make a good mix. Let's just first understand sort of those components. Number one, we've got the Kato itself. Now, Kato is a little bit of a mysterious substance, its this jet black sticky, pasty stuff However, we're going to be using this black substance as the paste that adheres the tree to vertical stones and vertical faces in order to facilitate root growth, but also basically to glue that tree to the stone in addition to the anchor wires that we use to tie it in. This is really how we contour the roots. This is really how we anchor that root system to the stone so it can survive and thrive as it moves down to the lower portion of the container. This is an irreplaceable component of a muck mixture. In addition to the Kato, we've got some long-fibered sphagnum moss soaking in water here. We leave this long-fibered sphagnum moss long. We do not want to grind this up because we're going to take these big, long strands. These are going to be the webbing that connects the Kato together to be able to span longer distances with a thinner amount of Kato to give us a better aesthetic and to facilitate a little bit more of that moisture retention in that vertical wall. We have no reservoir to retain water. In addition to Kato and the long-fibered sphagnum, as we sift Akadama at Mirai, we're always collecting the dust of the Akadama. The dust of the Akadama and the finest particles that escape the 1 16th screen become a really important amendment to our muck to be able to offer some of that nutrient-binding capacity as well as another form of adherence for that Kato and that long-fibered sphagnum moss to form one complete system. With the dust of Akadama to really build a solid muck system. Now before we start mixing these, we've actually got to prepare the Kato so that it's ready to go into mixture. There's no way we can put it in in that clumped form and expect ourselves to be able to mix it up. So we've got to break it up prior to ever forming that mixture. Let's take a look at how we go about the preparation of Kato to be provided and supplied and utilized in the muck composition. We're going to start with a large, oversized five-gallon bucket. And this will. Really hold all of the contents of our eventual muck mixture. We're going to take our bag of really black, dense Kato, which is actually a substance of decomposing organic material from the bottom of old lake beds that is harvested and utilized. That decomposing organic content has stones in it. Sometimes it has branches in it. Sometimes it has actual plant material itself in it. And in the process of preparing the Kato, we're going to be breaking it up and pulling out all of those larger chunks. And really separating this into a fine, nice paste-like substance to be able to mix with the Sphagnum and the Akadama dust. So I'm just going to dump my bag of Kato in here. And if we have a ton of Kato, we may want to break it up. I'll probably go 50% of this bag so I have space in the bucket to work. Let's go ahead and insert the Kato and let's see how we break that down to really form that fine paste. Okay. So you can see. If we look inside the bucket, just how black and really kind of sticky and nasty this stuff is. And again, this is not favorable for root growth. This is more the glue that binds. If we take a smell of it, it actually has kind of an anaerobic, stinky stench to it, which is because it really has no space for oxygen. That's what's creating that odor. Now when we're storing Kato, before we ever make that muck solution, we always want to keep it airtight and make sure that we have some moisture in that bag to keep it hydrated. Because once Kato goes completely dry, it's very difficult, if not impossible, to rehydrate that soil. It becomes significantly hydrophobic, meaning it repels water once it dries. Even once we apply the muck to our composition, we're going to want to make sure that we never let that muck totally dry out because that too, even with the Sphagnum and Akadama, will become hydrophobic. Now once we have this in the bucket, I'm just going to start kind of at the lower end of my Kato and I'm just going to grind this Kato against the wall of the bucket. And what we're looking to pull out are any sharp sticks or big stones or organic debris that start to come from the smashing of this as a paste. Now we have to do this with organization because we've got a lot of Kato. So I'm kind of going to lump all of this Kato onto one side of the bucket just to keep an unworked portion and a worked portion separate from each other so we can track our progress. And one of the advantages about it that you'll notice is that this is going to stick to the bucket. So we're going to be able to keep that divided Kato perfectly separated over the course of this and I may take a little bit more out just so that we don't have a huge mass to work on. Take a little bit more out to create that space so that we can clearly define what's been worked and what has not. So my goal in mashing this Kato against the wall is just to use my hand to really tease that out into a singular sheet of Kato and pull out those inconsistencies, but also to break up the Kato. So I don't have big chunks of this anaerobic soil. When I go to adhere the trees to the rock. So I'm just going to take any big chunks that exist here and I'm just going to kind of draw them out almost as if I'm like sort of kneading dough or rolling dough, but I'm using my hand and you'll see that I form this really nice thin consistency against the wall over here and I'm just going to continue to pull from this pile and sort of drag that across the bottom of the bucket and you can see how black it is and how streaky it becomes when we start to break it up. Every once in a while you're going to hit a stone or something sharp in here and those are the things that we discard. We don't want big chunks in our Kato when we start to form that mix to make the muck. So we're trying to get all of that out as we work those chunks out and we start to just go through this process of refining our Kato to be able to create that perfect muck that's going to give us maximum success in that rock planting composition. Now one thing about working Kato in this fashion is it is fairly labor intensive. Your hands are going to get tired, your forearms are going to get tired, occasionally your hands can get a little cut or ground up from the contents that are inside of it. But there's no real technique to be able to work this in another way because if we try to use a tool, a conventional tool to roll it out, the Kato will adhere to the tool. We don't have that sensation of those chunks and we want to be sure that we thoroughly need this and work this to be as quality as it possibly can be. So this is just that process. One of those labor intensive processes. One of those labor intensive portions of bonsai. If you're doing a stone planting, you're not planning on something easy or quick in terms of that creation process and this is one of those initial entries into stone plantings we start to recognize. Either you're committed to it or you're not, but it's going to be a little bit of a slog and a lot of labor to be able to create this piece and this is the beginning of that process. It's really working the Kato's like this is a big part of quality stone planting and I think too, you know, there's always ways to try and shortcut or make the operation a lot more mechanized. Yeah. But this is kind of preparing me already just for the process of the composition. It's nice to have. It's nice to have your hands on every single piece of the things that we create because bonsai is such a tactile art form that in coming through this kind of process and really working the Kato, you know, every material as well as you can possibly know it to be able to understand. The dynamics of the rock planting that you're going to be creating and that's, you know, when we start to get into finding mechanized ways to shift the experience of bonsai creation. Bonsai was never it was never about efficiency. It's about the tactile process of working with a tree to create it and that also includes the soil system itself. Well, I got into a rock pile here. But it forms. It's a fine paste. I mean, it's crazy. This is why this is why it's so invaluable because this can adhere to vertical surfaces. I mean, it's a magical, magical substance. If you try to make your muck mix out of lumpy Kato, you're going to have a real rude awakening when you start trying to adhere that tree to that rock and you can't get that contour because the contour of the muck when we adhere that tree is as big of a component as the location and the style of the tree itself. You want that all to look natural. Yeah. You want it to be totally under your control. Ah, gosh, dang it, those stinking rocks destroy your fingers. But this is why we do it to find that. Now notice in this operation how I've kept everything separate. I've just continued to work it, slide it, work it, slide it, work it, slide it. And once it's worked, it can't clump back up into that dense mass of that decomposed organic debris. It's forever broken down into much finer particles, almost like working clay to make a ceramic. We're working this Kato to be able to make that shape of that eventual root system on that stone. Ah, you dirty dog. Where are you? There you are. That's a workout on the forearms. But now that we've done it, all of our Kato has officially been broken down into a nice fine particle and a nice, fine consistency. Yeah. Now we've got a new Kato. Oh yeah. And we've just added a new glass to our room here. We're waiting for it to start moving. We've gotta come up with a new Kato to test it. You still don't know if the Kato will stay on top of this whole bucket, right? For the most part, no. I know it's still there but I, I'm still kind of ready to go. We're gonna move that right now. Donald's gonna get a little bit of light on this one. No, don't do that. No, I'm gonna do it right now. You can see, it's all in there. It has a really good, consistent, thin layer of that organic material. You can see how well it adheres if I just roll this bucket over. Stays on top of the bucket the whole time. that granular surface and that craggy surface of that stone that this is going to grip and it's going to hold those roots exactly where we want them okay now that i've broken the kato up i'm going to go ahead and just move all of this kato down in the bucket kind of as a uniform mass not wanting to clump it up right as i shed it off of this wall notice how it just sort of falls off into really fine masses that's exactly why we did what we did and i'm going to move it to one corner of the bucket okay and the last thing we want to do is come back and try to compress this or pack it we're going to leave it nice and loose in that side of the bucket now we have a lot of kato in here this is a significant amount of muck because the kato is only one-third of the components that we're going to put into this now that we have this in this bucket in that proportion we're going to match that proportion both with the long-fibered sphagnum as well as the dry akadama to go a one-third meter farthтак sacred namab to go a one-third meter farthtak sacred namab One-third Kato, one-third long-fibered sphagnum wet, and a one-third Akadama dry. And then we're going to add water to adjust the moisture consistency of our muck to be able to adhere to either a vertical surface with a little less water or a horizontal surface with a little bit more water in order for the muck to stick and not be so wet that it starts to decompose and fall apart in the process of sticking to those surfaces. So naturally, with gravity working against that vertical surface, we've got to have a little bit less water and a little bit more of the stickiness, not as conducive to healthy root growth, but definitely that adherence component that we're looking for in our muck composition to be able to mount that tree to that vertical face. Let's go ahead and add the moss and see what that looks like, try to get our proportions right and then we'll start the mixing process to really make that muck that we're looking for. Okay, so now that we've got our Kato already worked out in the bucket, we've got this extra bag that we still have some Kato, unworked Kato, in that we're going to go ahead and seal up. I wanted to do this as a touch point so that you understand how significant it is to lock out the air and how we go about doing that effectively. So I'm going to take my bag and I'm going to bunch this up and I'm really going to try to compress every single air space in this bag to eliminate as much of the drying process as possible. Okay, I'm going to compress all of the chunks of Kato that are creating air space between them to try and mush this into one solid sort of layer of that really. Okay, and then I'm going to continue to kind of knead out those air pockets so that I get good contact and I can see the moisture of the Kato on the edge of the bag here. That means that I've gotten rid of all of the air and then once I have all of that loose packaging worked out around it, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to twist this. Okay, now once I've twisted it, I'm not quite done yet. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take just a scrap piece of wire, aluminum, steel, copper. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to hold that twist with one really nice solid turn, wires moving in opposite directions. I'm going to continue to twist the neck of that bag so the whole thing is nice and twisted and I'm going to fold this down between those two ends of the wire. Now I can take these pieces of wire and I can hold that kink that I've formed in the bag with all of those twists, give it just a nice little secure turn here so that we can undo it later and that will never dry out as a bag holding Kato. Okay. Now it's time to add the sphagnum. Now when we first add the sphagnum, we just want to sort of take the sphagnum, leave it really wet, tons of moisture in that sphagnum. This is not going to overly moisten this composition because the dry Akadama is coming in third. We always put the Akadama in third because it allows us to adjust the moisture content and we can add water afterwards. So I'm just going to fill this bucket up, one-third full with really nicely soaked, thoroughly saturated long-fibered sphagnum moss. And again, I want this to be 30%. 30%, 33% of the composition because it's one-third Kato, one-third sphagnum, and one-third dry Akadama. When I'm putting this in there, I don't want to smash it. I don't want to compress it. I want to leave it really hydrated and full of that water because we're going to mix those long exposed fibers inside of this Kato with the Akadama and create that spider web with those long fibers. If we mash this together, you're going to ball your sphagnum up and it's not going to have the ability to really form that network of fibers. Okay. So I'm going to go ahead and add the Akadama and just see how much Akadama and how much moisture we're going to need to get that really nice sticky consistency for a vertical slab planting. So when I add the Akadama, I'm going to be a little bit conservative with the Akadama just because of the fact that we can always add more Akadama later to be able to change that moisture environment if we somehow insert too much water and get it a little too wet. We can dry it out a little bit with more Akadama. So we've got one-third Akadama, one-third of the sphagnum, and one-third of the Kato now. We've got a little bit less Akadama, so I have that adaptive capacity to add a little more to change the consistency if we go too far in the addition of water. Now in order to make this really easy to mix, I'm just going to add a touch of water to this to hydrate some of that Akadama, and I'm going to go ahead and start mixing this composition together so that we get a thorough meshing throughout the top and bottom of this muck mixture of the same consistency of Kato, long-fibered sphagnum, and dry Akadama. Okay. So to start that process, I really want to kind of get down to the bottom of all of these. I want to spread that sphagnum. I want to pull that Kato up and into this mixture, and I want to try to get everything on the bottom up to the top so that I make sure I don't get those pockets of compressed Kato or those balls of condensed sphagnum sitting on the bottom. The Akadama too will kind of lump up as a dry mass on the bottom corner of this bucket, so we've just got to be really sure that we're constantly working from the bottom of this up to the top. And we're giving it a good mix here. And then we're going to start mixing. We're going to start to get that distribution of all of these elements to form that really thorough mixture. Okay. And what's going to happen when the Akadama, being dry, starts to mix with all these elements? It's going to start to suck water away, and it's not going to necessarily stick together when we get it thoroughly mixed. And that's when we come back and add a little more water. That dryness is equally as capable of reducing the ability for all of this to adhere as too much wetness is. So we're striking that balance in between wet and dry. Okay. Big, messy chunk of Kato, look at that black stuff. Start to see it all bunching together, becoming very, very sticky now, so it's becoming harder to mix. Notice if I apply pressure, how it all adheres. Starts to form that clumping, really mass kind of, and in my palm of my hand, you can just see, I've got some Sphagnum, I've got some Kato, and I've got some Akadama. And all of a sudden, all of that starts to bind together and form that beautiful, beautiful muck that we've been trying to create this whole time. This is exactly what it's about, it's kind of that moment. Now if we're too conservative with any of the three components, we're not going to get a really consistent mixture that's going to be functional in the creation of the composition. You have to commit to that 30-30-30, that one-third, one-third, one-third proportion. It works. I promise it works. Okay. Always recirculating, recirculate, recirculate, just like you're mixing anything else. You're mixing a bucket of paint, okay, and I'm going to start to now cycle in my bucket so that I make sure I get all of that stuff off of the bottom. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to start pulling to the side, pulling up off the bottom and sort of clumping this up so that I make sure. I want to make sure every corner of the bottom of that bucket has all of the contents removed from it. I want to see every corner of the bottom of that bucket now. You'll see areas where there's a lot more brown. Notice how much Akadama we just pulled up. Notice how much black we just pulled up. Those are unmixed areas of the bucket. We have to get those really thoroughly mixed in. Get to the corners. Get to the corners. Get to the corners. Get to the corners. Get to the corners. Get to the corners. Get to the corners. Another pocket of Akadama right there. Kind of a central pocket of Kato. Got a big ball of Sphagnum right there. Working hard. I think we're about there. I'm going to go one more time just to make sure. Notice how this is starting to really adhere. Look at that. Beautiful. Every corner's been turned. This has been thoroughly mixed. Starting to get a uniform color. We're going to go one more time. Uniform color. When I dig into this, I don't see any pockets of Akadama. I don't see any pockets of black. I don't see any balls of Sphagnum. I've pulled everything in and up and off of that corner. This is now what I would consider to be a really beautiful mixture of muck mix to be able to create a vertical stone planting. Now, one last test point to be able to decide, do we have the correct consistency? Do we need to add more Akadama to dry it? Or do we need to add more water to wet it? We'll take a ball of muck out of this and just kind of form it into a nice baseball. As we kind of hold that ball and shake it, it starts to break apart like that. This says that we probably have just a little bit too much water in this. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to come back to that extra amount of Akadama. Just a little bit. Just a touch. Just a touch. I'm going to get some of that moisture and form a tighter bond. And again, we can always come back with more water if we overshoot the Akadama. So we're functioning between water and Akadama to get that consistency. And it's immediate. Almost the Akadama just sucks in that water and that porosity of that really fine particle starts to absorb that excess water. Let's get it all the way down to the bottom. Naturally, the water in this. The excess water. When you move to the bottom, your muck on the bottom of the bucket is always going to be a little bit softer when you get to the end of your composition. You may have to add more Akadama at that point. But also, evaporation is going to be taking place while you're doing this. And this is going to dry out a little bit. We'll keep it hydrated as we create the composition by putting a wet rag over the bucket. Or we could put this back in a plastic bag, pull all the air spaces out, twist it and flip it over so that we can just hold it there, open it back up when we need it, close it when we don't. Okay, let's see what that did in terms of that addition of Akadama now. Oh, that feels really, that feels really nice. No breakage. No breakage. That's exactly what we wanted. That's the consistency we need to be at. Still wet enough to be able to work in between the fine roots. Not so dry that we're not going to be able to get that tree and all those air spaces against the stone filled. But it's strong enough to hold together now where it just barely starts to crack with a significant amount of force. That's really well mixed muck to be able to create a vertical stone planting. Now if we're going to do something like this limber pine behind me and create a wall on a horizontal slab, we want to go a little bit wetter. We want to go a little bit softer. We're going to build up that wall. And then we press that wall into the soil system and it fills in some of the gaps on the edges of that root system. We're okay with softness there because it doesn't have to cling to a vertical surface. It starts to lay over the top of that root system. On that vertical stone planting though, we need a little bit more solidarity. Use your Akadama dust and the balance of water and Akadama dust to be able to create that correct consistency. Mix it thoroughly. One part Kato, one part Akadama dust and one part long fiber sphagnum moss. Well soaked. That's how you create the best muck mix possible to do a stone planting with bonsai. 
