Super Tuesday. What up, guys? What's going on? 92 degrees at Mirai today, headed to 100 tomorrow. I always think you guys should care about the weather as much as I do, and you probably don't, but this is going to become a thematic thing for us because the studio is a sweltering 95 degrees. Actually, we had the air conditioning running. It does very little for this space. If I start sweating and it causes you discomfort, I apologize. No, I'm working for you. What's going on? Happy to be in studio tonight to tackle one of the biggest, most massive chunks of knowledge that is never, ever discussed, and I have no idea why. Fundamental aspect of multi-flush pines, developmental pruning. You guys have been waiting for it. We didn't hit it last year. We've been working and working and talking, and oh, what about this moment, this moment, this moment? We've arrived. Got Kendall on the mic this evening. What's up? Got Josh producing the stream, Hunter on the detail cam, and our Jedi Knight up in the booth giving us the sound quality that you guys oh so dearly probably never notice but are benefiting from. We got any announcements for everybody? Q&A on Thursday. What's the date? The 9th? Yeah, today's the 7th, 8th, 9th. Yep, 9th. Yep, at 10 a.m. Pacific Daylight Time. QA. 10 a.m. Be there, be square. Got a lot to cover. I have some pieces of information I owe you guys and have to deliver on. Borer, Sticky Traps, still working on all of the other stuff. We'll be accumulating that knowledge, and before we start, just wanted to touch base again. Covered Wagon is rolling from Mirai to the National Show for the September 7th, 8th, and 9th exhibition in Rochester, New York. You need soil. You need stands. You need soil. You need soil. You need stands. You need pots. You need trees. Please let us know soon. The truck is filling up. It's becoming quite full. We will be vending at the National Show, and we will be launching a web store sale via Mirai on, when are we launching that sale, Kendall? August 23rd. August 23rd, the sale goes live on our web store, so stay tuned. Trees, pots, stands, all the good stuff is going to be available, and we're working frantically to get it all done. What else? There was something else. No? Covered Wagon? Covered Wagon, yeah, I guess that was it, huh? That's the biggie. I think that's it. Okay, all right, cool. Oh, got a new piece of feature content coming out for you guys. We filmed it today on the preformed hook as a technique, and a very pointed utilization of the preformed hook, the logic behind it, the technique to execute it. We're going to be doing sort of sequential technical feature pieces of content for you guys, so that inside of the structural wiring, inside of secondary tertiary wiring, we start hitting all of those situations that you guys encounter that aren't in the video, and I think you're going to benefit from it, so stay tuned. That'll be out later this week. Should launch Thursday or Friday at the latest, and we'll keep working on all the cool projects that have yet to be unveiled, but we're busy here at Mirai. It's exciting times, always making trees. Okay, without further, ado, developmental pruning on our multi-flush pine. So before we start this, I just want to dig into and recap, what is development? What does development mean? Okay, so we're saying, listen, we want elongation of branches. We want thickening of branches. We want rebuilding of the root system. We want expansion of the foliar mass, and if we get expansion of the foliar mass, that gives us back budding, which we are starting to see in a large quantity. Starting now through the fall, we'll be seeing, we'll be seeing, we'll be seeing, we'll be seeing, we'll be seeing, that vascular tissue accumulated because of the expanded needle mass as a result of development, and when we talk development, we're saying, listen, we're not talking about development like a whole tree has to be handled, every branch in a developmental state, and you guys saw that on the multi-flush stream we did on the red pine, where we decandled a lot of branches and put those into refinement, but we had those, some of those longer branches that we needed the length, we needed thickening, we needed back budding, we needed those branches to behave in a specific way, and so we allowed them to elongate. That red pine is behind me. We're going to touch on that second tonight, but first I wanted to come back just to a very standard Japanese black pine, not standard in terms of quality. This is an outstanding tree. Standard in terms of coming back to Japanese black pine as that reference point for the multi-flush sort of thematic, and a tree that has a lot of developmental pieces in place. We did not decandle a single branch on this tree. Now you guys might be saying, wait, why did you not decandle a single branch on this tree? Well, number one, this tree was heavily transplanted this past, this spring, spring of this year. When we transplanted it, we had to do some very severe root work, and so we said, listen, our developmental tactic in terms of our strategy around this tree was to use the needle mass to build up and establish the root system. We used that needle mass, we didn't decandle, we built up the root system, and as a result of building the root system, we were able to build up the root system, we've now recuperated that root system, we've formed new roots, we've got, we see fertilizer decomposing on the soil surface. Now we know that we've got the roots reactivated, and we've got the roots functioning when we see foliar expansion, because when we see this new growth push out, what the tree is telling us is I have enough root mass to sustain the needle mass I currently have on the tree, and I have enough root mass to be able to push out and sustain the new growth that forms, right? And we've got very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, vigorous new growth. Now some of us in the multi-flush process, we don't feel comfortable decandling come sort of that June, July period, and we say, man, do I decandle, do I not? If in doubt, we can always hold back on decandling and pushing trees into that refined position because we know that we have techniques to be able to recuperate the strength of the tree, okay? But we see that microbial activity re-stimulated, and the justification of that microbial activity re-stimulated is in the tree. So we've got to be able to recuperate the strength of the tree, in the decomposition of the organic fertilizer on the soil. Hunter, are you in here? Give me in here, show me that decomposition. Okay, so those broken down fertilizer, this was bio-gold, this was pelletized. You can see that it's breaking down, it's decomposing, it's turning into a very fine amount of organic matter. That says roots are active, they're stimulating microbial activity, microbial activity is spreading throughout the soil, and it's actively decomposing that organic material, okay? So consequently, when this is decomposing, it's decomposing, it's decomposing, it's decomposing, it's decomposing, it's decomposing, it's decomposing, it's decomposing, it wasn't that strong. We did that heavy repotting, wasn't that strong. We let it establish that root system, we didn't try to decandle, we weren't panicked about holding the tree back, we know we can come back and manage it. We put the tree into development, and this tree had a lot of branches on it that needed more length. So if we go back wide, Josh, we start to get some of these areas where you see these underdeveloped pieces of growth, where this branch up at the top clearly needed more length, needed more elongation, and we've got that elongation present here, right? So now we can come back at this point in time, and this is where we need to refine and hone in our understanding. If we accomplish the length that we wanted, if we accomplish the thickness, if we accomplish the root sort of regeneration, and we see that evidenced in the decomposition of the fertilizer and the expansion of the foliar mass, if we're seeing the back buds forming and we say, man, I don't need to leave the needle mass on to get what I'm trying to accomplish, I've got it, then we can start to look to, at this point, pruning that elongated growth, knowing that anywhere that we prune along this new growth at this point in time will not push the growth back to the very base and cause that second flush to happen. And in fact, we're at a point in the year where if we prune that growth, we're going to get buds right at that location where we prune. Okay? And this is the big point. Now, I want to go through the indicators that allow us to identify that. So, I'm just going to step back. I'm going to take a look at this tree as it exists, and we're going to go space by space. All right. So, I want to go through this sort of space by space. You guys see the whole tree. Hunter, go ahead and blast me into sort of this frame right here so that we can see what's happening in these lower branches, and we can talk about some of the theory and strategy. Okay? So, we're here. All right. So, when I start to look at these lower branches, one of the first things that I recognize is I definitely don't want them. Well, number one, I want them to be thicker, and I want more back budding to be occurring in these branches. If you notice, I've got growth at the tip. It's not super strong compared to the growth in the other portions of the tree. I've got one smaller shoot in here. Ideally, I would be getting back budding back along this branch. Now, when it was styled, we had a little break. Obviously, it didn't impact the health of the tree. I've got sites where back buds should form, and I actually have a really small back bud forming right at this junction right here where one probably candles, this was the beginning of one origin of growth. That's going to be heavily meristematic tissue. I see that forming. I'm not going to touch this. When we talk about the developmental pruning, to come back in and reduce the length of a really small shoot like this, we're literally going to save ourselves by coming back and pruning this. We're going to save ourselves a quarter of an inch. That's not what this conversation is. We're talking about making length decisions that are getting us big significant reductions and accomplishing what we were trying to accomplish. I want more back buds. I don't de-candle, and I don't cut back in the developmental style right now. Now, if we compare that to the branch next to us, we've got a ton of back buds. We've got back buds all the way up to the base of the branch here. I still want more thickening, so I'm not going to be touching this, and any reduction that I would do to this length would not improve, would not give me any sort of transition. Now, when I look at this branch, I've got a little bit longer. Notice this is longer and stronger. Still, though, I've got the back buds back in here, but I don't have the kind of length that it would encourage me to be pruning this, because we're saying, listen, I've got the length, I've got the thickness, I've got the foyer mass, I've got the roots, I've got the back budding that I want. I still want more thickness here. I still want more back budding behind where I'm at. I'm not going to touch this lowest branch. I still have things I want to accomplish, so let's keep going around the tree and just taking a look. Now, on this back branch here, this now starts to touch on the kind of strength. Hunter, can they see this? Okay, so notice how much length I have in here. Now, if I were striving for length, and I wanted to now, I've got that length somewhere in this shoot, I would prune this shoot back to the desired length at this point in time. This still is building back buds on the interior. I need more thickening as the lowest branch on the tree. I have relatively weak branches over in here. Again, theoretically, I don't have what I want to be coming back in and pruning this, so I'm going to use, I'm going to leave this needle mass on the tree, to continue pulling resources, photosynthesizing, moving sugars and starches, giving me back buds here, giving me thickening over the fall season where we build vascular growth. I'm not going to touch this right now. I'm going to keep going. I'm going to come back to this piece, and actually, let me swing this around. Josh, go ahead and blast this out for a second. Now, when I look at this big branch back in the back here, I have the kind of thickness that I want. I've got really nice interior branches. I've got a really nice solid sort of system set up. I've got buds. Look at all of the branching that I have back in here. Now, we left this on because we were trying to regenerate the root mass. Maybe now, where I'm at, I say, listen, over the fall season, I want to allocate resources. I've got interior branches. I don't need any more thickening. We can come back at this point in time, and we can make some pruning decisions around the branches that are on the tree because it is in development. All right? I'm going to rotate this to me. Hunter, go ahead and come in close. Now, we're talking about this big thick branch here. I'm going to say, whoa. When we styled this, I left these two branches plus this tip, which technically gives me three branches at this junction. One, two, three. We know with multi-flush pines, if we leave three branches at a junction, we get excessive swelling. However, we also identified that this tip was being left to rebuild the root system and to generate strength. We've got the thickness. We've got the interior branches, and we've recovered the strength. So I'm not going to be handling the end of this, but I can at this point in time, based on what I'm trying to accomplish and knowing that we're heading into the vascular growth phase of the tree over the fall season, I can come back in. I can come back in and cut it back to two because this tip has already served its purpose. I have the thickness. I have the desired length. I have the interior growth and the ramification built. Now I can transition that energy. I save that from excessively swelling. I make that decision, and we're going to avoid structural flaws by doing a full removal. Now, you guys might be saying, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. I thought you were talking about pruning back this big, long piece of growth. This is not true. This is true. I am in other parts of the tree. But developmentally, we've got multiple things that we're approaching and talking about, and one of the developmental keys to this is we had three branches in an area that were serving the purpose of rebuilding the roots, one of our developmental strategies. I kept them on. I rebuilt the roots. I saved three because I knew I didn't want this length. I take this away before we start thickening over the fall season with that vascular growth. And now I stop any structural flaws from happening. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to clean this up, cut this nice and flush so that I get rid of any of that knuckle that exists. Okay. And I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to patch that. Ninety-two degrees right now means that we're going to get a lot of sap flow. So if we're going to stop this from excessively bleeding because it is the time of the year where sap is flowing very, very quickly and it's very, very liquid as a result of the heat, I'm going to go ahead and patch that right when I cut it so that sap isn't going to be bleeding. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to patch that right when I cut it so that sap isn't going to be bleeding out all over the place, right onto the bark of the tree and causing sort of this open wound to occur. If I cut that and sap started immediately flowing, then I'm not going to be able to stop it with the putty and that's where we go back to the dry sphagnum moss on that wound, tie it to the wound with raffia like we did in traditional bonsai design, the stream that we did last year on the Scotts pine. And it will soak up that sap and cauterize that cut so that it doesn't keep bleeding. Okay. Now let's stay on this branch. So I've got these pieces and I'm looking at them and I'm saying maybe I don't want any more length. Okay. I don't, I still don't have enough needle or enough of an elongated candle here to be coming back in and shortening this. This is not enough. I need a really long expanse of needle mass to be making that length decision. I will leave these on the tree and I will start the decandling process next year. Okay. Let's come to this branch right here in the back. Now this branch too is thick enough. I've got interior buds on it. This is a point where I'm going to be saying notice how long, notice how long this piece of growth is on the tree. Okay. Maybe I choose to save this strongest piece and go ahead and make a length selection. Okay. So I'm going to be looking at this and I'm going to be saying, all right, from the front where you guys are looking. Okay. I've got this length here. And if I'm going to save this shoot, now I've got one, two, three shoots on this. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to save this because it's the strongest and it's still giving me a lot of resources. But I don't want it to be this long. I want to shorten it. Okay. And I'm going to roll this around so Hunter can come in on the detail. Give me this frame right here. Okay. Now let's look at the indicators that tell us we're at this point. When this was emerging, this was solid green. This was green. This was a fleshy stem. Notice how right in the center of the scales there's still a little bit of green left. But most of the scales of that growth, the shedding phloem as it's starting to harden off and really starting to form its vascular backbone, which means the phloem that transports the sugars and starches is sloughing off and creating this exterior area. We don't have bark yet. We just have shedding phloem. The yellowing of that green, the hardening off of that green is the indicator for timing. To be doing this pruning. And anywhere that I prune on this, instead of pushing the growth back to the base as if it were a decandling, I'm going to come back in here. I'm going to estimate the desired length that I want. And I'm going to cut right there. Okay. I'm going to cut that length. I've left some of the newer needles from this season on that remaining shoot that I left behind. I cut at the desired length for the design of the tree. I see that yellowing and that hardening. That hardening off which says it's no longer going to push new growth back at the base. And by doing that, what's going to happen is I'm going to get buds loading up in the crotches of the needles right at the point right where I cut. Okay. This is a huge, huge concept because now next year my growth starts from this length and I start building my branch at a length that is proportional to the rest of my design. This is a massive, massive concept. All right. If you guys have ever wondered, how do I build a pine? How do I make these decisions? I'm going through that strategy with you guys right now and it is very, very subjective to what you're trying to accomplish. Okay. So that is that cut that we've been talking about. All right. Now I'm going to move up on the tree. Go wide for me, Josh. Okay. So I'm going to look at this piece here. Now I've got interior shoots all over the inside. Right up in here I've got beautiful branches. Most of the time people think, as if this were a deciduous tree, that we should come back here and cut, right? I mean we should be cutting here and then we'll build out the rest of those branches. This is the wrong strategy for building a multi-flush pine. Okay. We're talking about conifers now. In the deciduous world, I understand that. We are in the conifer world and we're in the multi-flush pine world. If I cut here and I wire these out and I think I'm going to be building a branch that has two, four, five, six branches. Two, four, eight, sixteen, thirty-two and I'm going to have that finished branch. That's great. But I already have the length established on so many other branches in the tree that I'm going to be decandling at that length that the length of this branch needs to fit into the design of the bigger branches on the tree already. So when I look at this, I have this big long piece. I want at least this length for this branch to be able to fit into the current design. I'm going to come back here. I'm going to guesstimate that length. That feels pretty good. And I'm going to cut right there. Now what's going to happen is I'm going to get buds right at that needle cluster of the remaining needles that I left on that shoot. And this is where I start two next year, four the following year, eight the following year, sixteen, thirty-two. I'm building a branch from here. Okay. But this is where you have to understand the strategy of multi-flush pine. Because as I'm building this branch. I'm building this branch from here. It's not a quality branch. It's got this big long length. There's no taper. All of these other branchlets are not necessarily that high quality. But I've got these interior shoots that I'll be laying out. I'll be decandling these next year. This will go from one to two to four to eight to sixteen to thirty-two. This will be building a quality branch as we're continuing to utilize this to maintain proportion. But also to drive growth and strength through these branches. As a result of leaving this. The proportion of the tree in the first iteration will be appropriate. Will look good. And will develop faster. While we're developing this poor branch out here. Using that needle mass to drive development here. We'll be decandling and we'll be building a much higher quality branch out here. And we may come back in one year. Two years. Three years. Four years. We start cutting these other branches back to interior pieces that we've been decandling. And building up ramification. Just like I did on this branch over here. We take that tip off. And now we've got a good branch. At some point these will build to the size. This will be so obnoxiously long that we'll cut back to here. But we'll only cut back to here when we're regaining the proportion. And replacing it with a built highly ramified branch. This is multi-flush strategy for developing a refined tree over the course of time. And so I want you guys to be very clear. Don't cut back and start building a branch that you think is going to build into the eventual form. Save the energy. Save the strength. Utilize this for the proportion that the tree has now. Build behind it with high quality branches. And when it's time. When you have an established branch. When you've built this. Then come back and cut here when you've got this big beautiful branch. Only then. Because this is pulling energy. And increasing the quality of development of these interior pieces. This is the strategy you have to understand. This is multi-flush pine development at its finest. Its peak performance level. Okay. Alright. So that's there. Now. When I get to these branches here. Let's go wide again. Okay. When I get here. I've got a really beautiful nice strong branch. We already took off some of these ends because they weren't giving us. We didn't need any more thickness. We have interior ramification. We have everything that we wanted. So we pruned that when we styled it. Okay. When I look at these. If I lay these out. These are going to give us a good proportion with the length of this year's growth. It's going to fit right into the shape of the tree. There's no pruning to be done here. Okay. But when I get up in here. I start to see this big long shoot. I've got a great branch here. It's being used to heal. But I've got several branches up in here that are contributing to the healing. I don't want this to continue to thicken in the upper portion of the tree. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to make a length decision based on how long I would want that branch. Okay. And this is where we start to strategize design wise. Here is the shape of my canopy right now. If I cut it here. Maybe a little long. If I cut it here. That's starting to feel a little bit better. If I cut it here. Maybe a little short. So I'm going to come back to that point where I feel that length proportionally gives me a branch that contributes to design. Come back in. And I'm going to cut that. Okay. So now where my branch starts building next season is right at the buds that are set at the tip of this. Right. The reason we come back in August and we do this is because had we pruned even the tip off of that candle at any point sooner than right now. August. Generally sort of this first to second week of August. Is when we see that green. Start to turn to yellow. And when we get to a point in daylight length where when we cut this. It doesn't remove the auxin and push a second flush of buds back at the base. It loads up the buds at this length right here. And we get this on the Q&A all the time. I've got too long of branches. Should I cut them? Should I pinch them? Should I prune them? What should I do? And I've been telling you guys to this point. Wait. Wait. Wait. We're going to come back and stream on it. Just wait. Hold off. If you cut it now. It will come back from here. And this is no longer usable. It's a dead piece of growth. Right? It won't produce buds. It will just sit there. And it won't contribute to your design. The growth will come back from here. This is the moment. Right now. Where we can come back and we can cut to that desired length that fits into the design of our tree. The buds will start from that cut site. And we'll be building a branch from that point that is proportional to the rest of the design. All the while using that needle mass and that strength to build the branches behind it. And eventually. Two, three, four years later. When we come back in and we shut closed down. Or we reduce the size of this canopy that's going to become too large. We'll cut back to highly developed branches. This is a major, major point of understanding for you guys. Okay? And I cannot stress enough that this is very strategic in terms of developmentally. Did we get what we want? Did we accomplish what we were trying to accomplish in terms of the definition of development? Did we get the length? Did we get the thickness? Did we get the back buds? Did we get the healing? Did we get the roots? Right? If we have what we wanted out of that branch. And we want to stop that elongation and fit that into the shape of the tree. Now is the time we can cut and keep that elongation on the tree. Producing growth. Driving the interior branches and buds that were created. To become a better branch that we will cut back to later. Is that clear? Yes. Is it? I've said it like ten times. Yeah. It sounds good. Sounds clear. Okay. People are loving the info. Okay. Good. I want to make sure. Because this for me. At Mr. Kimura's. He had all these field grown pines. And I've told you guys this story before. And these field grown pines. We would pot them up. We would let them grow to rebuild the roots. If they were strong enough in June when we started decandling. Some of the branches. We would lay out the structure. Some of the branches we would decandal. Decandal here. Decandal here. Have what we want. But then he would put these pieces of tissue. On all the branches. That we weren't supposed to decandal. Because he wanted elongation. Because he wanted thickening. Because he wanted back budding. Because he wanted other things out of those branches. They were developmental pieces. We would climb up onto the roof of his workshop. Where he kept all of the field grown stock. Because they weren't available to clients. And he didn't want people seeing these developmental pieces. Right? They're up there. I don't know what's up there. I've got all these finished pieces here. I'm so blown away by Mr. Kimura's work. We would climb up the ladder. Up to the top of the workshop. We would set a turntable up there. He would have a big weird looking hat. And he looked really funny wearing it. It was August. Between August 7th and August 14th. We did all of this work. And he would be coming back in. We would set each black pine on the table. He would come back to all of these elongated pieces. He would be stretching out the branch. Seeing where it fit into the design. Cutting them. He would make a few cuts on those. And they would go back. Back on the. On the ground of the. Of the roof. To continue developing. Buds would set at that cut site. In the following season. We would. We would be starting to decandle those branches. As well as the ones that we had decandled. That year. Prior to that work. Okay. So. So. As you can see. This isn't. I'm not coming through. And working every shoot on this tree. Developmental pruning. Some branches are still in development. We're not cutting anything. Some branches. Are already where we want them to be. And we could be decandling them. But we would have needed to have done that. Two months ago. Right. And then those pieces of growth. That have gotten where we want them. Now we come back in. And we touch them. Okay. So I've got a few more pieces here. That I'm looking at in the front of the tree. I'm going to rotate this to the side. You don't want a front branch growing. Super long and out towards you. I've got interior shoots. I've got great branching up in here. I'm going to stop that growth. And I'm going to cut this relatively short. Because I don't want this to continue growing forward. Right. I want to stop that. I want to keep that as compact. I still need to use this. I want to set the buds there. I'm going to use this to continue developing. Right. So I'm going to make that cut there. I know the growth isn't going to be pushed back. And I'll start building. Really thinking about building these branches in here. But I'm going to use this as the momentum to build those. I'll be decandling all of these branches here. And I'll be decandling these next year. To start building that ramification. Three, four years from now. I'll be cutting all the way back to here. Once this is a beautifully ramified built branch. And I will have a fantastic black pine. Very, very quickly. In terms of this just came out of the field. First styling. Making these decisions. I will have it quicker if I follow this protocol. And I have this knowledge. Than if we started decandling. Or we cut back to those branches. And tried to build those. I'll have it much quicker with this technique. As a result of utilizing this strategy. Okay. There's some questions in the chat about timing. Okay. Linda asked if this time in August. Is that dependent on where you live? So it might not be August. Is it dependent on where you live? Is it more what's the season? Yeah. So this is a northern hemisphere. If we're in the northern hemisphere. Once we cross sort of the first week of August. It's August 7th today. I might even be like a day or two early. Doesn't matter. Once we cross that first week of August. Daylight length. Development in terms of that green turning to yellow. So now all of a sudden the tree is already transitioning. Into vascular growth. It's starting that transition. Now this transition occurs. Over several weeks in the growing season. Okay. So we're saying we've been full year. They've been producing needles to date. Right. And when we talk about the hardening off process. Notice how dark. Sharp. And well attached. Still a little bit. Still at the tip. At the tip of this. They're still a little bit soft. But they're becoming well attached. That is the hardening off process. Now you guys might be saying. Holy cow. I didn't realize that Japanese black pine. Takes all the way until August. For the first flush to harden off. Indeed it does. And in fact. It takes all the way till September. Just like our ponderosa pine. Right. It takes a long time for these to harden off. So when we're starting to look at this. We want to hit this. When it's in that transitionary phase. Before it's fully hardened off in September. But we have to let the tissue get to a point. Where when we cut that. It doesn't stimulate a second flush. Back at the base of it. And that's where the daylight length. In the northern hemisphere. Whether you're in Florida. Or whether you're in Portland. August 7th. Through say the third week of August. You've got a two week window there. Where you can do this pruning. And it will produce buds. Right at that chosen length. Of elongation. Instead of pushing it back. If we wait beyond that. Say we do this the first week of September. We don't get buds at that cut site. And this is that window of opportunity. That we've got to be hitting. It's daylight length based. Not heat. Not temperature. Daylight length based. Northern hemisphere. First. Second. Third. Fourth. Fifth. Sixth. Seventh. Eighth. Ninth. Twelfth. Twelfth. Twelfth. Twelfth. Twelfth. Twelfth. Twelfth. Third week of August. That's your window. Right? You get past that first week. Boom. August 7th and on. We can make this. Once we get past that third week. Daylight length is starting to shift. To a point. Where we say. We're now entering. Fully hardened off state. We're now entering a point. Where if we cut. We don't get buds. So the indicator. To know that we can prune. Is seeing that transition. From green to yellow. And we would know. That we're at the end of that. If we come in here. And try to remove these needles. And they're really firmly. At the end. attached to where we would have to exert a significant amount of force. Like these guys, the older needles on the tree, this kind of attachment, if these new candles have this kind of attachment, we cannot prune and expect to get buds because it's already shifted. It's already past the point where it will produce vegetative growth in the axles of those needles. This is the timing, these are the indicators. Use them wisely, okay? But in general, in the northern hemisphere, that time frame, second, third week of August, that's your wheelhouse. And then, so for the people who are maybe living closer to the equator or who are on the southern hemisphere, should they just look for those signs that you mentioned? But closer to the equator is not what we're talking about, right, because we're still dealing with northern hemisphere time frame. There's someone in the chat from Costa Rica, Central America. Costa Rica, Central America? I think that, and so let me clarify that too. I think all indicators, all execution of this technique, because I've done this in Florida, I've done this in Texas, I've done this in Southern California, I've done this in New York, I've done it in Portland, I've done it across the entirety of the island of Japan, whether it was Hokkaido, Obuse, Tokyo, Hiroshima, or all the way down in Okinawa. Taking trees from there to Mr. Kimura's, making these decisions, they have all behaved the same way. Everything would tell me that in Costa Rica, your timing is going to be the same. If I'm wrong about that, then you'll see that and you'll know you need to adjust it. But I think that you're safe. I feel confident giving you that information from all of the factors, indicators, and experience that I have. And then folks in the southern hemisphere maybe should just think about what August is in there. So, because you're in the winter now and we're in the dead of summer, you've got to extrapolate sort of that point where you're gonna be hitting the 180 degree opposite. Is this in, February? Is this in March for you guys? Yeah, probably. Because we would generally look at sort of June, that midpoint of the year as the time that we decandle. We wait two more months and we get into August and we can do length selection. You guys are talking January for decandling. You're talking about March probably for that period of time where it's hardened off enough. You see the yellowing. You start, you notice that the needles are darkening. They're getting sharper. They're still not completely solid and firmly attached. That's your indicator that that is an ideal time to be performing this operation and getting the buds at that tip so you're able to use that length that you preserved and use that vehicle to drive growth on the interior and development of those finer branches. Wow. Okay? Timing, yeah. Giant, giant. I mean, this is giant. This is like, when Mr. Kimura was doing this, I almost, I was literally like, this feels sad. Like, nobody's ever talked about this in a book. Like, I've never heard anybody discuss this in terms of like, it just didn't make sense. It just didn't make sense to me. But when you were in Japan, and you were watching all of the niwaki, the garden tree gardeners, maintaining all of the red and black pines, the big pines hanging over the gates and the cemeteries, all of these big garden trees, they're not decandling those trees in the landscape, right? If you're decandling a 40-foot red pine in the landscape and you have to come back in and shoot select and needle pluck to redistribute the energy, then something is wrong, right? Because you can't handle that workload as a gardener on that scale of a tree. They're pruning those trees once, and they're doing it when they get up to a point where the length that they're pruning back to, they're gonna get the buds set at that site where they're gonna get that bifurcation the following season, and they're not gonna push back a second flush and get five or six shoots out of the same junction. If they did that, those trees would be grotesquely malformed because you'd have all of these big busts of growth, and then those would produce more, so it would be radically inverse taper and swollen, right? So when we think about that, we can extrapolate this information from timing that we see in the landscape trees. This is the technique that is utilized to be able to execute this, and as I started seeing Mr. Kimura do this, and I started seeing the results and where the buds set and how they behave, it started to really click. Oh, even in bonsai, we have to have the ability to prune a multi-flush pine and not have the growth come back to the point of origin of that season's push. We've gotta have the ability in the developmental phase to be able to dictate that, allow that to keep functioning in the proportion of the tree, build the interior branches to the point that we want, and then eventually prune back to those once they reach that level of refinement. So this is, again, I've never been taught this by anybody outside of Mr. Kimura, and he could build, literally, and I say build because I'm literally talking about physical construction of a bonsai at this point. This is a stump with a lot of vigorous, small, slender branches. How do we get that to a stately, refined bonsai? You have to have this technique and you have to have this knowledge, right? This is paramount knowledge for you guys, okay? Larry asked, why at this point in the year? Why is it only this time? Because when we start to talk about pruning, right, and this is important, and I'm really, Larry, I'm happy that you understand that. We've got this tip on the tip of the tree, the terminal bud that was set. As that new candle was elongating, these are transpiring. These new needles are losing water rapidly, okay? To be elongating the trees, pumping all the resources. Right now, a lot of auxin, a lot of that hormone has accumulated in the tip of that branch. Now, we know, if we prune prior to this and we remove that auxin, that all of the adventitious buds, all of those buds at the base of that new shoot are stimulated to grow. This is the second flush of a multi-flush pine. By removing that auxin, we stimulate those buds at the base of that. When this piece of growth starts to mature, however, right, and we've gotten so far down the road of this shift in daylight length, longest day of the year in the Northern Hemisphere is June 21st, okay? We're now at August 7th. We've gotten so far down the road from the longest day that the days are getting shorter right now. The new growth is hardening off, and the tree is saying the days are shortening to a point where I no longer would be putting out, new solar panels. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna set up buds to grow because we removed the auxin. I'm gonna set up buds to grow to produce foliage next year, right? Anytime we remove that tip, a tree has to replace that tip with a new potential growth site. But the vascular tissue is established enough and the daylight length is short enough that the tree doesn't start from the very base. The tissue here is hardened off. Those are not the catalytic point. This tissue in the crotches of these needles is now, hardened off to the point where they are actually carrying the ability to produce a bud. They are capable of cellular division. And we see that by that turning of yellow, that creation of that vascular backbone, the formation of phloem that carries those sugars and starches, that is where we're at. Now, if we wait too long and it fully hardens, the tree says, I'm not producing foyer growth anymore this season. I'm now in vascular growth. I'll start to next year, I'll start from one of these shoots farther back on the tree. So we lose that tip. It's just a cut site with needles. There's no growth that's gonna come from it if it fully hardens off. And that's how we get inside this window where we're in the transition from foyer to vascular. This shift, this space between here and here, right? We're in this window where that transition is what we're taking advantage of. It'll produce a bud here, not here, but it will produce a bud. Whereas if we wait to here, we get no bud there, right? And it's all driven by the removal of that tip and that accumulation of auxin. Oxin is gone now. Once we cut that off, auxin is gone. The tree says, crap, my guidepost for becoming a big tree is gone. I need to set up a new guidepost. And the new guidepost is gonna originate from the crotches of these needles, right where we pruned because the daylight length is starting to get so short or much shorter than it needs to be for it to produce vegetative growth. Okay? This guy pruned here, I feel good about that. I want this length here. I don't want this branch to be necessarily longer than this, right? I'm gonna leave this guy. I'm gonna leave this guy having chosen the length here. As far as the apical region of the tree, I have this big site where this was trunk chopped in the field. We've wired this up as the new leader, okay? And again, at this point, I've left one, two, three branches, right? Now, when I get to the point, in terms of development, where I've used this strength of this leader to thicken this piece so that it's a nice transition from this size to this size, and when I've used the growth that this big piece of strength is driving, it's healing this wound where we cut it and we pasted it, then I'll come back and do a full removal here, back to these two. One will be the apex, one will be a branch. This is the building component of this, okay? And so what I can say is, oh, okay, if this is gonna be my apex, I don't necessarily want this to keep thickening, so I can come back into this and just cut it to reduce the needle mass, I'll get buds at this tip, I've got great shoots and back budding on the interior, but I'm gonna leave this untouched to continue the thickening process and to continue the healing process. Thickening and healing, two points of what we're trying to accomplish in development. That means that I'm gonna leave this, I'm gonna leave this, I'm not gonna touch that portion of the tree. And literally, I'm done. I'm done. That's all the pruning that I'm gonna do on this piece of material. I did what I came here to do. I did what this needed. The pieces that are ready to be pruned to set up that length that gave me the back buds, that gave me the thickening, that gave me the elongation, got it, cut them. I know where the buds are gonna be. I will build from here and decandle those branches next year along with the other branches that are in refinement. My developmental branches down here, they gotta keep growing. They gotta keep getting stronger. I need thickness, I need back budding. If I get that, then I can either do this next year, or if I get that between now and then, I would start decandling next year. Okay? So this is the process. Chris asked, so if you cut too late and you don't get buds this year, what happens? Do you get them in the spring or at the base or something else? No, no. So if we cut, if we cut too late and we don't get buds at this site, then the shoots behind it are gonna grow. And in the case, say for example of this branch, where I want this elongation, I want my branch to be, from where you guys are at, I want my branch to be this long. If I cut too late and I don't get buds here, it means I'm back to developing and elongating these branches to get to the length that I want that's proportional to the current form. So I have to do it again next year if I miss this window. And if we cut too early, say two weeks ago I cut here, it would stimulate buds to push at the base of this and again, I lose the length and I get the growth from here, it's not gonna get this long this season, so I'm gonna have to develop again next year. So we lose a year if we miss this window of timing. And then Steven asked if this technique can only be applied to branches that have not been decandled previously in the year. Yes, yes. Good question, great question. If we decandled and we're getting too long of shoots, we cannot apply this technique to those shoots because your second flush right now is still green, it's still very immature. If we cut on that, it would not get buds at that cut site, it would stop it and we would lose that piece of growth. It would hold needles, it would survive, but you would not get what you want out of that, right? And so if we're getting too long of candles on the second flush from decandling, say in June, it is what it is, let it go, it will generate energy and back buds that we can cut back to either this fall when we shoot select or next year when we come back and decandle and some of those interior buds develop, right? And that's just the process. Sometimes we don't get what we want, we let the needle mask develop the interior of the tree and we can always decandle, we can always cut back, we can always utilize whatever's stimulated on the interior of the tree. Okay? So Leonard said you already have the trunk size in this specimen, but let's say for another tree, maybe with less thickness, would this pruning change the growth to the point where the trunk doesn't thicken anymore or slow that down? Absolutely. And this is why when I point out up here, I want more thickening in this apical leader and I want more healing here. I'm not pruning this piece. And when we're trying to thicken a trunk, allowing one sacrificial leader to elongate and to control, just like I controlled this apical piece here, this is gonna be my eventual apex, but I don't want this to get big and massive and gigantic and thick and coarse. I'm driving that with this. I'm gonna hold this back a little bit so it stays fine, it stays tight, it stays compact, right? So that I'm able to use this as the eventual apex of the tree here. I'm using this as my sacrifice and I'm not gonna touch this growth because this is what's contributing to thickening. The continuation of this elongation, the quantity of this needle mass is what's contributing to trunk thickening. So you pick that sacrificial piece. Now if you're trying to thicken the trunk really rapidly, you may have sacrificial pieces down low, you may have sacrificial pieces in the middle, and you may have sacrificial pieces up high to be giving you different points of thickening. They're all sacrificial to achieve that thickening and we will come back and cut those off eventually. This will be cut off and this is why, sacrificially, I've got two branches here plus the sacrifice. Three branches causes a structural flaw. I can only allow this to elongate until this starts to become a structural flaw and then I'll cut it off before it becomes detrimental, hoping to have gotten what I wanted to achieve but maybe I'll have to allow another sacrificial leader to grow to actually get what I want. I can't sacrifice too much swelling at this junction. Right now I'm still safe. Right now it's not causing inverse taper. Next year, will it? Absolutely. Next year I will have to make a choice. Each time we approach our pines, we've got sort of these timing pieces, multi-flush pines. We've got timing. We can decandal in June. We can come back in the beginning, sort of the second or third week of August, and we can make length selections and developmental branches if we've gotten what we were trying to accomplish. Then we come back and we shoot select and balance energy through needle plucking in the fall after the trees accumulated all of its vascular resources. Those are our three periods of time to really be doing work on our multi-flush pines. Okay? Yeah? Let's do it. Okay, cool. I'm going to set this one off to the side and I'm going to bring the red pine up that we decandled several branches on and show you guys what that looks like. The process of really learning and understanding all of these mechanisms, this is serious stuff to be really wrapping your mind around this. It's such a, if you read all the books, you've got, you know, do you shoot select? Do you thin the buds? Do you pinch? Do you cut the candle in half? Do you prune the strong ones, you know, first or last or middle or what's strong? Discard of all of that. Discard of all of that. Discard of all of that garbage, right? We've got three periods of time that we can touch our trees. Two if it's in refinement, decandling in the early summer, shoot selection and needle plucking in the late fall. Okay? And then we've got this window. If that tree's in development where we come back second or third week of August and we can make length selections if we've gotten what we wanted to accomplish. Okay? That's the only thing you guys need to know. We don't thin the buds on the second flush. We don't pinch the candles as they're elongating in the spring. None of that. These are your three contact points, right? Early summer and fall if it's in refinement and you've got your developmental checkpoint right here second or third week of August. Other than that, you shouldn't be touching your multi-flush pine. You should not. Does not need to be touched. There's nothing else to be doing to them. This will maximize their development. This will maximize their refinement. And you will produce a more high-quality multi-flush pine in a shorter period of time if you abide by this concept. I promise you. People always ask me, why did you choose Mr. Kimura? And I could have said, right? It would have been inauthentic. I could have said, well, because he can radically bend. Because he created such innovative pieces. Mr. Kimura's pine work appealed to me more than anybody else's. I actually went to Mr. Kimura to study pines. That's what I thought when I went. Now, I learned so much more, right? But his pine work was by far the best. And I watched him create from a field-grown stump to a kokufu showable tree, a pine in five years. That is literally unheard of. Literally unheard of. I watched him do it with a juniper, and I watched him do it with pine. And I watched him do it consistently. Now, did they have the same age as other trees? Did they have the same mochikomi? Did they have the same, you know, refinement or sort of nuance to that developed pad? No. But they were beautiful. They were well-developed. They were well-built trees. And they only get better with age on top of that initial foundational work that he was so good at doing. Okay? All right. So this is the red pine. And now we're stepping into a tree where we decandled a large portion of these branches in June, in the multi-flush pine stream in June. We came back and we decandled this. And I walked you guys through the theory of all of the branches that we decandled. I decandled here because I don't need any more length. I don't need thickening. I have interior budding and all of the things that I needed. So I'm gonna decandle here. I'm gonna decandle here. I'm gonna decandle here. Now, we're at this point where you can see, and Hunter, go ahead and blast me into this sort of set of branches right here. Okay, you can see the second flush emerging. On some of these, I've got five shoots emerging. On others, I've got two, one strong and one weak. Okay? And I've got any amount of variation. Some I have three. Some I have four. Some I have, again, that one with that sort of weak interior. Now, I also have these little gems, these little guys down here that are starting to show strength that existed below this, okay? So I'm getting a lot of opportunity to be able to have the selection of the eventual branch. But right now, on all of the decandled pieces, I am not going to touch this second flush. If I touch this second flush, if I pinched it, if I pruned it, if I thinned it right now, I would ruin, I would ruin why we decandled in June, okay? Because we decandle for refinement and refinement says we want shorter needles, we want shorter inner nodes, and we want to push the strength from the tip back to the interior pieces that exist, okay? These are our three reasons and really what that catalyzes and what you guys will identify with is improved ramification, all right? These are the three reasons that cause us to perform the refinement technique. And again, I don't want you guys to memorize a calendar of development. I don't want you guys to memorize a calendar of development. I want you guys to understand why are we doing what we're doing? Because then when you go in and you say, should I decandle this or not? If all you have is a calendar of development and it says decandle and you decandle, was that what you wanted to accomplish with that branch, right? And that's where the theory around this tree really dictated did we do what we wanted to do or not and not memorizing the candle. So for example, this lowest branch, we said, listen, if this tree, if this is the lowest branch on the tree and we want this to be a defining branch, we want this to dictate flow, having it pushed back into the interior felt wrong. So what was our action? To not decandle this single tip. Well, now look at the length that I'm getting on this. I'm starting to get, let me just orient the front towards you guys. Now I'm starting to get that length that starts to push this piece out and form the pad that's gonna define the movement of this tree to the left, okay? Trunk moves to the left, branch moves to the left, and we're gonna eventually orient the apex to move to the left. We had an underdeveloped apex. That's why they're unpruned up there. We're gonna orient that to the left as well so that we have a harmonious design in the tree. We'll come back to basic bonsai design in a future stream. It's something that we're working on. It's gonna be paramount for you guys to understand. Don't try to grab onto that right now. We'll come back to that, okay? Understand that I wanted a longer branch. I did not decandle, okay? So this is in development. Now, when I stretch this out, I say, boy, that length feels a lot better. It feels way better. It gives this branch so much more purpose in the design. Is it too long? Is it past the point that I want? No, no, right? I could use a little more length. So I'm not going to come back and touch this. I'm gonna keep the length that I have. I'm gonna utilize that length, so I'm not gonna be pruning that, okay? I wanted a little bit more length here. I didn't decandle either one of these. I didn't decandle these two, and I didn't decandle this third one. I want length here to drive that asymmetry to the left, okay? So none of these are gonna be touched because the length, these didn't shoot out into candles this long where I need to choose that length. This is as much as I got out of the elongation cool. Not gonna touch those, right? Now, I'm gonna rotate you, or actually, while you're there, I'm gonna point to this piece on the back of the tree. We said, listen, we need a little bit more formation of branch here to occupy this negative space. We didn't decandle any of the shoots on this. This was very short, stubby branch, right? And now, I'm gonna rotate Hunter. Go ahead and blast me in nice and tight to this branch, okay? So now, by not decandling those, you guys notice that these aren't obscenely long, but what you will notice is when I lay all of these out, I now have a beautiful branch pad, right? This was stubby. This was short. It was literally this big, long branch here and these really short, tight branches. That's not a branch pad. That's a underdeveloped branch. By letting these out, by letting these elongate, I now give myself the secondary branches, right? And we talk about this. Primary from the trunk. Secondary sets the scaffolding for our pad. Tertiary forms the ramification and the density. By not decandling, I built all of my secondary scaffolding to create my pad. I had this linear structural branch, right? And I had these little buds here and here, and I could have decandled them, and it would have been this tight little linear branch. But by letting them elongate, not decandling, I let that secondary branching form. I lay those out. Now I have my pad formation. Next year, I will be decandling all of these to start building that more refined pad. Right now, are they too long? No, they're not. They're the perfect length. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to leave those. I'm not going to touch them, okay? So now when we come up into this piece, let me go ahead and keep referencing the front for you guys. Now we come up into this piece and we stopped the elongation forward by decandling. I don't want that development to be any longer towards the front. And I told you on the black pine, we typically don't want the branches on the front of the tree. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to shift this just so you can see. So you can see, I don't want this to be in my face on the front of the tree. I'm sitting where the front is right now. This is coming towards me. However, I had this long linear with these stubby pieces, and I needed to, again, build my secondary scaffolding, so I let them elongate. None of them are too long when I lay those out, they will form a beautiful pad here. I have nothing to reduce right there. I'm not going to touch it. Okay? But this is when we start to get into the best part, because when we get into the upper canopy of the tree, this piece right here was only this long when we started, and we don't have sort of that continuity of design that would move the apex to the left. Okay? We needed that guiding branch, and now we've got it. Now maybe this is a little bit too long. We start to see that transition of color. On a red pine, it turns a minty green. It goes from that light green to a minty green. Black pine turns yellow or straw colored. I'm getting this beautiful minty green color in terms of the formation. That is phloem forming on the tree. So now I can come back and I can start to make some length decisions. So let me step up here where you guys are just so that we can function together. Okay? And I start to say, okay, how long do I want this branch to be? Do I want the full length? Ah, the full length feels pretty aggressive. Do I want to cut it here? That feels pretty darn good. Do I even want it shorter? That feels really a little bit stubby. I like that middle section right there. I'm going to make that cut. Okay? So now I take that tip off. My branch now builds from this point out. I've got smaller branches on the interior that I'll be decandling now that they've gained the length to be laid down as scaffolding for my secondaries. So I can form that pad and I can start that decandling process next year on this growth, this growth, and the two buds that are set at that cut site preserving that length. Okay? I also have this big branch. I'm going to rotate this away from front so that you can see this is really trying to cut off the big long leader. This is really, truly beautiful developmental growth because look at the kind of opportunity we have in the length of that. And this, again, in the apical region, this was really the most underdeveloped portion of the tree. It had the least amount of opportunities. And this is probably because we had to cut off the big long leader. This was going to be a landscape tree. This is, again, this is a grafted weeping red pine. You can see the graft union there. This was being grown for a big landscape tree. We cut this off two or three years ago when we first styled it and we wired up a really weak, lesser than branch to take over the leader of the tree. So we've been building this to this point. Now I've got this. Let me orient you back to the front. Okay? Now we're here and we wanted a little bit of depth in the apical region right over here. We want the same thing from this upper one but let's start with this lower one. So now I've got to come back where you guys are. And let me get that trunk never two-dimensional. Slightly slanted towards me, not two-dimensional to the left. So when I rotate here, now you're seeing this flat plane. It's just sticking straight out here. I want it slightly towards us to get that front to back depth a little bit. So our front, I'm always checking that front to gain that depth. It pulls this branch forward. It gives us a lot more front to back. Okay? And I start to look at this and I'm saying, well, gosh, I don't want that much length. That's a lot of length, right? But I obviously need something in this space back here where there's nothing. Okay? So when I hold this up there, I'm going to go through that same process. Do I want it to be this long? Definitely not. Okay? Do I want it to be this long? That feels a lot better. I'm going to leave this pretty long knowing I'm going to wire it into shape once it's hardened off. I'm going to cut it there and that's where that branch now when I wire it is going to be in terms of length to create that depth and that branching in that upper canopy. Okay? So that one's done. I don't need to do any more to that. Okay? Next one up in the canopy is right here. Okay? This big long guy, I'm going to again orient you guys. Here's the back of the tree. This is the one I just cut that's giving me that depth. Okay? Now I've got this piece. Now I don't have any branches. Hunter, go ahead and zoom right in here to this upper and show how bare this is. Okay? So we've got this branch that we brought up. We don't have any growth in here. Now, will I get back-butting in this region? Potentially. I may get back-butting along this growth when the raffia comes off. But I'm going to say the tissue is probably developed enough that I won't be getting back-butting here. So I've got to, excuse me, take what I've got and build branches around it so that I start to utilize that formation to be able to build that branch and sort of hide, disguise, or at least distract that line that's bare of branching. Okay? So let me come back to the front and let's take a look at this. Again, let me get that position in the front dialed in. Okay. So when I elongate this over to here, I see, boy, I need almost all of that length to start building that branch right there. Okay? I don't have really much that I can cut. Cool. No touch. All right? And then the last region that we're looking at is this apical region right here. Now this is going to form the very top of my tree right here. When we started, if you guys refer back to that multi-flush pine on the red pine in June of this year, if you refer back to that stream, again, this was just two little twigs with a little thing here and a little thing here. Now I've actually got the kind of scaffolding in terms of building my secondaries to be able to create an apical region. Okay? So I'm looking at this and I'm thinking, okay, how am I going to treat this? Well, this is going to become my apex right here, this branch. This piece right here, this is going to become another branch that fills this space where we don't have that content and that branch formation because we don't have any buds or branches on the right side of this apical region. Okay? So I'm going to leave this right here and I look at that and I say, okay, I feel like this one is a good length. This one feels a little bit aggressive but it's very, very comfortable. I'm just going to go ahead and I'm going to take just that tip off, just a little quarter, quarter inch or so just to give me that small reduction and start that beginning of ramification right at that length right there that allows me to fill in. And when I look at the apex here, I'm saying, okay, I definitely don't want my apex to continue being so long. I've got my scaffolding set up but I want to start to tighten up that apical region. I'm going to come back in here and I'm going to have both of these. Okay? So that now I've got a length where I can start building a really beautiful, nice, delicate apical region starting my ramification from that cut so that my building process starts from that internode length and each year it's going to get progressively shorter. Feminine tree, smaller apical canopy. I want to keep that nice and tight. I've got that scaffolding. I shortened it just to get that smaller internode length for that building process. That is going to be a little bit longer. So that is the pruning for the developmental piece of multi-flush pines as it pertains to this red pine that we did some selective decandling and some selective elongation because the branches were in development from that June stream. Any questions? Yeah. Okay. There are questions. All right. We got to, we, I think we need to do the questions while we're here just to try because this is complex. Yeah. Cool. Okay. So, yeah, this tree was from a stream in June. June, yeah. It's called Japanese red pine. Is it Japanese red pine? It's called Japanese red pine. Okay. So if anyone wants to go back and see that. Yeah. That's the way. I can walk you through the theory of why they were decandled or why they were elongated for the design purposes, right? Right. Yeah. So there's some sort of big questions. Okay. And then there's also some zoomed in questions. What are some of the native North American multi-flush pines that this could apply to? Yeah. Good question. Okay. So currently we know, listen, Pinus virginiana, the Virginia pine, and pitch pine from the eastern United States. These are the two definitive northern pines that can be treated as multi-flush pines, right? If we go down into the southeastern United States, we start looking at loblolly pine. We start looking at long needle pine. We start looking at sand pine. We start potentially, of course, looking at spruce pine. And that's one that's kind of out there and I'm not totally sure about, but we're continuing to refine our knowledge. So southeastern, really southern pines that are growing in hurricane regions are growing in really warm, high humidity regions and growing in coastal regions along the southern portion of the United States. These pines tend to have the adaptation to be able to produce a second flush, right? And when we, I think it's wise now when we start to say really talk about what would be some indicators when you look at a natural pine in the native environment that could potentially lend themselves to being a multi-flush. One of the biggest characteristics is angular movement because, and Hunter, come back into this branch right here. Okay, when we start talking about the way that these exist, when you get a piece of growth knocked out, the new buds originate at an angle to that, that termination of that piece of growth. And that's telling you that those buds originated at the base of that growth whenever we see that angularity in the branches. So when we see this angularity in the branching, a lot of times that is telling you there could be a multi-flush potential. Now when we look at say a five-needle pine, a limber, a strobus, when we look at a Japanese white pine, or even when we look at a lodgepole or a ponderosa, which are two-needle pines in the alpine, their branches are very smooth. They have these long, flowing lines. Maybe the structure has been broken. Maybe, you know, secondary branches have taken over where a larger branch died or was broken. But you don't see the fine ramification forming this kind of angularity. That's not the structure. So that angularity is saying the growth tip was removed and new shoots shot out in these directions that give us this angularity. Okay? So that's a big indicator, potentially, that we could have a multi-flush pine. Here's another indicator that could insinuate that we have a multi-flush pine. When we look at that big, elongated piece of growth in the spring, as it's elongating over the course of spring and into the early summer, we can look back at the base of that and we can see the adventitious buds at the very base of that strong piece of growth. If you see a whirl of adventitious buds at the base of that growth, those are there in case that tip gets knocked off and we're able to regenerate new growth that season. That's another indicator that it could potentially be treated as a multi-flush pine. Do we know all of the multi-flush pines both in Europe, in South America, in Australia, New Zealand, the African region, that could be multi-flush pines? No. I guarantee you that we have not identified all the multi-flush pines in the world. And in fact, I think we've probably identified maybe a single-digit percentage of the species of pines that are treated this way, right? And these are two indicators that we can look at and hypothesize. I notice this. I see those buds present at the base and not out along the tip or out along the new flush of growth or I don't see any buds at all so if I removed it, what would grow in its place? These are indicators for us. This is intelligent bonsai reading the growth potential of a tree. Davis wants to know if you can practice developmental pruning while cultivating trees in the ground. Not only can you practice developmental pruning in the ground, you should and probably have to to be able to preserve the branches in the ground that you would eventually be using in the bonsai cultivation because if every branch is allowed to run, right, then we're not going to have a lot of interior growth, okay? Now, it will cause a very thick trunk and it will cause everything to get bigger quicker. It doesn't mean that you're setting the structure for something in the ground if we're decandling. You're not going to get shorter needles, shorter internodes, and you're going to have to come back in the ground. And if you're cultivating a lot of pines in the ground, you'll know how much of a monster this is. You would have to come back in and shoot select to maintain the integrity of the quality of that tree in the ground if you choose to decandle. This is your better option for being able to control that strength, elongation, thickening, preserve branches you can use for the tree, eventual bonsai that will become while letting others develop primary branching and heal any wounds that are created. This is a paramount technique to field growing multi-flush pines. So Matt said when you start the decandling process after cutting some or leaving branches, how do you treat the long growth with older needles on it? In terms of plucking to balance energy I'm assuming is what you're saying. And if we want development, we're not plucking needles on those developing pieces because the more needles, the more rapid, the more healthy, the more length, the more thickness, the more back-butting, the more healing, those older needles in that greater quantity are what drive the developmental process. So we're not worried about needle count on developmental branches. We're only worried about needle count and distribution of energy on the branches that we're pruning to get the refinement response of shorter needles, shorter internodes. And that's a super good question. The other question that you guys should be asking is, well you had this tree three quarters in refinement and maybe one quarter in development. In development we continue fertilizing, right? We want elongation, right? We want thickening, right? Yes, it's true. But if we fertilize when we've decandled some of the branches and other branches we didn't, then the branches that we decandled would not produce shorter needles and shorter internodes. We would lose the refinement process. So when we have a tree that has refinement and development in the same tree, we're still going to pull back on fertilization and treat that tree as if the whole thing was in refinement. And here's where we get the development to take place. I haven't fertilized this tree since the first week of May, right? So that means that the nitrogen over the course of May was leached out of the fertilizer and when I decandled that first week of June for the stream there was no nitrogen in the system. Nitrogen causes elongation and we decandled to get shorter needles and shorter internodes, okay? So by decandling not all of the branches, right? The decandling process alone of removing all of those terminal tips on all of these is the same response in terms of the branches we didn't decandle as if we continued fertilizing. Because we removed all of the tips and you can see these branches just went, oh hell yeah, I'm going to party now. Because all of this got held back, these weren't touched and they just took the energy in the tree, boom, and blew out. We don't need to fertilize. When we start selectively decandling while we're still developing other branches because the decandling process pushes the energy into the developmental pieces already, right? And we want these to be short and we want these to be long. The system works perfectly to treat each branch independently. What are you trying to accomplish? Refinement here, development here, cool. Don't fertilize, the pruning process of decandling will drive development. So Linda said, so overall is the key to this that you must have your design in mind and then if you don't have a design in mind you just let it grow? So if we're talking about making a bonsai, number one, before we can even talk about development or refinement, if it's time to start deciding on branches, deciding on whether we want it shorter or longer, thicker or thinner, we have to wire out the structure, right? So you saw on the black pine, that tree was not decandled at all yet the structure is wired and laid out. I can't make design decisions on a tree unless I've wired out the structure and the tree and given it shape. Now that I've given it shape, I know I need more thickness here. I know I need more length here. I know I need more back butting here. This one is exactly as I want it. I need to decandle here. If you haven't established the shape of the tree, then you can't be applying these techniques. First step, once a tree is healthy, setting the structure and then we start the process of making decisions. What are we trying to accomplish branch by branch? Do I decandle in June? Do I count and I come back and I check the developmental growth in the second or third week of August? Do I not touch it at all because it hasn't given me what we're trying to accomplish? These are our decisions that are made on a tree that we've already set the structure on. So Eric said, so if I'm letting a tree grow to develop trunk thickness near the base, how can I keep the bottom branches from getting too thick proportionally? How do I keep them from being shaded out by a strong apex? Do I refine these branches by pruning or pinching while letting the main leader grow unchecked? That could, you could, and there's, look, there's a million and one ways to go about this. So we could say, I don't want the lower branches to get super big, long and thick, but I want this tree to get big and thick. The leader's gonna shade it out. Cool. Pluck some needles off of the leader, leave the foliar mass as far away from the lower branches as possible. If you are in the field and you don't want to have to come back and shoot select, you would be pruning those longer lower branches that you don't want to overly thicken now so that that needle mass doesn't create tissue that causes it to thicken over the fall. This is the time where you check that. Okay? If it's not in the field and it's in a pot, you could decandle that in June for the ones you don't want to overly thicken. You allow that to elongate. You might pluck the needles out to make sure sunlight gets in. Right? And you guys are saying, but you said, don't pluck needles on development. Well, if it's shading out the rest of the branches, then you need to pluck them at least to a point where you get light in if that's a limitation. Okay? But we still want to get light in from that much that you plucked? Yes. Should I pluck more? Not if you want it to be sacrificial and give you more thickening in the trunk, but you still need to manage all the other branches. This is why growing bonsai material, this is why development is such a cerebral discussion. It's not a pattern. It's not a chart. I can't hand you guys this and say, here is how you do it. The only thing I can hand you is, this is why we do it. What do you want to accomplish? What are you going to do? Right? And that's really where we've got to change our mindset in bonsai from what the books give us. Oh, I've got a calendar. I'm going to follow this calendar. I'm going to set up an alert on my phone. I'm going to track all of my decisions on a flow sheet or a graph chart or a picture. It never works. Because every time you sit down, you need to know when you're sitting down and why you're sitting down. Are you decandling? Are you checking developmental growth? Or are you shoot selecting and needle plucking? This is your multi-flush moments for managing growth. Okay? And when you sit down, you take what that branch is giving you right then and there. Do I have what I want? Or do I need to continue growing to get more? Okay? And that guides your process. So, Cesar wants to know what size or what thickness should the branch be in order to set that structural wiring? I mean, on that black pine that we started with, I think we're... Are there more questions around this tree or should I bring that one back? Yeah, there's questions about both. But yeah, there's still some follow-up questions about that tree. Okay, let me... I'm just going to set this over here so I can have access to it because I think this is... This is... I was going to like wire this red pine out and I knew this was going to just... And this is why you guys are here, for this information. So let me bring this back. Speaking very emphatically and dramatically tonight. It's like, I want... I like want to... I want to give you... I just want to like give you guys this stuff because it's so important. Okay? So how big? How thick? When do we... Right? Hunter, come into this branch right here. Okay? So you guys take a look. Now, we've got big, huge, thick structural pieces but I had this and this was just a chute. I mean, it was a very small, underdeveloped chute. Still has wire on it. Now, the wire is biting in. This was wired in... Hmm... April, March, April before the new candles were super long. This was wired by Tom Englewitz. He's the guy who's been working on this tree for a couple of years. He's been working on this tree for a couple of years and he's a tremendously talented Mirai student. I mean, his wiring is great. He set a beautiful structure on this tree. Did tremendous work. It's already biting in. We're in August. That's four months. Okay? Young, young chute. We give direction to everything when we set the structure. Okay? Notice that even the smaller, finer branches are wired out on this. So when we say we wire structure, it doesn't mean, oh, I only wire the thicker branches. I don't have to worry about the fine stuff. Right? It's just structure. No. We increase photosynthetic efficiency. We lay out the small pieces. We lay out the big pieces. Okay? And when we lay those out, we increase photosynthetic efficiency. Now we see how they behave. We set the scaffolding. We set the primary. We set the scaffolding that we have. And then we can make decisions. But our focus in that first styling is primary to really set that structure. Small, they're not going to get any thinner. They're only going to get thicker from there. So you might as well set that line while they're young. Get that movement in that you want to set that line as early on as you possibly can to make the best possible tree. Once they get big and thick, you can't put exaggerated movement into them. You might not be able to drop it down where you want. You start to work inside limitation when you're dealing with thicker, older branches. Set the structure. When you go to set it, set it on all of your branches and then build them based on what you're trying to accomplish. So Steven wanted to know how thick would you allow that leader to get in relation to the stump that you have? I mean, ideally, I would want the leader to become not as thick as the stump but, I mean, three quarters of the thickness would feel good because then you would have that healing. You would have this nice transition from this to this across that cut and the quality of that cut. You would have a change in direction as a result of that cut. I probably won't let that elongate until that gets three quarters of the thickness because it would destroy my structure of the two branches, one that produces the apex and one that's going to be a back branch and really help me build the crown. So I may have to cut that before it gets as thick as I want it to get and I may have to grow something else out as a sacrifice off of one of these two branches that's left to further thickening it and that will be part of that process. Next year when I approach this, I'll decandal a lot of the branches on this tree. There will be some branches that are still in development. I mean, the red pine that we're looking at is from three years ago and we still have branches in development. But next year, I'm going to say every single one of those branches on that tree will be decandled for the first time in that tree's life as a bonsai. This tree too will get to that point but only after I've accomplished what I want to accomplish. And this starts to talk about when you deal with a raw field-grown tree, you know that your length for development is going to be longer but you also have the ability to make what you want. When you deal with a semi-developed tree, you might have a long time frame but you don't have as much control. You're working more within the limitations of, oh, this branch is really thick. It's important. Now I've got to move it. It's a little riskier. I don't get the movement I want. But maybe it already has good movement. That's the quality of the field grower. I'll pay a higher price for that tree. And all of that deals inside of the economics and the skill of the field grower and your taste as a bonsai practitioner. And this is where the conversation starts to get outside of all of the black and white. It becomes very gray. And you have to expect that later to take to really get that thickness. I would imagine if I just let that grow unchecked, that in two to three years it would be the appropriate thickness. I've already told you guys I can't let it grow unchecked and preserve the branching that's in place to create my apex and back branch in the upper canopy of the tree. I will probably have to remove it next year so that that junction where I've got those three branches doesn't inverse swell to a point where it's no longer usable. And that means that another bud or branch that comes off of one of these three will be used as a sacrifice to again drive that thickening. And that'll probably be a practice over the course of the next three to four years to get it to where I want it and not be in development in the apical region any further. Andrew suggested that we should bring these trees back in spring of 2019 to just sort of see the manifestation in the spring of this one. Happy to. Happy to. And maybe, you know, I don't know about spring. We might bring the red pine back in the fall as a product of those pruning decisions on the developmental branches. I'll show you where the buds have mounted and how that behaved. And we can definitely follow the progress of this tree and sort of those, oh, you guys remember this stream. We have to cut it now. Now you see why we cut it. I think that's a tremendous idea and I would imagine that we will probably be doing that. Just so you guys get the consistency of information. And ultimately where this whole thing is headed with Mirai Live is the archive is becoming a paramount resource. And we're working on this so that you guys could track these actions and their responses and really learn, start to finish, how we handle a multi-flush pine, how we handle a single flush pine, how we handle the repotting process, right? This makes sense to us to create that bank of information that will probably reset the way we practice bonsai for a vast majority of the world that can't go be an apprentice in Japan. And that's important to us, right? To be able to deliver that to you. So that's where our goals are. Okay. So Steven said, with this first sort of technique and the first tree that you were working on, how do you, when you're choosing the length of where to cut and get new buds, how do you take into account the length that the final branch will be once it's ramified? How do you, if you know what you want your final branch to be, say, you know, six inches from the trunk, do you cut it the same percentage of that or how do you decide? No. And this is, that your question, that's the best question that could have been asked but what I'm explaining is answering that question but nobody asked it for it to be verbalized, right? So in a deciduous tree, you would be cutting back and growing it out incrementally. So say, I want the branch to be this long, I'm gonna cut back here and I'm gonna grow these branches out, right? That's very common deciduous practice. In a conifer, you don't know and you can't predict where the buds are going. In a deciduous, you cut it back, you know you're gonna get buds everywhere. You just pick some of those branches out and you're gonna grow these branches. In a conifer, you don't have that kind of control. So what we're saying is currently, as I'm looking at this tree, I've got this shape that makes it beautiful. I know this is what I have. This is what I have. I don't know what's gonna happen. I don't know what I'm gonna get. So I'm gonna maximize this to what I have. So when I cut this piece, I fold this piece down and I say, for what I have, for the shape of this tree, to make it look as good as I possibly can right now with what I know I have, I want this length. Right? And I'm gonna start building from the buds that form here and building that branch. Now you and I both know this is a pretty crappy branch. Pretty crappy. It's not a quality branch. Right? And this is where you've gotta check it because you could say, well, why wouldn't you cut back to here and start building those out? Right? And I'm saying, I'm going to be building those but I'm not gonna treat it like a deciduous and cut back to there because I would be building these for the next seven or eight years. By cutting here, by building this branch here, I'm actually increasing the rate that these will develop and I will be cultivating and building these. Two, three years down the line, I'm gonna say, gosh, this is big and long and unnecessary. I'm gonna cut it back to branches that are already built and give me the length that I want in the shape. So I'm gonna kind of shine on the crappiness of that branch right now knowing it fits inside of this shape. This is not a great refined shape but by leaving that and building that from here, I get to enjoy what I have now with what I know I have and over the course of the next two to three years, I'll be building all of these pieces so that I will be able to take that out when I say, oh, that's too long. I'll cut back to this really developed branch. Oh, this is too long. I'll cut back to this really developed branch. We need to use this in conifers to drive development so we treat this as if it was what we wanted right now and that will build what we actually want in three or four years. Okay, so don't don't try to anticipate what it's going to be. Take what you have right now. Make the best tree right now. Right now, I need a branch this long. So I cut this to that length right now. Next year, I might I'm gonna start this and maybe next year, I say, gosh, these developed so well, I can cut that off next year. Maybe it's two years. Maybe it's three years. Maybe it's four years. Only cut when you have what you want. Don't anticipate and try to build what you want. That's why we let it elongate in the first place was to give us what we wanted, right? Leonard said, so are you pointing out that those of us that depend on nursery stock only, we have many trees in sort of various stages of development. Does it, do you think anything of value is bonsai worthy? No. Look, I think this is a fantastic tree right now. I think it's a fantastic tree right now. I have absolutely no problem putting this on a bench in the main garden at Mirai right now. It's a great piece of material, great base, great trunk movement. Branches are in the right place. The structure is set very soundly and I'm carrying it forward. I'm gonna make it better. We've always wanted to make it better. I just took a big long branch here and I cut it back to the length that I want. That made this tree better. I did it at the right time to get those buds where I want so that I continue to make it better with the length that I decided. Next year, I'll come back in and I'll decandal these. I'll decandal these, I'll decandal these and in doing so, I'll be seeking refinement of that length that I accomplish and I'll be making it better. And as it grows out and that second flush happens and I come back in the fall and eventually, these will build and once it's to that point, I'll cut it back to that. Oh, okay. This is part of the developmental process. This is how you build a tree, right? So I'm not saying that if everybody's resigned to nursery stock that you have to have a bunch of crappy trees or that they're just gonna take forever. And in fact, what I'm telling you guys is if you take what the tree is giving you right now, I'm not cutting this back saying, okay, I'm gonna start from here and I'm gonna build those trees out to this length over the next four years. So I'm gonna start here and I'm gonna be building what's actually why nursery stock never becomes a good bonsai, that mentality right there. I got what I wanted. I cut it to the length that I want. I let it grow to the length I wanted and I cut it to the length that I wanted. I don't have to wait for it to get to that length. I have that length. Now, is it as beautifully refined as the taper, as beautiful as it could be? Is it highly ramified? No, I'm gonna build that from this point forward and eventually, when this becomes crappy and those become great, I'm gonna cut the crappy off and I'm gonna cut back to great. But over the course of the whole time, I get what I want every single time on the execution of techniques and this is how nursery stock goes from nursery stock to beautiful bonsai as fast as it possibly can. This is how you maximize its transition to bonsai and that's what you guys have to understand. This is not, I'm not looking down on this work. I'm quite happy. I'm very, very happy with where this is at. Once these harden off and all of these get wired out, scaffolding gets laid out, in one year, this tree will actually have improved in quality a degree that would take most people three to four years to improve. That tree. We'll come back to this when it hardens off. We'll come back to this very tree. We'll lay it out. I'll show you guys how to handle it and you'll see and I'll ask you to refer to this. We'll have a picture of this in fact so that you can see how dramatically different this tree looks in the fall when all of this is wired out and you'll start to understand. Oh, geez. Wow. Okay, got it. That tree, it'll look like a finished bonsai. It'll look like a coarse finished bonsai but it'll look like a freaking good bonsai and it'll continue to improve. A few folks in the chat are wondering when will it be wired? Why not wire it now? Yeah. Why not wire it now? So I'm showing you guys that the needles are not firmly attached. Right? We're in that transition. Again, remember. Right? We're in that transition from foyer growth to vascular growth. Needles are starting to firm up. They're getting darker green. They're getting sharper. They're not firmly attached. That's why I can cut here and get that bud right at that site. Let me refer to this. I can cut here in that transition. If the needles were fully firmed up and I cut I wouldn't get buds at those needles because it was done adding any vascular growth. And the bud that it adds that's a piece of vascular growth that it's setting up. So you have to understand in that transition if I get past that vascular growth phase in its totality I don't get buds where I cut. Okay? But if I come back and I try to wire when these needles are really soft and susceptible then I'm gonna be knocking needles off. I'm gonna be actually setting the tree back. I'm gonna be multi-flush. We're gonna be decandling in the early summer. We're gonna check our growth in the second and third week of August and we're gonna come back in the fall when everything's hardened off when it's accumulated all of its vascular tissue when it's given us all of its back buds we're gonna shoot select we're gonna needle pluck to balance energy on a refined tree and we can come back to a developmental tree and we can lay out all of the growth lay out that structure lay out that scaffolding and that secondary so we create a photosynthetically efficient system and we set up to decandle the following summer. Okay? So I don't want to be diving in here. On the red pine I've got several branches with new second flush shoots candles emerging I knock all those off I do damage I knock all the needles off I do damage I'm setting myself back. This is a growth check technique. Yeah, so earlier Edgardo asked if structural wiring or heavy bending could be done at this time of year with multi-flush. Could be done. Totally could be done. Is it wise to do it now? No. Even myself I've wired an unreasonable number of trees five, six thousand trees I've probably wired in my career. I'm not going to be wiring this right now. No way. Why would I do that? Why would I do it now? Sap is flowing at the greatest possible quantity and degree. Growth is not completely hardened off and I'm trying to actually leave the needle mass on a tree in development to further the development or I'm trying to get that second flush on some of those branches that are in refinement on the red pine I'm trying to get that second flush to push out and give me nice tight internodes. I come back in and I try to push the pace or wire right now and I break all that down. Not only do I set back what I accomplished this year I probably set myself back two or three years. The only goal of this is to check the developmental pieces of growth choose that point because I know I get buds at that point and I get to accomplish what I wanted to accomplish. Hands are off until the fall. So Cesar mentioned that so if we let trees in development grow without touching them the internodes get too long how do you mitigate that? Well, any time that we're in development internodes get too long that needle mass is what generates back buds over the course of the vascular tissue formation in the fall. And then when we get to the next year maybe we choose to decandle maybe we choose to wait until this point and cut that back and that pushes the energy from the tips back into the buds that have formed as a result of that big large needle mass forming at the tip. And this is where I say listen, you guys don't panic about a multi-flush pine having two or three too long of the growth. That needle mass photosynthesizes and over the course of fall it creates new vascular tissue and that's where back buds come from. That is where back buds come from. We get so panicked to try and manage that growth that we lose sight of the fact that that growth is what develops the tissue that gives us back budding. So when we lay that out we get sunlight to that we set that structure these are too long cool! Let them get too long. We can come back and we can either prune until next June or we can come back next August and prune back to the desired length and that will push the strength from the tip to the buds that you got as a result of that growth. This branch right here I don't have back buds along this branch. I have one back bud along this branch. I don't want this to be any longer. I want it to be thicker and I want more buds on the interior so I'm not touching this. Let it long get long go long right? Go deep. Okay? So what I want give me what I want before I come back and I prune and touch that growth because I know this needle mass gives me what I want. And we know we can decandle to transition from the tip back to what we want and have gotten or we can come back in in August and we can check developmental growth to give me what I want. Right? It's easy. It's easy. Three touch points decandling growth check on developmental trees in the second or third week of August we're working on refinable trees okay? In the fall. That's it. And then Ross said so what how is the work different on sort of newly acquired trees compared to something we're developing or refining? Are we just letting those get wild? Well I mean it depends. A newly acquired tree that's refined a newly required tree acquired tree that you have some developmental desires in if the tree is healthy enough we need to set the structure and make design decisions first. Okay? Giving you this big robust growth because the big robust growth again break all of your preconceived notions about bonsai throw them in the trash for the next ten minutes. Just give me your blank slate. Okay? When we start to talk about this we're saying listen you have to have a healthy tree and everybody says okay a tree that's green and a tree that's growing. No. A tree that is adding significant growth is a tree that's healthy. That growth is telling you I have enough root mass to sustain the needles and I have enough root mass to add more. If the tree doesn't have the root mass it's not going to grow. Okay? It's not going to happen. A tree doesn't have a credit card. It doesn't get to put on growth and figure out how it pays for it. It sets up the root mass first and the growth second to be able to support that growth. Strength in pines comes from the roots. If the roots aren't healthy you don't get big strong robust growth. Okay? So if you get that growth and you have that healthy tree that is indicated by that big strong growth right then we can lay down and set the structure. We lay down and set the structure now we can see what are we trying to accomplish in terms of the design. Do I want length? Do I want thickening? Do I need more back buds? Do I need to heal a big wound? If you do we don't decandal. We can come back at this point if we get what we want but if here I didn't get what I wanted I'm not touching this. I'm not pruning it. I'm not needle plucking. I'm not doing anything. I want thickness. I want back buds. I don't touch. Okay? This hasn't developed me developmentally given me what I want. I got the thickness that I want and I got the length that I want. I chose that length right now. This is the time of year to be doing that. I got everything I wanted out of that branch. Not yet. Yes I got it. Okay? And so we've got to discard of all of sort of the limitations and just understand what the tree is telling you and understand the touch points of when you can accomplish those things. Wow. Ed asked if now would be a good time to remove an unsightly knob or and get good healing on the trunk of the tree? So, you could. Ed, you very well could because you're headed into the vascular growth portion of the year where the tree is going to add a lot of tissue. That tissue is what forms callus and healing. Right? We think callus is like this alien tissue that comes out of nowhere. No. It's just the expansion of the cambial layer as it's seen over the fall season. Okay? So you could cut that right now and over the fall use that vascular addition of tissue to heal that wound. Okay? So, the sap is flowing very smoothly because the heat makes it more liquid and more capable of moving. So, if you choose to do that right now to take advantage of the vascular growth that's coming, you need to patch that with the putty, putty cut paste or with dry sphagnum if the sap starts flowing too soon. You're trying to refine that. You're trying to really sculpt that big cut. You may have to put a big clump of dry sphagnum moss on it to face your bark and it cauterizes that cut and then next year you can take that sphagnum moss and cover it with putty. But, yeah, you can take advantage of that now for sure. So, after this work, Danny wants to know approximately when would the fall work, the follow-up work get done? Yeah, good question. So, generally when we talk about fall work we want to make sure that all of this on the, on the candle pruned portions of the red pine that second flush fully hardens off. We've got three, four, five shoots on some of those places where we decandled. I leave all of those over the fall because three, four, five shoots give me great vascular tissue energy reaccumulation after decandling it. Once it's done with all of that accumulation typically in the northern hemisphere the beginning of November is when we would come back and we would start this process of shoot selection and we set it up for next spring growing with those two pieces of ramification instead of four, five and we make sure to preserve the integrity of that junction. Okay, if we do it any sooner though then we lose the benefit and advantage of that needle mass to create that vascular tissue so we typically wait till we're done with the vascular growth phase which generally November is sort of that reference period of time. Yeah? Yeah. Cool. That was complex and you guys asked some tremendous questions tonight. That was tremendous. It's exactly what I wanted out of tonight's stream to get all of the misconceptions and the confusion and to get all of those thoughts of how we've been taught to think about bonsai and multi-flush pines to date. All of the magazine articles, all of the people in our clubs that are telling us all of their crazy ways that they handle these things. All of that to come out. I wanted you guys to barf all of that garbage out, right? Garbage, that's a strong term. I wanted you to get all of the misconceptions on the table and I wanted to continue to refer to the fundamental concepts that I need you guys to grab onto to be able to apply this knowledge and I feel like we really did it. Showing you guys this technique, giving you the knowledge, giving you the indicators, going through the process, helping you understand how we build a multi-flush pine, which is different than deciduous and it's different than our other species. This is pine work and pine work and pines, they do a specific thing and inside of that multi-flush are particularly unique at what they'll give us. If you can understand these concepts and I would encourage you guys to watch this stream again and really lock in on this knowledge. Hear it three times, hear it four times, hear it five times. I was an apprentice in Japan for six years. In the sixth year of my apprenticeship I was still learning things I had been taught in my first year that I could not grab onto because there was too many other things that I needed to know that I was learning that were getting in the way of me understanding that piece I learned in the sixth year. This is bonsai. We can't grab it all at once. We've got to hear it, we've got to see it, we've got to hear it, we've got to see it, we've got to try it, we've got to fail, we've got to understand why we fail, we've got to try it again, we've got to tweak, we've got to... The journey is the value of bonsai. This process of learning is the value of bonsai. Come back to this. Try it. Fail. Fail. Come back to this. Understand how you can improve the success. This is bonsai as a practice, right? This is bonsai as we are starting to understand it in the Western world. And this resource exists for you guys to do that with. This is your apprenticeship. I came back to Mr. Cremura's Garden every day. You guys can come back to Mirai Live every day. There's a Q&A to help you clarify. There are streams where we're taking your feedback and we're giving you that information. This is bonsai as a practice. We're giving you that information. This is our version of the Western apprenticeship to really master your skills and build that knowledge of bonsai. Couldn't do it without you guys. Yeah. And also go and dig in the archive. There's the Japanese Black Pine Stream from November 8th of 2017. There's also Multi-Flush Pines from June of last year. Yeah. There's the Japanese Red Pine Stream that happened earlier this year. So go and dig in the archive and review. And there's the Shohin. There's the Shohin. The Shohin Multi-Flush. And I understand it's a little bit hard to wade through. It's not really as organized as it could be because it's become such a big bank. We are trying to improve that. As always, we're always working to improve this. It will be better. It will be more clear. We will be able to connect all that knowledge for you in the very near future. It's our current project that we're working on. Stay tuned because it's only going to get better. It's only going to get simpler and easier and more capable of being used in a manner that allows you guys to use the forum and also becomes a massive tool. I feel as though the forum is underutilized and it's sort of a team goal to improve the quality of the forum with some of the Mirai presence on it. I know I said I would and I haven't been there. I am moving in that direction. I will be on the forum to be sort of correcting some of the conversations and adding my two cents to some of the knowledge that doesn't feel like it's as accurate or there's confusion around that's important. And I know I need to guide that ship a little bit. But we're working hard for you guys. This wouldn't exist, so thank you very, very much for allowing us to do this, to being partners in this process, and to coming with an open mind and advancing your bonsai practice. You guys rock, and we love you. Have a great night. Happy multi-flesh development pruning, and if we don't see you on the Q&A, 10 a.m. Pacific Daylight Time on Thursday, we'll see you next week in the stream, and we very much look forward to it. Thank you, guys. Thank you. 
