you you you you you you you you you you you you you what's going on everybody oh my goodness happy friday it is friday right whew i have like completely lost track of the the world around me monster research repotting season i am dedicated to sunday hanging up the chopstick i cannot do it anymore we're over 400 repots this year i think we burned through like close to 200 bags of akadama uh i'm out of pumice i'm now scraping the heat beds to finish up pumice i've called on uh several favors for lava to get through this it's just it's been a journey it's been a total journey uh but but you know at this time of the year after having repotted after as trees wake up right we start to need to up our game in terms of insect and disease awareness as well as the nutrition that sets our trees up for success this is not going to be sort of your standard structured lecture like i usually do it i'm going to riff on some things i'm going to connect some dots i'm going to treat this as we have plenty of you know insect and disease uh pieces of information in the library i'm going to touch on some that we haven't necessarily addressed and and really how we sort of decision make around all of this what's causing the issue how do we rectify the root cause in addition to stopping the damage on our trees until we get them to a point where they can really crush okay so my lecture series you know this is one of my favorite things to do uh without fail let's get started so let's get started so let's get started let's rock and roll okay so first and foremost we do you you do just have to understand you know and and it's not a belief because it can be scientifically proven but so many times i think we want to discount the belief that there's something else going on and that this insect or this disease randomly attacked our tree and it just simply is not the case now can you always have your trees in a state of perfect nutritional balance without toxicity without deficiency which is the lopsided proportional difference in element to element relationships inside of your plant can you always have those perfectly balanced so that you do not have insect and disease issues no it's virtually impossible i can tell you five years into apical it has significantly decreased susceptibility there are other things that have to come with the action of bone cycle and that's what we're going to talk about in this lecture so let's get started and i'm just going to add here and technique so that it cues me to tell you guys about this there are other things that have to happen and there is a holistic system that allows us to give our tree the best chance to be balanced over the course of the growing season so that we do reduce the incident of disease and pest both through our horticulture including nutrition balance of water and oxygen and watering as well as through the application of our technique and the bonsai action okay all right so when we start to talk about this right as we're getting through the repotting season we understand that there's different water mobilities inside of our species so we're thinking about water mobility as one of the big considerations because water mobility starts to help us see beyond the surface of the soil and our watering practices to understand how dry is okay versus dangerous right because we do want our trees drying out to establish that balance of water and oxygen it's become right we've said it we've said it we've said it and i think it's become a major talking point this year again with my students as we have more classes just had two master studios fantastic listen all of your guys goals i don't say this to be arrogant at all i say this because as far as bonsai experiences that i have had around the world i took all of those concepts of teaching study advancement of the art technique horticulture etc i put all of my energy into master studio two master studios so far down best experiences i've had in bonsai ever anywhere best experience i've had in bonsai ever anywhere if you want to elevate your bonsai game the online platform for mariah live mariah mobile giving you the timing and the stage of development work that's specific to your region and yes we are still building out the professional calendars there's more coming but that calendar of what to do even if you're a seasoned bonsai veteran you make your own calendar you remind yourself of your own things notifications are about ready to get fired up my calendar is now functional we're working on elongating or excuse me we're working on broadleaf evergreen including tropical we're working on mounding juniper we're working on multi-flush pine right now those are going to be coming soon or at least over the course of this summer so lots of information you can build a significant knowledge you guys have to be oh you have to do the work you have to do the mechanical work you have to do the technical work there is no amount of information that replaces right practice without information you're gonna get fifty percent of the weather information without practice you're gonna get fifty percent of the way there information plus practice you're gonna get to a technical point we're coming to multipurpose Ripley litemius live bioed highest value Ivan Valprise and I posted on the other side of James himself a link to a we're going to Freiburg myש所有 leben and over the course of seven 18 and up and go west of wonderful the knowledge of everybody there, including myself, working on pivotal trees in Moriah, leaving your DNA on this garden, that should be your goal. I'm telling you, it is a new bonsai happening when we've done these master classes here, building the community and building our artistry and technique in the process. Anyways, with all of these students back in the house, both in terms of students that are building towards Master Studio or my Master Studio students, the concept of balance of water and oxygen has continued to come back up to refine this concept. I believe I spoke to it maybe in the last lecture. I remember talking about it at some point. I feel like it was on the lecture. For the sake of not forgetting this, I am now making the argument. When we start to think about the physiology of the tree, we got a happy tree here, which means Mr. Sunshine coming out, temperatures increasing, daylight length increasing. We know on the energy scale, we hit peak stored energy right around that shortest day of the year or shortly thereafter. In the spring, we start to vacate. Energy for the production. Energy chart. We start stocked. We spend our energy to generate the foliar mass. Then we exceed what we started with because every tree wants to be a bigger tree and every year a tree has to grow in order to not just sustain, but sustain and add. All of these concepts that we talk about with the root system. When we think about these stored energy models that give us this, we think about the expenditure of energy to develop the foliar system, elongating daylight length, increasing metabolic activity and we start to say, okay, so we've got balance of water and oxygen, right? H2O is the one that's going to be going up into the plant system. 85%, you've heard this before, H2O is transpiration or cooling. Cooling, especially when we're in new growth, right? But that other 15% is a monster. This one's a monster. This is the metabolic activity and the water's contribution to metabolic activity, which means the potential for growth. The potential for growth. Even an unhealthy tree with the initial push of energy in the spring is going to look healthy and then we're going to start to see things fall apart and the repercussion of not feeding correctly, not balancing energy, not having a solid root system because of an imbalance of water and oxygen. Right now we're saying, dude, this is going to be the best year ever. I'm saying it, you're saying it, but we know that once that energy is spent and now the plant has to start building, it needs that energy to produce a root system. Now we're starting to talk about exactly what I want to discuss, which is the oxygen. The oxygen is a basic oxygen component, right, because in photosynthesis, the hydrogen from water. Let me just go here. The hydrogen from water forms the hydrogen and glucose. The oxygen from water forms the oxygen and glucose. The sun through the chlorophyll capturing of the energy to break the molecular bond. This is the 15% of metabolic activity that is producing glucose. Right. Now, when we talk about glucose. CO2 here, CO2 in, photosynthesis breaks the molecular bond, O2 goes out, right? And that carbon becomes the backbone of that glucose in terms of our tree's potential energy system. Now, can it spend sugar for short-term growth gains, localized cellular expansion? Absolutely. But it is not energy until that glucose comes down into the root system here and goes through the process of respiration. This is where we get into balance of water and oxygen in the root system by saying, listen, respiration, oxygen, we only need 7% to 10% oxygen in the soil system to trigger respiration, respiration being the bonding of that phosphorus molecule through the fueling of the sugar and the glucose to create ATP, which is long-term stored energy, or growth. That is what gives us growth. The energy of ATP, the phosphorus molecule. It is the battery of the bone size system, okay? Now, we talk calcium, calcium, calcium. You listen to the James Agent podcast, King and Queen, calcium and phosphorus, King and Queen, they always come together because calcium forms the backbone of cell walls. So you can have the energy to grow, but if you don't have the ability to form the outer boundary of the cellular wall, then you are missing one of two pivotal components. And if you have the calcium to produce the cell wall, but you don't have the phosphorus to drive. You have the oxygen to be able to produce the cell wall, but you don't have the oxygen to be able to produce the cell wall. So you have to have that cellular division, meiosis and mitosis to be able to create that differentiating tissue and have that go through the process of maturing into a functional cell. You see why they're the King and Queen of growth, right? And we say, okay, nitrogen. Well, nitrogen feeds the photosynthetic process and the chlorophyll molecules, and so does magnesium, and then iron allows magnesium to be synthesized into chlorophyll and use that nitrogen to synthesize all of this energy system that breaks the structure or the molecular bonds of water and oxygen and all of the other elements that we're using through the photosynthetic process. through the production of glucose, okay? So, follow me here. If oxygen is necessary, right, for the respiration process to be able to take the phosphorus molecule and turn it into usable forms of energy, not having a balance of water and oxygen in your system, which we have effectively called a tree as drowning or suffocating without oxygen, because we think about oxygen and respiration is where we're taking in oxygen as well, right? That's where our body needs a lot of oxygen. We talk about quality of sleep, we talk about breathing through your nose, all of these things happening, right? We need oxygen to drive respiration, okay? The same thing is happening in the tree, but I would argue that the tree is not suffocating, the tree is not drowning, that without enough oxygen, the tree is starving to death, right? Because the oxygen synthesizes the production through that processing of the phosphorus molecule, long-term energy from the potential glucose. And the potential glucose tree is spending its energy, its energy to develop its foliar mass is naturally going to be produced as long as there's water present and carbon dioxide present, which means we can't lack on watering, especially now with new growth that has no cuticle to prevent excessive transpiration. And because we need the 15% when in doubt, we water in the spring season, but we may stage our watering at an earlier time in the day so that we go through the evening time with a higher oxygen content in our soil system. Doesn't mean you let a dry tree go through the night, especially if you've got wind, especially if we have low relative humidity. Tree is dry, water is the most important thing because we're saying, listen, oxygen 7 to 10% is all it takes. I'm going to make sure that it's hydrated. That's the bigger pull at this time of year in terms of the system. But we're looking at that in terms of our species, how dry is okay versus dangerous, which then relates to water mobility. Is this a high water mobility, broadleaf deciduous, multi-flush pine, running juniper, or is this a low water mobility, broadleaf evergreen, pines? Or, you know, some of these other drier species, dry western conifers, et cetera. Okay, so it's important to start out here for balance of water and oxygen because it does inform our watering practices. It does inform the decision-making process. It does inform how we go about thinking about timing and application and allowing the tree to dry out, what function allowing the tree drying out gives us. We get root growth when we have oxygen, oxygen in the system to compartmentalize and then to initiate new root production. But even that oxygen that initiates that is still going through the process of respiration to be able to generate the energy that generates the callus and generates the new roots. And that is the critical step and the critical piece of information I think that we have been missing in the balance of water and oxygen discussion, okay? So when we start to look at this time of year and water mobility and thinking about all of these things, as the trees are spending their energy kitty, right? They're spending their cash of stored resources from last fall over the winter season through that continued photosynthetic productivity, even at lower temperatures, we start to understand why, okay? So now we get to this point where tree starts to spend its energy. Sugars and starches being produced are moving south. We need a balance of water and oxygen, but we also need to be looking at nutrition in terms of we need calcium, we need phosphorus, right? We need carbon, we need nitrogen. This is your fundamental building block drench because we know even without a test, would you go wrong? I'm not a consultant. I can't say that this is how I would treat it. But as I've been working through this post repot, we need a mid-level calcium. And typically if we have a tree high in salts, we're gonna go up. We're gonna go up. We're gonna go mid-level calcium. If we have a tree high in metals, we're gonna go mid-level calcium. Most trees coming out of winter, if they've stayed wet in a wetter region, are gonna need calcium. Most trees in a drier region are gonna need calcium, right? Calcium to deal with metals in wetter regions, calcium to deal with salts in drier regions. Phosphorus provides the energy molecule has to be there. Calcium, both in terms of lowering salts and metal content through the makeup will last the night or calcium carbonate between the calcium and the calcium. So calcium and the calcium, the calcium building block for the cell walls, carbon locking up any more of that toxicity and starting to form some carbon sources inside of the container, which ultimately if we don't have carbon, the tree is gonna eat the akadama. That's the only carbon resource inside of the container. This is gonna come back to technique when we start to talk about maintaining a tree with a high level of nutrition, high level of salt, a high level of nutrition, high level of growth, high level of health, right? We have to perform on this tree. We have to do it. on this tree or else we got problems okay carbon being that building block so that the tree doesn't have to consume the seven to ten percent organic matter that is a part of the akadama being a raw material right and then the nitrogen continuing to keep our nitrogen stock and specifically complex amino acid chain nitrogen we want the most oxidized form of nitrogen to be present in the system in the form of nitrates as your cleanest purest if you can't get into which we have played with into uh fixing um uh biology inside of the container we don't really have the holding point for that into to really sit inside of that system and start to generate its own amount of nitrogen right and that would be amazing and maybe we get there over the course of time because into is going to be the cleanest purest form of nitrogen nitrogen is the dirtiest element that we try to apply to a tree. It comes with salts, it comes with ammoniacal forms of nitrogen which start to create gaseous pressure inside of the system. So when we say the most oxidized, that is the holiest food source outside of a pure N2 nitrogen fixing bacteria inside of the container and the bonsai soil makes that challenging to achieve, okay? So we're trying to get all of these things pumped up. Now when we start to talk about metals, right, we know we want a calcium over magnesium at a three to one. Two to one is good. One to one we're starting to get into that sort of phase where we're happy, and this one we're really happy and we're saying we're really happy because now with a three to one calcium over magnesium we start to look to strategically add magnesium through a foyer, right? If we see the two to 1 slightly creeping up above a 2 to 1 that's when you start to see the half min MG on the foyer when we're at a 1 to 1 we're going calcium calcium calcium all day long with phosphorus at this point in time in the year just as an understanding of the system and what is happening okay so when we start to talk about metals we're saying listen iron is your number one because iron suppresses suppresses aluminum iron suppresses manganese which is high in presence in the volcanic soils that we use specifically the Akadama high in manganese and if we don't have carbon in the system plant starts to chew on the carbon inside of the Akadama organic content that seven to ten percent now the Akadama loses its backbone its structure and we see Akadama break down from the tree active decomposition not necessarily from root growth now right this is a new concept we say man I had this tree I had this crappy Akadama and now the soils broken down but you can find the same Akadama structured and intact in another tree that was repotted at the same time what's the difference is the tree with it breaking down a tree that's experienced a tremendous amount of growth because if it has then it makes total sense that the tree consumed that carbon source and the Akadama lost its backbone to hold its structure another little twist to the puzzle of Akadama maintaining its integrity in the book bones I container case of keeping your iron up above all other metals right now we talk about zinc we talk about boron we talk about molly sometimes we talk about cobalt not very often but occasionally and there are some other ones but the one that I've really been noticing that's very interesting now understand any of these trace elements over iron opens the door for disease issues when we start to talk about disease imbalance in metals creates disease this is your big driver right there right now there are salt related issues that call in insects to suppress the salt quantity in the tree right so when we start to talk about insects we say salts give rise to insects and when we say salts we're talking about sodium magnesium chloride and potassium right they can call in the different types of call in insects that insects in the piercing process transfer the disease, and now disease is a part of high salts, but it was because it was conducted through an insect. This is the entire discussion about Xylella down in Puglia, Italy. It's what we know. High salts, because of change in cultivation practices, along with chemical, high chemical application of fertilizers since World War II, and 3,000-year-old trees suddenly in the past 80 years have started to completely collapse, right? Okay, so when we think about all of this system, and we think about all of these things, this is why it's so necessary to test. It's why it's so necessary to test, okay? Because you have to know where your plant is at in the process, but if you're seeing disease and pests immediately, you know, and there's other reasons that this stuff can be happening. For example, I can start to get salt accumulation because I have broken down aqueducts. You're getting, you're getting, okay, yeah. Yep, let me just put it right here on the surface. Can you give me a hand? Yeah. This is my, positioning the microphone is my least favorite, and least, this is my lowest skill set at Mirai. You know, this is like a 99% success rate, I feel like. This is where I fail. Well, it weighs down the shirt. Especially when you've been grinding. Oh, I'm on one today. There you go. Okay, thanks. Okay, so we can have broken down akadama start to hold more salt. Where does the salt come from? Salt can come from fertilizer. Hey, big one. Salt comes from chemical applications, fungicides and insecticides, right? Now we've got this broken down surface that needs vacuum cleaning. Vacuum cleaning empowers oxygen back into the system, which allows the energy to be utilized, which allows all of these. Different products that the plant produces that repel insects, that stop calling the insects to the environment, but we get this breakdown, we get this lack of oxygen, we get this accumulation of salts from our water, from our fertilizer, from our chemicals, from our general bonsai practice, right? And now all of a sudden, broken down akadama with an increased surface area, holding more salts and less oxygen creates an immediate insect issue. Number one, scale. Scale is going to be a product of broken down akadama and the accumulation. Okay. Okay. And the accumulation of salts. Now scale could be the product of excessive sodium from the fertilizers you're using, could be excessive magnesium from the fertilizers and the soil you're using, could be excessive chloride from increasing temperatures without other elements to offset chloride spike, which is a natural thing that the tree does to keep itself turgid through the water in, water out growth phase over the course of the day, or most fertilizers have too much potassium, which explains the presence of insects. And almost a majority of our bonsai is excessive potassium, right? So we see this, but broken down akadama also on the surface starts to increase the surface area for the metals to be released, for the metals to be released, right? And now all of a sudden we have an organic fertilizer component on our surface. We water in the organic fertilizer component, which acidifies the system. Acidifying the system makes the metals become soluble. Anytime we get below a neutral pH, now metals are starting to become soluble and available. Okay. Broken down akadama has the metals sitting there. What else is part of our chemicals? What else is the major backbone of almost every fungicide and insecticide? Metals, metals, metals. And now all of a sudden we're treating disease. We're treating pests. We're loading our system up with salts. We're loading our system up with metals. We've got broken down akadama, which is holding more of it, exposing more of it. We have less oxygen in the system that allows for the plant to produce its natural phytocides and some of the things that protect it. The root rhizosphere is not as healthy, which can manipulate and balance the incoming toxicity to a degree if it's not overwhelmed by an excessive release based on all of this stuff happening. And now you start to understand the complex system that starts to lead to the susceptibility of disease and pest. And so automatically, whenever I see a tree with disease or pest, the first thing I'm thinking is, is there still field soil in the container? Is the container fully occupied with roots? Okay. Two things. I'm going to have to repot to fix the problem. Do I want the tree to be strong when I repot? Absolutely. Is the tree strong? Depends on the tree. Some trees are strong but showing some issue. Cool. I'm going to go ahead and repot. Some trees are very weak, losing a lot of foliage, showing disease. Okay. Now I'm going to vacuum clean. I see an insect or a disease issue. My number one action, insect or disease issue, very first thing, clean, compacted surface. I cannot. I cannot overemphasize that action in the spring season going through every tree in your collection. Right? If you repotted, you know you took care of the problem. If you did it correctly and you cleaned off the compacted surface all the way up to the base of the tree so that water and oxygen permeate the sheen as well as all of the other soil in the system. And we know we're going to be timing our watering based on water mobility as to when we apply that water. But trees that were not repotted, trees that are showing health issues that don't provide the strength to repot. First thing we do is we clean the compacted surface to start getting oxygen back into the system, to take away all of the accumulation of that fine broken down organic matter and Akadama at the surface of the soil that are holding toxicity and releasing toxicity and continuing to contribute to the acidification of your bonsai system that causes further issue. Right? To go through your collection every spring. Now, as the trees are starting to grow or just prior at the tail end of your repotting or any time through the repotting, if you've got extra time, you're going to be vacuum cleaning those compacted areas where water does not freely permeate, where oxygen does not freely permeate, where you see broken down Akadama, where you see a high amount of moss accumulation and organic debris. And this is not moss for one year, two years. This is like the moss that's holding. And here's another indicator. A lot of weeds in your container automatically means that's an indicator. I've got a broken down soil. Weeds occupy broken down soil. Now, they will occupy soil that is totally intact and filled with oxygen, but not nearly as prevalently, not nearly as densely. It will not proliferate as much. It will not completely consume the container. You have high weeds, soil clean. You've got insects, soil clean. You've got disease, soil clean. If not repotting, clean the surface of your soil. That is the beginning of rectifying all things that are going to come from that. So, once we've rectified the bleeding, once we've stopped the bleeding, now we balance nutrition. Now we balance nutrition because balancing nutrition is what allows you to recover from the toxicity that was taken in through the bonsai cultivation practice that will inevitably lead to a pest or disease issue at some time in every one of your trees. Life is a bonsai, right? And a majority of us are saying, well, that's a lot of work. Can't I just spray? And here's what I'm saying. In this instant, in this circumstance, if you are spraying to solve the problem, you are only making it worse. You may kill the insect. You may kill the disease. You still have the root cause of all of this, right? And if you don't fix it, it's going to get worse because the chemicals contribute to the long-term accumulation of things that lead to more insects, more disease, more root failure, and a decreasing health and immunity. And it's not just a matter of time before you die. It's going to be a long-term loss of your immunity and your tree, right? Now, we do these steps. We have an economically damaging situation. Scale is causing deformation of growth and defoliation of our tree. Phomopsis is causing the excessive loss of foliar mass in our junipers. Needle cass is causing the loss of our photosystem in our pines. Syracoccus is causing the drop of leaves in our Doug Furs and our Cedrus species, right? And it goes on and on. redwoods, black spot, anthracnose, any number of other diseases that affect our deciduous trees are causing the deformation of our photosystem and the drop of our foliar system, right? So we see, oh, okay, we have to do more than just load up a spray bottle with chemicals. If we are going to fix the imbalance of a tree that has now achieved susceptibility or a lack of that balance, which will inevitably happen, and knowing how to handle it is why we're talking about it, right? We have to fix the root cause, and if it's economically damaging, come up with a solution, right? Now, there are times where we still use chemicals at Moriah. I've said, listen, we've gone chemical free. I had to use malathion for the first time on aphids on a juniper this year. I do have a scale issue on trees that have been repotted that I need to help the trees now that I've fixed the issue, or trees that have had surface. Now that I've fixed the issue, I need to come in and stop the damage, relieve the pressure on the tree so that it can spend its resources to recover and build back up to that state of immunity, right? So there are moments, spider mites are typically something that are challenging to get ahead of once they attack, but here's the other point of this. Are you using beneficial nematodes in the spring? As you know, root aphids are going to be in their first or second instar of maturation as an insect and capable of being consumed by the nematodes. Are you using beneficial bacterias like Basilius to go into the soil system and bind themselves to the soft body of an insect and take over that insect, stop its ability to reproduce and eradicate the insect? Are we putting out predatory mites that knock down spider mite populations in the spring and in the early summer because we know that's how you actually prevent a boom that requires the nuclear bomb of a miticide? Not favorable for anything. If you take a nutrient panel after you spray a four-year fungicide or you spray a four-year fungicide, it will freak you out. And if it doesn't, then you don't have a pulse. The amount of toxicity that comes with chemicals, and again, I'm not saying no chemicals, no chemicals. I get it. And we still have to lean on them every once in a while. Three times in the past five years since I started Apical have I had to do something. I had spider mites one summer, I had to treat for scale at one point, and I just recently had to knock down aphids that had reached a critical mass. Okay. Ultimately, are we treating with nematodes? Yeah. Do we have predatory wasps released? They're coming next week. Are we about ready to move into spider mite, predatory mite release? Absolutely. Why not? We've had spider mite issue the past two years. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to release, try to proactively get ahead. This is how we try to buffer. Do you have sticky traps out in your garden, right? Are we feeling for, you know, and sticky traps knock down your beneficials? Can we use colors, especially with board identification? Adult beetles are going to start flying. It's warmer this year. They're probably starting now. We're going to have a lot of them. We're going to have a lot of them. We're going to have a lot of them. We're going to have a lot of them. We're going to have a lot of them. We're getting sticky traps ready, right? These are all the things that go into a responsible management. Now you might be saying, I have 12 trees in my backyard, bro. I don't need all. Okay, cool. Totally. Especially in an urban environment that's highly sterilized by the built materials that are utilized there, there is a lower pressure of disease issue and insect issue, but it doesn't mean they're not there. In the rural environment, this is an inevitable. High disease, high insect spore population, insect flying youth population, wind is blowing things everywhere, right? Spider mite distribution, primarily through the wind. So we start to see differences in the susceptibility, but if you have a problem, you also need to know how to address it. If you want to prevent a problem, there are things you can do that are a lower lift than coming back, nuking your trees, and then trying to figure out why next year in the spring your tree is yellow. It could have been that chemical application that could have been stopped or dealt with in a different way. Or methodology. Chemicals should be the last resort of all things that we do, okay? So thinking about this, right, in terms of that compacted surface, you know, I've got 900 trees. I'm going through every single one of them. I've repotted over 400 trees. That means there's 500 more trees that I've got to check. A lot of them are good. A lot of them need some attention. That's what we're going through now as we wind down on the repotting process. If I don't, I'm going to be fighting an uphill battle all year. You know, I'm going to be fighting an uphill battle all year. You know a bonsai is fun when your trees are healthy. You know a bonsai is not so fun when you're trying to get a tree healthy, right? That's the least enjoyable. Now when you win, it's like, oh my gosh, that's a victory beyond all victories. Do you even want to have that fight? I don't want to have that fight because I know even if I try to not have that fight, I'm going to have that fight, right? But if I know that I need to do something and I don't do it, now I'm asking for the fight. Now I'm saying, look, I'm here. It's like, who wants that? We don't want that. I don't want that. I'm tired of that. Right? This is the information that we actually need to know. This is what nobody tells you about disease and pest, right? Who knew that compacted akadama created insect and disease issues? I mean, I think we're becoming more aware of it. Like, I'm aware of it now, right? But it has really altered my practice on site. Having such clarity into the trees that I've handled well, seeing trees that have resisted infection and disease, and insect populations over the course of time, seeing some of those trees become susceptible, seeing trees that were susceptible become stronger and more immune on their own through the horticulture, right? Like, it's feeding all of this. And the beautiful thing about Mirai is I have 900 test subjects. Who else is producing this information that has such a large sample group of how to deal with this? I was just up at PBM working with Aaron and his crew, and they're saying, hey, give us the lowdown. We're going to do this. We're going to do this. We're going to do this. And they're saying, hey, give us the lowdown on the apical system, how it works, what we can expect, so that we just better understand the workload coming down the hopper. And it's become much more clear. Because to this point this spring, I've been pumping trees with a tremendous amount of calcium in the form of CalKing cell wall. I've pumped them full of phosphorus. These are based on Rex, but my Rex were 2x max CalKing. 2x max phosphorus, mid-carbon, mid-nitrogen since December of last year, which says as they went through the fall, that vascular productivity, they burned all of that resource that I had been building up over the late spring, early summer, right? And they used that for vascular growth, and now they need something, right? And here's what I'm seeing now is repotted or surface clean because I've been focusing on the CalKing and the phosphorus as per the Rex. My next round of Rex is almost entirely CalCil across the garden, across all species, because now with all of this fresh Akadama, with all of this replaced surface area, any of the dead deteriorated detritus, stocked system of metals and salts over the winter and the broken down stuff, now they're coming to roost. And I've got to purify the system. I've got to detox the system. I've got to prepare the new roots for a favorable environment to occupy, so that they can actually start to do their job, and I can build up. But I mean, I cannot overstate how high the level of health is in the garden this year compared to any other year. David told me it would take three years. Didn't start out with the right dilutions. That was the first step. Didn't necessarily know how things worked, right? And now, three years of really following protocol, it is truly a pleasure because so many trees are so freaking healthy, and so many trees that were unhealthy have recovered to the bottom of the garden. And so many trees have recovered to the bottom of the garden. And so many trees have recovered to the bottom of the garden. And so many many trees have recovered to the bottom of the garden. And so many have recovered to the bottom of the garden. And we are Below the point where we get to take them- that next level this is why we do it, right? This is why we go through the sufferfest of horticulture to be able to achieve the visual dream, right? Okay. But there's a catch, right? So with all of this and with the understanding and again none of this is possible you can't say okay well i'm not going to test now because you don't know, you don't know if it's aluminum yellowing your tree or if it's sodium yellow in your tree. You don't know where the sodium is coming from. If you haven't tested the water. You don't have the tools to apply the calcium if you don't have the two different resources and the test to understand, right? Even just starting out with a baseline as you do routine pruning. I styled a tree last week. Great. Send in the foliage, right? I've got water from this hose. Great. Send in the water sample. Know what the inputs are. Know what's going on. Even if you're going to use biogold. I still use biogold at Mirai. I don't use it on a majority of the trees we're treating. I tend to find the Satsuki azaleas like the acidity of biogold and can handle the calcium-magnesium ratio. Bristlecone pine also, if you listen to Brian Smithers, has a unique calcium-magnesium ratio tolerance. Okay, but here's the other thing and this is where we come down to technique. This is the biggie here. We are growing a tree in a confined environment, right? We are trying to maintain the carbon backbone inside of Akadama, right? That is what keeps the structure that allows for the balance of water and oxygen, that allows for the synthesis of phosphorus, that allows for the lower salt. Lower metal content based on a lack of decomposition that allows for our energy system to fuel and foster growth both in the foyer mass as well as in the vascular region of the tree in the root system trunk and branches. So if I start to get this big massive growth and I start to get this recovery, right? And I start to get foyer mass out here. I'm still in this confined environment. You can create in the bonsai container a tree whose growth you cannot keep up with. Get a tree healthier and healthier and healthier. And it's like, okay, this tree is just going to continue getting healthier, but at some point it stops because the confined environment has a set level that it cannot exceed, right? And the tree is growing and growing and growing and scaling and scaling and scaling and opening up more and more access. And at some point there's more pulling than we can provide. And that's all of a sudden when we start to see the tree saying, I need carbon. And there you are, Akadama. And it starts taking that carbon and the Akadama gets crushed. And now we've got an imbalance of water and oxygen. And now we're phosphorus deficient, even though we're supplying phosphorus to the tree. And now we start to see branches set. And now we start to see insects come in. And now we start to see the color of the tree change. So what that means is when you ask the tree to do something through how you nutrition it, you have got the responsibility of responding to that. And when I say careful what I ask, what was the context of Master Studio? Getting my best students here to elevate their level, building a community that is pursuing that next iteration of bonsai. I've titled it the Bonsai Bauhaus. In case you care, check out Bauhaus. Badass. Anyways, right? And one of the things that they also empower me to do is to manage the growth and responsibly handle the big bad trees at Mirai. Because as a single individual who waters, who nutritions, who's still repotting, who's got a greenhouse, who has to move trees, who's got rain protection, that's got to be changed to shade protection. All of the things, if I didn't have proficiency in my students, I couldn't do all the work. I couldn't do all the work, right? And this work of managing this is to say, okay, I'm going to come back and prune. I'm going to wire to get photosynthetic efficiency. I'm thinking specifically about the Kenosha to Cyprus that is in the greenhouse right now, due up for a big prune. I'm thinking about the big pomegranate from the wild animal park down in San Diego. Big hollow trunk, twisted pomegranate that produced three feet of growth last year. And by the end of summer was putrid yellow. And I could not keep up with the nutrition. I'm saying, what the heck? I go into the repot, soil's broken down. But really what happened is I exceeded the capacity of the container and the tree fed on the soil. And the only nutrition that existed with the biology that was built through the act of generating that health. Okay. You have to manage. Now, when you come back and prune, prune prior to the flush of growth, right? Prune prior to the flush of growth. No, we don't want to be pruning our broadleaf deciduous. If I have a broadleaf deciduous that I didn't get to at leaf drop, got too far into the winter, I'm going to still prune it in the spring because I know if I don't manage that growth, I'm going to have an issue as we move through spring coming into that energy reaccumulation as they're pulling so hard on that extended growth. Okay. Pruning my conifers, junipers prior to the push of growth, pines prior to the push of growth, but also coming back. So we have stocked with energy. Now we know, especially for ramification refinement, this is the worst time to prune. It's going to focus more energy on a smaller number of growing tips for a tree and refinement. We want it to be handling or managing that energy. We should not get refinable trees into this state unless we've let them go. Okay. So pre-flush prune, secondary primary stages of development. This is the best time to be pruning stock full of energy. If you've accomplished your secondary or primary goals, elongation, thickening, bud expansion through foliar mass, healing of wounds, rebuilding of roots, we're coming out of a repot. What's the only type of repot that I say you can prune wire and repot? A refinement repot. Boom. There you go. Okay. Secondary primary, second repot, first repot, sheen replacement. Now all of a sudden we're not going to be necessarily having the capacity to prune here. Okay. Second is post-flush. Okay. This hasn't happened yet unless you're in a very warm part of the country or world. Post-flush pruning, that's... After hardening of the first flush of foliage. Okay. This is mandatory for trees and refinement. Another opportunity to check your secondary primary and move them up the stages of development once they accomplish their goals branch by branch, not universal across the whole tree. Usually 70 plus percent of the foliage needs to be handled to the highest level of refinement for it to maintain strength. That is saying, if I'm going to move from secondary to tertiary, I partially defoliate and prune. I'm disempowering portions of the tree. I may still have some secondary or even primary elongation and thickening I'm after. Seventy percent of the tree has to be handled to that refinement process. Only 30 percent can be in secondary or primary development or the secondary or primary being in addition to 30 percent. 40 percent, 50 percent, 60 percent. The areas we handled in refinement will be disempowered. They'll lose strength and the tree will try to shed them in the energy system. Okay. The last one, which does not apply to our broadly- Besch morality, but the kind of energy that space canavan toanzas for as its most prolific and Mental-agan propagated—— or a broadleaf deciduous is early fall, okay? Pre-vascular pruning. This is when we calm down our primary, secondary to advance them and get a finer response to the growth. This is when we lower the energy system accumulation over the course of fall, knowing that if we lower the energy system next year, we get finer growth. So we remove on a ponderosa pine excessive amounts of needle prior to the point where it accumulates its sugar starch storage and vascular production that determines next spring's growth, right? But these are the times. So just because we have a healthy tree, we can't willy-nilly it. We still have the discipline of technique. Even if you cannot wire, getting into prune, removing the excessive tissue, slowing down the photo system. And here's the other thing. When we prune, guess what happens? The tree dumps an excessive amount of carbon back into the soil system. Poof, poof, poof, poof. What? That's right. That's right. So if any of you have ever done any reading about the failing of the prairie, which was an incredibly fertile region of North America, the failing of the prairie and the movement of invasive species into a lower and lower nutritional and poorly structured soil, it is almost not universally, right? Plowing, farming, decrease of prairie lands, loss of grazing animals, specifically the buffalo, right? What is the trickle-down of the loss of grazing animals? The soil system across North America is collapsing, right? And now you go to the Central Valley, you've got a tremendous amount of chemical inputs breaking down, causing the same thing, right? Unsustainable growth on the soil system causing a massive uptake and necessity for carbon by chemical inputs. The loss of carbon, causing the breakdown. Plowing of the soil, causing the breakdown of the carbon backbone of your soil structure. We prune, grass gets grazed, carbon goes back into the soil system. Tree goes, let's start all over. Now we're restocked, let's go, okay? And it really does have a tremendously sustaining impact on your bonsai cultivation to be pruning and managing the growth of trees that are showing the health, that are showing the health, that are showing the health to tolerate the work, right? So a long time held bonsai adage is, ah, if you don't know what to do, you should wait. Or I'm just gonna keep it growing, I'm gonna let it develop a little bit more, right? These are all the things that we tell ourselves to justify not sitting our ass down in the workshop on a night that we wanna watch a football game or a basketball game or a movie, right? And this is where I'm at. Like I got, I got four kids, you know, that I love very much. I have a phenomenal wife. I have a facility here. I've got a team. I've got a business. There is every excuse in the world and has been for the past four years as I've been rebuilding the garden and rebuilding my home after what happened. There's been every excuse in the world to not get to this. With the renovation of the soil system that has happened at Mirai, with the work that is happening, I'm starting to get my foothold. I'm getting trees. I'm getting trees into the workshop. I'm getting them wired. But most importantly, I'm getting trees into the workshop and I'm getting them pruned. And those prunings go straight to apical to build up my body of what do my trees need right now that I've brought to this level to continue to perpetuate the health and deal with the inevitable imbalances that are coming down the pipeline. And it is a lifestyle. Cultivating bonsai is a lifestyle. If you wanna do it at the highest level, it is all about the tree. And I'm not saying all about the tree sacrificing everything else in our life. I'm saying it's all about the tree, meaning you have to find the time. If you wanna pursue bonsai at the highest level, if you want your trees to stay healthy and maximize their aesthetic advancement, you have got to prioritize the tree somehow, some way. Does that mean less sleep? That's not sustainable over the course of time. Does that mean less nutrition? That is not sustainable. Does that mean less family? That is not sustainable. Does that not mean less work? That is not sustainable. Does that mean potentially less leisure? I think that's your moment. I think that's your window. To do bonsai at the highest level, the people that are the best at bonsai, bonsai is their leisure. It is what they allocate their time spent that is extra and feeds their soul, feeds their spirit. Bonsai is that thing, right? And I'm recognizing as much as I do it for a business, bonsai started out and continues to be my greatest passion and heart. Bonsai started out as a hobby and pursuit for my own mental and physical health. You got to be pruning your trees if you're going to build up their health. And this is not just specific to apical. This is specific to plant growth in a confined environment under the pressure of that confined environment demanding we use volcanic soils. Right? Period. Okay? So now you understand the full picture. This isn't, hey, if you've got spider mites, you should be using fluoramide or a tetrasan apical. Or a tetrasan abamectin tank mix. No. No. I don't. Chemicals are the last. Chemicals are literally the last thing to know. That's easy. Go online. Look up the insect. Figure out what chemical treats it. No problem. Right? Last resort. Easiest available information that you can find to cultivate bonsai. Here's what you can't find. This. All of this stuff. That is actually far more important, far more sustainable, and empowers you to have the very best, highest level health and aesthetic outcome of technique through the bonsai action. And I do mean, listen, I'm telling you, technique plus education raises your level. Get here. Become a part of the master studio movement. In order to step up the game of bonsai, you gotta elevate your commitment to the tree or at least be doing what it needs, when it needs it, to keep it in that sweet spot of health and aesthetic productivity. That's all I got for you. Check, check. Boom, boom, bam. All right. Nice work. Yeah. That was good. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. I've been working on my diatribes lately. That's one of them. That's the bonsai health diatribe. Yeah. I'm about ready to go into, we're gonna do a podcast here, either this week or next. Actually, it's Friday, so next week or the following week, about my diatribe on what I've discovered through the bonsai process, like more of like the spiritual, soulful journey. It'll appeal to some people. It'll be totally woo-woo to others. All good, baby. I don't mind, right? We can't please everybody with everything, but we wanna please everybody with something. But my diatribe on plant health after five years of apical, and let's just be really clear, 10 years of modern factory farming practices, this is where I'm at. And that is something that nobody ever taught me. This has been a true labor of love to get to this point. Well, and I think if you love trees enough and you really do care for the tree, you look at it and think, how do I do this better? Yeah. And you look around. How do I do it? Yeah, absolutely. Right? Absolutely. Absolutely. Cool. So we got a couple questions. One from Danielle. Can salt buildup cause new growth on broadleaf trees to be yellower and seemingly lacking some turgar? Yes. Yes. Even though watering is on point, nutritioning has been working on detox. Beyond a shadow of a doubt. So salt, and when you think about salts and metals, here's what salts and metals ultimately do. Just as like a broad overview. They clog the vascular system. They clog the vascular system. So if David extracts a high salt or a high metal tree, usually what he would get out of a healthy tree that's in nutritional balance is he gets a very beautiful tinted fluid. Right? With the chlorophyll. Sometimes it's green. Sometimes it has a slight bluish tint. If you have a blue foliar mass like a Sierra juniper. Right? He'll get a clear liquid that comes out of the centripetal force. The centripetal force extraction. If he has a tree that he's extracting that has high salts, high metals. First and foremost, there are often times where no matter the amount of sample or if a sample is too minimal, he doesn't get enough or he doesn't get anything. Right? Because the water content of the leaf mass is so low based on the vascular constipation that there's literally no water there. Or what he will get is he will get a mucus that looks yellow or brown like snot when you're sick coming out of the plant. I mean, it is literally like a visible one to one. I've seen it. It's incredible. The difference between a balanced tree or a tree that has high salts and high metals in terms of what comes out. But yes, it impairs hydrology and hydration of the foliar mass. And to sample a tree like that. Right? A lot of us say, man, I cannot. I don't have enough foliar mass to sample it. Okay. Well, then you're going to go into that emergency. Calcium, phosphorus, carbon. And I might even, for the first drench or two, hold off on a little bit of nitrogen. But it's difficult to treat with carbon and not provide some nitrogen. A minimum amount of nitrogen can be really helpful to balance the carbon until we get the tree purified enough to actually take a sample. Right? Nice. And a question from Danny. Can you go into detail? And I think you've touched on quite a bit of this. But maybe some details about the apical process that you haven't gone over today. Can you go into the details of the workload of applying apical to the garden and the process? Yeah. That's a really good question. So if you... This is going to be a circuitous as I so often do because this unlocks a lot of information. If you wanted to... The best horticulturalist I've ever seen in bonsai was Masahiko Kimura. After his apprenticeship, he went to college for horticulture. And he said, I don't know how modern or how sort of regenerative it is here in Japan. I have no idea what was taught, how modern or how sort of regenerative. And I say modern derogatorily like post-World War II chemical input is modern horticulture. Right? Pre-World War II, old world is regenerative agronomy through and through. Right? So I don't know how much regenerative agronomy... I mean, because they use so much chemical input in Japan that there's a lot of disease and insect spraying and so on. And so, it's a chemical fertilite. Like, it's a lot of chemicals. But his education may have provided him with a regenerative knowledge. One of the best, the best horticulturalist in the game. It is the root of all of his success. Okay? Like radical techniques, how does the tree take it? How does the tree recover? His horticulture is the best I've ever seen. Right? When you think about that, we never let a tree get a broken down surface layer of soil at Mr. Kimura's. Ever. Ever. The moment it started to break down, he'd have us vacuum clean it. And oftentimes, I was doing work to trees where I was saying, why are we doing this? This tree is so healthy. Which speaks to the fact that he knew the pitfalls and he knew how to avoid it. And he was the most proactive horticulturally, which is what made him the best. And so, he was the most proactive horticulturally, which is what made him the best. And so, he was the most proactive horticulturally, which is what made him the best. Right? And I know that that's based on knowledge or experience and or experience. If you can be proactive in your bonsai process, okay, and this is where I'm getting to the apical thing. Because, in the past, apical has kind of fallen in my, like I gotta move out the greenhouse. I gotta finish repotting. I got trees I'm trying to wire and prune. Apical would fall out of priority. What I've learned is, I've got to bite down on my mouthpiece at these critical periods of time. And I have to prioritize the tree and find a way. I've gotta find a way. If I can drench once a week, if I can foyer three days after that drench, and I can continue by staggering my applications, what I've started to do is I've started to come an hour or two early to work, I drench a few different species of trees each day throughout the week. It's a daily part of my routine. You guys might be looking at this going, dude, this is never gonna be possible. Okay, cool. This is what I do. Right? You can do it where you drench everything one day and you foyer everything three days later. I cannot. I got 900 trees. Right? But I do have my groupings pulled together. My junipers are relatively homogenous. There are outliers. I will treat the outliers. I have a homogenous drench. My pines are homogenous now. I do have outliers. I will treat outliers. But I have a homogenous which means I've gotta be sampling two or three at a time. One that's unhealthy, two that are healthy. Two that are healthy allows me to know how to treat the healthy trees. I'm not impacting others. I'll try it. They don't improve. I'll sample those specifically. Right? That's kind of how I work through it. But it is a daily part of the dedication. Now, David knows as much as I do that they need a pelletized component. He's working on it. We will have, and I believe he's even in process of testing, pelletized so that the rex for apical will have a drench to immediately address the issue and a pelletized application that will have a more prolonged impact. I'm finding with my rex that my rex I'm now using up to two or three months long. I'm not testing all of the time. As long as I'm seeing good benefit, I've been using the same rex for five months. That's over the dormant period. Trees are coming out healthier than ever. I just did recent samples with the pruning that I'm talking about. Now I've got new rex. I've got a new set of samples, a new set of data. I'm seeing it change. Okay, cool. Those are the things I wasn't applying. Now I'm seeing where the tree needs them. And I've gotten into a beautiful system of being able to mix quickly, apply very consistently, and really address and stage my behavior in the bonsai conduct, and it has made a world of difference. But none of that matters if I don't address the root, which is tending to the soil system to maintain the balance of water and oxygen. Nice. Question from Treebeard Steve. Our club in Fort Wayne has started making our own solid fertilizer to help club members reduce their costs. When we mixed a batch a few weeks ago, the pH meter we used was defective and we didn't know. Tests in the last few days have shown that the pH of the fertilizer is about nine. Do you have any suggestions for ways club members can counteract that high pH when using the fertilizer? I mean, I'd be curious what the fertilizer was, but my very first suggestion is don't apply that. Don't do that. Whatever you guys got going on there, the pH of your fertilizer is nine. If you have a pH above neutral, oh man, don't do that. That's not good. I've never... I guess we have tested the pH of BioGold and it was slightly acidic. And the pH of the apical products are basically, they work out to be neutral. Yeah, I don't know. I would say, you know, you're already starting off on the wrong foot if you're going with the pH of nine. Shit's going to go bad quick. Yeah, I don't know. I would say, you know, you're already starting off on the wrong foot if you're going with the pH of nine. Shit's going to go bad quick. Yeah. Yeah. That's my advice. Wrong fertilizer, make sure. New fertilizer. New fertilizer. Change it up. Okay. So now we've got a question from Simon. I have three young crab apple saplings. I'm growing on... Growing in the ground. They're right next to each other, experiencing identical conditions, but just one of them has a serious green fly infestation. The others seem to be free of it currently. Any thoughts on why this might be? Genetics? There's some people who say they're seedlings. Yeah. He's saying that they are saplings. Saplings. Okay. Yeah. Genetic diversity. Unless they were propagated from the same plant and then maybe you just have a different pocket of soil. You know, because even cloned from the same tree, meaning the genetics are the same. So a seedling has genetic differentiation from the mother stock. Every seedling is going to be genetically different. This is how plants adapt to changing conditions over time, right? But even if they're cloned, there's so many variables, right? Even to the degree that it holds a little bit more water or a little less water or, you know, dogs urinated here and not there or an animal crapped here and not there, right? Like those can have, believe it or not, those can have major, major impact. You sprayed with Roundup here, you didn't spray with Roundup there. That literally could be the difference and you might have done it a year ago or two years ago or 10 years ago. I had a student that was watering from a shallow well and he lived on an old cattle ranch and the water was so salty, it torched all of his trees. He didn't test it, lesson learned, right? So it could be any number of things but I would assume genetics, if all things are relatively equal, genetics is probably what you're dealing with. All right, and that's it. Oh, okay. I don't even know how many people tune into the lectures anymore but I just got to say, good on you guys. I know they get watched a lot in the library. Man, this is like one of those man, this is like if anybody had to tune in to one lecture in the spring, this was the one in my mind, right? But I feel like that every time we have a lecture because it's just information that is immediately applicable, information that is cutting edge in terms of the research and science that we're engaging with which again, I don't know anybody in bonsai doing this and it's information that you can tuck into your tool belt and put into immediate action to improve the quality of your bonsai pursuit. So thank you for showing up. I love you. Have a very happy spring. Be sure you're nutritioning balance, balance, balance of water and oxygen. Balance, balance, balance of nutrition in the system and we will see things thrive when you have the opportunity to advance a tree. Now you know, you got to seize it. 
