what's going on everybody that totally caught me off guard eve tripped over the camera right as the camera went live as so often happens you know behind the scenes look someday we'll give it to you not today okay phomopsis p-h-o-m pho mop m-o-p-s-i-s p-h-o-m-o-p-s-i-s phomopsis right if you need to do any research on it the spelling is imperative juniper tip blight is the slang term okay now what you're going to find is you're going to google try to webmd right from a bone tie perspective the disease that's plaguing your juniper and specifically on your juniper the growing tips of your juniper not necessarily isolated to the farthest extent of the tip okay phomopsis can attack any growing tip inside of the tree outside of the tree but it is attacking the growing tip of the juniper and it's not going to attack the growing tip of the tree right it's not going to attack the growing tip of the Juniper it's going to attack the growing tip of the Juniper tip. And this is what is so important to understand about phomopsis. Now, we've got to be very careful when we start talking phomopsis in the same way that we've got to be very careful when we start talking dothostroma. And I think we started out this sort of identification of issue. We started out talking about identification of issue by starting with an abiotic nutrient deficiency that looked a lot like dothostroma on the ponderosa pine. And then we came back two weeks later and we talked about dothostroma and how to decipher and delineate between an abiotic issue, a nutrient issue, a water issue, a potential mechanical issue, attacking the entirety of the crown. And then we came back and we looked at dothostroma in a fungal issue or an insect issue as random distribution. And again, we have to carry these exact same contexts into the identification of phomopsis. Because on this singular juniper right here, we have a multitude of issues causing branch dieback or death. And it's not all phomopsis. We do have a tree that was wired relatively recently, wired by a student. And as with anything, as we're learning, there is some failure inside of that application. And so when we start to look at this and we see branches dying here, and we say, oh my gosh, do I have tip blight? And Eve, go ahead and zoom into this one right here. I think this is a really good example, right? Do I have tip blight? I have a random branch dying here. I have a branch losing color and completely. Notice how that's kind of washed out and yellowed there. Another branch that's dying, right? Is this phomopsis? Is this phomopsis that is knocking out this entire branch? Is it phomopsis that killed this tip? And again, we go back to our discussion. Number one, is there a pattern? Is there a repetition? Is there a theme? Or is this broadly applied to the entire branch? Is there a pattern? Is there a repetition? Is there a theme? Is there even a response? And so, when we start to look at the dieback, we do notice that a lot of the dieback on the upper portion of this tree is occurring inside of branches that have wire and have wire immediately applied to very thin, fine sections of the foyer mass. Okay? So when we start to see these tips dying, and we start to see some of the wired portions like this one, for example, we have a living tip here, right? But then we have dead tips all over here and all over And not just dead tips, but entirely dead branches. Let me go ahead and show that to you. And you start to say, oh, is that Phomopsis that killed that? Well, if it was recently wired, and we're seeing a consistency of the repetition of that dieback. And when we talk about recently wired, let's just be very clear. Wiring, if we disconnect the xylem, we disconnect the core transport mechanism of the foyer mass. And we are at a time in the year where we have temperatures that are causing transpiration. 65 degrees and above. Wiring will start to show death within two weeks. Because a juniper can generally hold its moisture level and its foliage for two weeks during a period of 65 degrees or above. And suddenly we see these branches dying back after we've wired it. And we say, oh, I totally broke that branch wiring. Very, very effortless to see. If, in the wiring process, we did damage to the cambial layer. Or we did damage to the phloem, the sugar conductive tissue. We will see the cambial layer or the phloem damage show branch death 90 to 120 days later. Three to four months after the wiring process is when we start to see that damage. And this is where Phomopsis is most often misidentified. Because we say, listen, I wired it. Everything was totally fine. Four months later, things started dying back. It must be a disease. The tips are dying back. This is bad. Okay? And so first and foremost, let's just understand that with the damage of wiring, when we start to see this, the entire branch dies and there is no new regeneration of foliar mass within those twigs. Whereas when we get the death by Phomopsis, and let me go ahead and come over here and show you a true blue Phomopsis piece of death. Okay? This is a true blue Phomopsis piece of death. Okay? Notice that the tip of this has perished. Notice that there's even a little bit of dieback back in here. But there is new growth. Coming from this branch. Right? There is new growth coming from this branch that has had the infection of Phomopsis. So the wiring process did not cause this dieback. The wiring process did not cause this death. Because if the wiring process caused the death of the branch, we would not be getting any new growth occurring on that same branch. Right? This is one of the indicators of whether we're dealing with wire death or whether we're starting to deal with a juniper tip blight. Okay? Let me show you a few more instances. Of Phomopsis death. Let's go ahead and let's look up in the upper canopy here. Okay? Up in the upper canopy. And again, this is a really beautiful illustration. Okay? And go ahead and zoom in pretty tight here, Eve. Come on in there. I'm kind of knocking off the dead stuff here. Okay. I have just a random tip here that's dead. Random tip that's dead. Right? Let me go ahead and put my hand behind that so that you can see. Okay. Random tip that's dead right there. And then you notice all of the green around it. And here's the thing. There's no wiring. There's no wire on this branch. Okay? I've got another random tip that's dead right here. Okay? And I've got new growth coming from its base. Right? That's coming from the base of that piece that's dead. So I have a small tip here and new growth right around that small tip's death. I've got this piece, which is a bigger tip that's died back. And I've got big, healthy growth coming from its base. These are major indications. No wire on it. No pruning. No cleaning. No unwiring. No possibility of damage. Yet we have living growth around a dead tip that has died back. And we've... We've got another branch that shot from the crotch as a result of the dieback of that branch. Okay? These are instances where we start to look at this and we say, I have no mechanical damage. Right? I don't see this condition widespread over the entirety of the canopy. It is randomly distributed and irregular in its pattern. I see branches that are dead that have wire on them. But the entirety of the branch is dead. Which is to say, I killed the whole thing. I disconnected the xylem if it died quickly. I disconnected the phloem or the cambium. And it took the... I took the whole tree for months to recognize that that branch is not paying back the energy that the tree is giving it. And so the tree popped that baby off. We don't need you anymore. You're consuming water. You're consuming nutrition. You're not paying me back sugar and starch. You're not a part of this community. Boom. You're out. Okay? And that's why it took so long. And so we're starting to formulate some notice... Some notably identifiable components that allow us to separate this notion of phomopsis from mechanical damage or other things that could cause... Juniper tip blight or tip dieback if it is being misidentified. And again, so many abiotic, mechanical issues, watering issues, nutrient issues look very similar to a fungus or a disease or a pest issue. Being able to delineate these things and getting the knowledge in your head of how we tell the difference and these discernible components that give each of those a unique appearance, right? Is how we start to recognize, do I need to treat with a fungicide or not? Okay? I'm going to pull back for a minute. Because I went a little bit too deep into the detail without setting us up. Without setting us up, I got excited. I like talking about phomopsis because we deal with it so very much. I want to give you a background. And let me give you the whole kind of rotation because you're going to see more, right? We've got some more wire damage that's occurring in this. We have some more pieces that have lost tips that are unwired, right? There's a lot going on in this tree. There's multiple issues that are occurring inside of this tree. And you can see some of these big branch pieces of dieback. And we can see even on areas that are unwired. And this is a really beautiful area that we'll come back and focus on. Some of these areas definitely having that dead tip in here and having the green being produced around it to know that we're dealing probably with a pathogen. Again, no mechanical damage. Phomopsis is a fungal issue typically infecting junipers in the spring via the production of spores while temperatures are between 50 degrees and 70 degrees. Okay? 50 degrees, 70 degrees. It spreads via rain and splatter, via human contact with the plant if there's spores present and it's wet so we become the vector or by wind. Okay? Phomopsis is one of the most rapidly infecting fungal issues that we deal with. From the moment it contacts that branch and has the conditions, high relative humidity, moisture on the foyer mass, condensation from temperature fluctuation and morning dew. These three things, right? Rain, watering the foyer mass. Or the accumulation of dew in the morning spontaneously cause germination. Bam. Conditions are there. Temperature range is there. Right? And with that, the hyphae start to be produced. Okay? The hyphae of a spore enter the vascular tissue of that foyer mass and they start feeding on nitrogen specifically as a source of nutrition. Nitrogen, a big component of the chlorophyll. By consuming the nitrogen and those hyphae starting to feed the evolution of that nitrogen. The evolution of that singular spore into a large scale reproductive organism. Right? Feeding on the nitrogen causes the tip to lose its green color. And this is where we see juniper tip blight at that growing tip in the spring time where all of the sugars and starches are being moved. Consuming the nitrogen and leaching out the green color. And suddenly we get a yellow tip as a result of that spore infecting that tissue. Okay? Now, that yellow color as the spore continues to feed on. The resources. Where the spore entered its hyphae into that tissue becomes a line. Where that yellowness starts to turn to brown and die back to the point where the spore infected. Not just the needle but potentially even the twig of a juniper. The young, unwoody, un-lignified, non-woody, un-lignified twig. That becomes the point where the spore infected that tissue. Okay? Now, most of the time with phomopsis. Right? We're talking about it. There are ways that we avoid the infection of phomopsis. Okay? Number one, we don't touch our trees when they're wet. Number two, we make sure that we have a good balance of water and oxygen. The most susceptible species to phomopsis is Rocky Mountain juniper. Juniper scopulorum. Right? And even drier areas of North America or Europe or Japan experience phomopsis in abnormally wet spring. Right? I had a moment on the East Coast when I was first coming back from Japan three years into my professional career in the United States. They'd never seen phomopsis before. And it literally burned through the Northeastern United States and really had a negative impact on a lot of junipers. And everybody's like, what is this? Right? That was phomopsis. There was a moment about five years ago where Denver, Colorado, super dry, low relative humidity, high elevation, never dealt with phomopsis. And suddenly, boom. They bring Rocky Mountain junipers across the bonsai community in Denver, Colorado, riddled with phomopsis. Nobody had ever seen it. Okay? This can happen anywhere. But being able to identify it is the most important thing. And so we say, I see that yellowing tip. I see that dying back. How do I handle that? Let's first talk about that. First and foremost, the plant's ultimate health. When we start to talk about, okay, I have a tree here that in multiple areas I have phomopsis. And I'm going to come back and we're going to re-solidify. Sort of solidify how we identify phomopsis. But let's just first understand. I have a tree with phomopsis. What is my first thought process? Is this a healthy tree if I have phomopsis? Could be. Maybe. I got a little tip here. I got a little tip here. But otherwise, the tree is really healthy. Can I remove those tips so that they don't produce spores and increase the amount of infectious tissue? Absolutely. Absolutely you can. Stop the spread. Those are going to reproduce within ten days. They're going to be spreading spores. Which is why we say phomopsis infects that. Dies back. Reproduces. And really starts to amass momentum quickly. Okay? A few little spots. No problem. I have a tree. Right? I think it's healthy. It's growing. All looks good. Half of the tree has phomopsis. I'm losing significant portions of foliar mass. How do I fix this? Right? Now, naturally, we're all going to be like, my tree is healthy. I see that I have phomopsis. I don't know why this is happening. Immediately. Immediately. Your first thought. Okay? Your first thought needs to be, I have a susceptibility in the root system. And we talk about this with insects and disease. Where when we're dealing with a significant pathogen, we talked about it with dothostroma, we probably are lacking oxygen in the system. When we're dealing with phomopsis, we're probably lacking oxygen in the system. Right? Either lacking oxygen in the system through compaction of the surface of the soil. Or we have something else acting on the roots. And one of the biggest components. Of negative activity in our root system of a juniper, highly fleshy, all the sugars and starches from the foliar mass carrying the epicenter of strength in the tree, transporting that down to regenerate that seasonal root system, is root aphids are feeding. Right? And when we start to see compact soils with a low amount of oxygen and a high amount of water, and we start to see a tree showing a lack of health, we can assume our balance of water and oxygen, number one, is thrown off. And number two, we're creating a favorable condition for root aphids. So I see that this tree has phomopsis, a susceptibility to phomopsis. And what we're seeing here is the fully died back version of phomopsis and the recovery of phomopsis. Because we are seeing all of the new growth shooting. We were able to stop it. We were able to change our cultural practices. And this is kind of the aftermath of phomopsis that occurred in the late summer, mid to late summer. Right? We had several rains. Suddenly that stimulated the onset of phomopsis in the Pacific Northwest. Our phomopsis season lasts through the summer if we get rain. But the real limitation here, the real cause of the phomopsis in this is actually, notice how broken down and compact this soil is. I mean, when we start to look at this, I have some algae forming. Not moss necessarily, but I actually have algae forming right here, which is a different type of ground cover entirely. Moss here, you see this kind of lush, fibrous type of a texture. This is good. This is what we want. Algae, it's more like a fuzzy carpet. And algae is an anaerobic growth that occurs from a lack of oxygen in an abundance of water. So I see algae here. I see a compact soil system. I see moss moving away from the edge of the container, which is to say moss needs a balance of water and oxygen and microbial activity. I've got algae, which means I have an imbalance of water and oxygen, and I have low microbial activity. And the compactness of this soil at the surface is not allowing oxygen into the system. That is immediately. The initial cause. Okay. Now, if I dig into this, do I find root aphids or not? I don't know. I would have to clean. I would have to find a very fine portion of the root system. But my assumption is, is prior to the application, which we've already done our fall nematode applications, I would be willing to bet that we probably had a little bit of root aphid infection as well. I don't see any immediately in the fine roots over here that are active. So I'm going to say, you know, maybe we already took care of the root aphid population, but just the lack of oxygen created susceptibility. Okay. So we recognize with Phomopsis, with Juniper tip blight, number one, is it broad spread across the canopy or is it randomly distributed? I have random distribution. In that random distribution, were there actions that took place that could have caused mechanical damage? Yes, there were. We wired it. And the wiring mechanical damage is very obvious. Oh, well then how do you know if it's wiring and mechanical damage or it's Phomopsis? Well, I have areas that are unwired that are showing tip dieback. Okay. And in the mechanical areas, I'm not getting new growth on the mechanically damaged branch. Where in the unwired areas with the tip that's died back, I have new growth occurring around that area. And this is the whole thing about fungal issues that we talked about in Dothostroma. Fungal issues feed on the nitrogen from the living needle mass and the really underdeveloped green stem. Okay. But when we start to talk about the tree's ability to endure that, once those pieces of infected tissue are shed or are compartmentalized. In terms of the infection, fungal issues allow new growth to occur. So if we have a totally healthy tree and we have one random spot with a tip here, a tip there, go ahead and take it off. If 50% of your tree is covered in this, hands off. Don't start removing infected tissue. Don't cut off those branches. Let that tree recover. Simply by allowing this tree to recover, I've regained three quarters of the foliar mass that I lost. Had I gone and cut it off? I would have cut off the branches that the recovery of that foliar mass would have occurred from. Okay. And so already in this conversation, I've learned how to look for it. The questions to ask of other things that could cause a similar type of dieback. How we delineate between those other conditions that cause that dieback. And we've started to identify the initial major issue that caused the symptoms of the onset of phomopsis. Compaction of the soil. Or an insect bleeding the nutrition out of the root system. Okay. Those are the two. All right. So naturally, if I'm going to prevent this from happening in the future, do I need to repot this tree? No, absolutely not. Absolutely not. Because once I get past that compact layer and I just start working in here, I have very friable soil. I have very fine roots that are occurring in here. Right? This is what I would consider to be a very, very healthy root system with very friable soil that's intact. Right? to get that compact surface layer of soil out of the way, to get those bigger particles that are still intact open enough to allow oxygen into the system, okay? So first and foremost, I'm gonna clean the compressed surface layer of soil. This is the biggest move we can make to curing phomopsis. Number two, I'm going to prevent the new tissue that is either growing in the springtime and hasn't been infected, or is produced out of that infected tissue. I'm going to be treating that with a fungicide that prevents the further susceptibility and infection capacity of phomopsis, okay? This is where we see mancozeb. This is where we see Eagle. This is where we see Cleary's 3-3-3-6 as really good, dedicated fungicides that allow us to protect the tissue that is not yet infected. Now, this is where you have to be careful because we want to spray a fungicide onto this tree that's going to fix. It's going to stop that foliage from dying. It's going to make it turn green again, and it's going to protect everything that isn't infected yet, and that's not the way phomopsis works because phomopsis, most of the time, when an infection becomes very heavy, has already infected tissue that is still green by the time you recognize what's happening. You spray the fungicide, and it continues to get worse, and you say, this isn't working. I'm gonna spray more. I'm gonna spray more. I'm gonna spray more, right? But be careful because we need the microbial activity in the soil to ramp up the fungicide. We've already talked about the fact that the soil system has to be compromised to open up a Rocky Mountain juniper or any juniper, for that matter, to the susceptibility of disease, right? If our soil system is intact, which it is for 90% of the junipers at Mirai, even though Juniper escapulorum, oh, most susceptible juniper species to phomopsis, we don't see phomopsis. We don't see phomopsis on 90% of the trees at Mirai, right? And we have 400 junipers out there. 90% of them, we'll never see phomopsis on them, but the ones that have the compaction, the ones that have suffered, the ones that are weaker, the ones that have been miswatered, the ones that have root aphids, those are gonna be the trees that we see phomopsis and we start to identify this. We have to get the microbial activity built up. We have to understand how we fix that system to improve the tree's health. We have to understand how we protect, but we need to do all of this with a very educated, slow and deliberate application of chemicals, right? Because those chemicals, if we overreact and we see phomopsis getting worse, which we're saying the chemicals aren't working, the knowledge around phomopsis is you're trying to improve the health in the root system and you're dumping fungicides on the tree that are naturally entering the root system that aren't helping recover the root system to get rid of the phomopsis. And the tissue that you're treating, that you're seeing dying back was already infected before you started that application process, okay? There's nothing you can do about it. Once phomopsis has started, it's going to do what it's gonna do. You're gonna sustainably take deliberate, slow measures to protect what's there. You're gonna fix the health of the root system to improve the plant's immunity, and then you just go hands off. I gotta let this disease run its course. It's gonna be devastating. And Ryan says, if I don't cut off all the branches, they will grow back because a fungal issue doesn't kill the entirety of the twig in the branch, okay? And I promise you, I promise you, this spring at Mirai, we had a phomopsis infection like I have never seen before in the 10 years at Mirai. I remember, I remember Carl Hagedorn walking through the garden before we did the podcast on asymmetry, and him going, whoa, whoa. It was really embarrassing for me, right? It was embarrassing. A lot of the major junipers at Mirai riddled with phomopsis, compost extract last year, warm, wet winter, imbalance of water and oxygen over the fall, lack of nutrition. I mean, we had the ultimate cumulative negative situation set up for phomopsis to just burn through like a forest fire, and it did. Two months, two months, and I mark that date where as I'm walking through with him, I'm thinking this is embarrassing, and really humiliating, and just not the way that I want Mirai to look, right? And I'm walking through the garden thinking, man, I've gotta do something. I've gotta do something, but also recognizing we had sprayed, we had treated, we were working on improving the root systems. I was doing everything I needed to, believing in my consistent experience of going hands-off, two months to the day, we should be better. the day after that walk through the garden, you could not tell that those trees had phomopsis, right? That's faith in the system. That is faith in the system, okay? Now, if you read literature online, they're going to say phomopsis stopped fertilizing. That's not true. Not in bonsai cultivation. This is one of those things where the knowledge in the botanical community and horticulture does not cross over to the bonsai world. We must be feeding. We must be building up microbial activity. We must be building up the plant's nutritional system. We must be encouraging and increasing the resources that the plant has to fight that infection, okay? This is of utmost importance. Paying attention to the balance of water and oxygen, rectifying oxygen issues, stopping whatever insect might be feeding on the root system and depleting resources, and providing supplemental nutrition for the plant to respond, okay? Fifth, preventing that fungal issue from further infecting, okay? So I want to come back then, now that we've talked about all this, and I just want to get some really good looks, because there's a few more indicators inside of this system that allow us to see what's going on. So I want to come back then, to identify phomopsis. Again, I have a branch that's wired here. Branch is not wired all the way to the tip. Tip is alive, and I've lost this piece behind it, but I have new growth occurring in the crotch, okay? Perfect indication of phomopsis. Now, probably when this started, these small little tips turned yellow. Those tips started to die back. That entire piece started to die back, and it perished all the way back to the base. Now, you can see that this is a very, very brown, unsightly loss of a fine twig. I'm fine with it. You can't tell. I take that off of this branch. You can't tell this branch was ever unhealthy. This is the hands-off approach to phomopsis, okay? But when we identify phomopsis, we also have one more way to understand whether or not we're dealing with a pathogen or not, and that comes down to using a loop, much like we talked about with dothostroma, under a magnifying glass. Do we see black spores across this shoot littered on these dead needles, okay? Black spores are the spores of phomopsis that are produced after the infection has started to claim the tissue. Again, we go from germination to sexual reproduction in phomopsis in seven to ten days. When we talk dothostroma, we go from infection in the spring to sexual reproduction in the fall over six months. Dothostroma is, or excuse me, phomopsis, seven to ten days that it takes. Those spores that we're dealing with are the spores of phomopsis. We go from germination to sexual reproduction in the spring to sexual reproduction in the fall over six months. Those spores that we're looking at off of those tips that we've identified as irregularly distributed without mechanical damage and a compression in the root system or the presence of an insect and all of the things that we're talking about, those spores are the final cap to understand we've got phomopsis. We're dealing with a phomopsis-related issue, right? Black spores on that dead tip, dead giveaway, and that's how it continues to proliferate, okay? Let's continue. I want to find more. I really want us to have a very firm grasp of phomopsis and how it looks. And again, this is not the spring infection. This is the aftermath of a late spring, early summer, or maybe mid-summer infection post-rain for a tree whose root system we did not fix. We did not rectify because this tree was wired in the early spring. We saw mechanical damage killing off the branches in the mid to late spring. And then suddenly we saw phomopsis come on to the recovering pieces over the course of that late spring, early summer. So, we're dealing with a very firm grasp of phomopsis and how it looks. The root system is the problem. The mechanical damage was one thing, the root system is adding another, and that's increasing susceptibility. Okay. So, we come back up here. Now, this is interesting because I now have wire out to this tip right here. Yep, I now have wire, and you can kind of see, right? You see that dead tip? Let me get the green out of there so that you see I've got that dead tip, right? Toast. Toasty-roasty. And we're saying, oh, phomopsis. Definitely not. Definitely not. That is mechanical damage from that big thick wire on that branch. Out there. Speaker 3. wire on that tip. Okay. But as we start to move back in here, do we have phomopsis infecting any of these pieces? Well, I've got this branch here and it's dead and it's not wired. That must be phomopsis. Au contraire, right? This is mechanical damage from this wire being carried through this because juniper branches are very delicate. How do I know that that's mechanical damage? I don't have any new growth along this twig. I don't have any new foliar productivity along this twig. Phomopsis will not cause this whole branch to die off, right? Only mechanical damage will cause this to die off. Phomopsis would have a point where the spore infected and we would see foliar mass being produced behind that point of infection. Okay. That is a mechanical damage piece. Oh, I've got this piece right here. Look at this. Look at this. This is interesting. Okay. Now I've got all of these dead tips all around here. Dead tips, dead tips, and I've got this living piece. No wire on it, right? Living piece here, dead tips around it. This is phomopsis. This is phomopsis. Okay. Because now all of a sudden, if we had mechanical damage, the whole branch would be dead. But the tip of the branch is alive and several of the foliar pieces on that are dead. That's definitively phomopsis. Still growing here and also down at the base right here. Let me get my fingers out of the way. I've got a nice little bud starting to grow right here at the base, right here at the base of that shoot, right? That means that that is still alive, still conducting resource. And recovering from the phomopsis infection. Okay. And so we start to see, oh, holy smokes, that tissue stays alive. Fungus doesn't kill the entire branch, just the softest portion of that fleshy tissue and immature portion of the branch. And if I go hands off, I solve the problem. I treat to prevent. I can recover a tree from phomopsis relatively easily. And wiring as a mechanical mechanism does cause a very similar identifiable issue. And if I go hands off, I can recover a tree from phomopsis relatively easily. And wiring as a mechanical mechanism does cause a very similar We have the knowledge to fix the actual cause of it. And we have the preventative measures we can take to protect the foliar mass that isn't infected until the tree gets its root system back into a state of health built up and capable of protecting it without our intervention and without chemical application. Okay. Very, very important message and important understanding of phomopsis as a pathogen. And a disease, right? And again, I want to go back. Spring infection, temperatures, 50 degrees and above, 45, 50, typically 50 is when we get into the wheelhouse, 50 to 65. Okay. Rainy conditions, overcast cloudy with high relative humidity, or big temperature, warm days, cool nights that cause condensation in the morning hours on the foliar mass of our junipers. And suddenly, with the right conditions, a little bit of a weakened immune system, we have the germination of a very aggressive pathogen. Irregular distribution, no rhyme or reason, no mechanical damage, and no pattern, just areas of our tree where the tip starts to show yellow, eventually starts to show brown, and we start to see dieback of that tip into the interior, right? Now, a lot of people also make the misidentification of root-related issues, such as the interior second-year needles, or older interior needles. Right? Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Wait a minute. Wait a minute. There's actually a Phomopsis-infected tip in here, right? That right there. I just knocked it off. That was all the way on the interior of the plant. Phomopsis can attack the exterior tip. This is very, very realistic. And you see this Phomopsis infection right here. tip is alive we've got the loss of some of these tips back inside that's a phomopsis infection okay but we recognize that it starts at the tip and it works towards the interior it does not start in the interior and work towards the tip fall treatment of phomopsis okay this tree was infected in the summertime it has been sprayed as a as a result of the infection we recognize we need to take action on the root system this will go from the studio down into the workshop this was the tree that i saw that led to let's talk about this in the fall we have to circle back in the spring fall treatment of phomopsis okay beyond what we've talked about in terms of the roots the foyer mass and the handling okay we also have to understand that there is a significant presence of spores now on this tree that will carry over to next year would it be better to protect this in a greenhouse outside of the wet winter conditions of the pacific northwest yes it would because phomopsis will if the temperatures are warm enough continue to act to activate germination over the course of the winter time where we're at in the pacific northwest super cold temperatures it goes dormant moderate temperatures it stays active okay so number one i can protect this and it would do the tree a lot of good to control the water consumption and the water contact number two i need to spray i need to be spraying at least once ideally twice with a fungicide to continue to set the tissue up in these last waning moments of that 50 to 60 degree window or something like that and i'm going to be spraying at least once ideally twice over the fall season i need to be spraying to protect that foyer mass because i have spores present okay number three the use of a dormant spray once we move into a greater degree of dormancy and colder temperatures first really significant cold spell which we actually just have and i could do that right now i just haven't yet okay but once we have our first significant cold spell a dormant spray to suppress spore populations and to be able to start to shut down the infectious tissue that is present on the tree that can then infect those tips should conditions be favorable over the winter or come springtime. That is the biggest reason that we would treat with a lime sulfur. And I'm going to say a lime sulfur specifically because an oil with a domesticated or with a juniper that has domesticated foliar mass is very, very dangerous. And I think that lime sulfur is going to be your best bet. Okay. Come next spring, we observe. Temperatures start to get into that wheelhouse. 50, 65 degrees. Days are overcast. Prolonged spells of rain. Do we move the tree into the greenhouse? This one will be in the greenhouse. Others start to show infection. We get them out of the rain, right, to slow the spread. We treat with fungicide to prevent further infection. We allow phomopsis to run its course and we improve the condition of the roots to increase the balance of water and oxygen. These are the steps consistently that we will take over the course of time. Being positive in our identification, being understanding, of the conditions as well as the indications that we are dealing with phomopsis and recognizing that we can't stop it. We can't save what's already been infected. And all we have to do is express patience, increase the health of the tree in the root system, and work towards that greater degree of the growing season that is going to allow our tree to recover and replenish its foliar mass. Okay. All right. So we will come back and circle back to this in the springtime. And I recognize this was a lot of talking, but you have some really good ideas. And I'm going to give you some really good visuals. You have some really good concepts to grab onto here. And most importantly, you have the ability to alter the system and improve your tree's health to both stop an infection, allow a tree to recover from an infection, and now improve a tree's health to avoid infection. All right. We'll continue on the path of identification of diseases, of pests, of issues. Next, we're going to do identification of scale on junipers because this is becoming a big, big deal. And there's a few very subtle indications that I can show you that will make it completely and totally effortless for you to recognize a scale infestation. But for now, wrap your mind around phomopsis. Come back and refer to this if you would like. And we will continue breaking it down and giving you the good stuff at Mirai. We'll see you tomorrow on the live Q&A. Have a great rest of your Wednesday, hump day, in the week. We're happy at Mirai. And we will see you tomorrow. Okay. Take care. Thanks. Thank you. 
