What's going on everybody? Circling back to the notion of plant hardiness and this is a question that we field a lot at Mirai. Is my plant safe at a given temperature based on the fact that over the winter season it is so incredibly challenging to understand the hardiness of our trees and I've thought about this I've thought about this I've experimented with it I've learned from my mistakes I've observed failures I've you know probably over protected I've definitely under protected I've pruned and saw what happened I've styled and saw what happened I've repotted and saw what happened and learned a lot over the course of time in terms of plant hardiness and that has created this chart that I've drawn for you today. Now I want to just crack into this by saying listen these are broad these are very broad factors but I do feel like these are broad factors that explain to a very significant degree plant hardiness as it exists as a plant behavior and being able to identify the factors that influence and inform your decision is a big part about knowing how to trust your bonsai gut in your bonsai instinct. Okay so I've put here on the chart the three major considerations that I take into account when deciding can I leave this plant out in what degree of temperature and feel very confident not relative not fairly not might be okay feel confident that the plant is going to be okay and at first always starts with species listen species plants have a tolerance that exists in their native ecosystem where they experience temperatures in that ecosystem they are adapted to tolerate now we have to buffer the notion of species and we have to say listen just because a species exists in a very cold environment does not necessarily mean that when we take the roots out of the buffering capacity of the ground and we put them into a bonsai container that has far less warmth and buffering capacity for cold temperatures that that plant is going to thrive quite the opposite we have to recognize that the containerized environment can change the behavior of a tree entirely the the most common two samples that I can think of mountain hemlock tolerant to ridiculously cold alpine temperatures in the far northern portion of North America and when you put it in a bonsai container is not as cold tolerant of those temperatures and the California juniper existing in the Mojave Desert tolerant to very cold temperatures and snow you put it in a bonsai container it is no longer tolerant okay but you could also look at a converse relationship the bald cypress existing in non-freezing non-cold temperatures in the swamps of the southeastern United States tolerant of very cold temperatures when you take it into the northern climates especially if you put it in the ground but even in a containerized environment relatively cold tolerant so we recognize this is just an introduction okay and if we talk about that we say listen the alpine version of a conifer conifers adapted to very cold climates suggest that those conifers store more sugars and starches and are genetically adapted in their needle behavior their leaf physiology and their vascular physiology to tolerate colder temperatures store more sugars and decrease the temperature that the water and the vacuole of that cellular structure will crystallize at rupture and cause damage from the freezing process okay when we look at that very hardy temperature consideration we're saying 15 degrees Fahrenheit to 20 degrees Fahrenheit is this very hardy temperature range in a bonsai container below 15 degrees Fahrenheit you are rolling the dice on anything existing as an unprotected plant in a shallow container experiencing that kind of cold temperature so we see 15 to 20 degrees as being a significant amount of cold tolerance that these plants can endure without protection negative 10 degrees Celsius to negative 7 degrees Celsius very hardy okay when we look at the moderate we're saying listen there might be some alpine conifers like we talked about the mountain hemlock that is an alpine conifer that does not tolerate below 20 degrees Fahrenheit that would fit into this moderate but for the most part we start to look at conifers from the coastal varieties and our broadleaf alpine varieties we're saying listen a populous tremuloides an aspen a stewardia a potentia some of our higher elevation a Japanese maple we're saying 20 degrees Fahrenheit to 25 degrees Fahrenheit negative 7 degrees Celsius to negative 4 degrees Celsius moderately tolerant without protection of those colder temperatures in a cold spell okay and I'm not saying you shouldn't protect I'm saying these are the temperatures that we can say I think this tree will be okay not necessarily having major actions applied to the tree to protect we will come back and talk about protection methods and temperatures to protect in a future lecture okay and when we talk about low cold tolerance species we're saying our broadleaf coastal varieties when we talk about our low cold tolerance species we're talking about some species that are highly resistant to a lot of the coldness but in this case we want to say a species that is highly resistant to a lot of the coldness but in this case we're saying a about our broadleaf coastal varieties. This might be a manzanita. This might be a laurel. This might be a rosemary. This might be a heather. This might be any number of coastal oaks, quercus, that can't necessarily tolerate colder conditions. This is also some of our coastal conifers when we start to think about, hey, what about that sequoia simpervirens, that coastal redwood? Does that tolerate colder temperatures? No, not necessarily. We don't even want to roll the dice on those freezing. So there are a few of those coastal conifers, very limited number, that fit inside of this genre where we're saying, listen, 28 degrees Fahrenheit is the first temperature that we're going to see water inside of the plant tissue crystallize and potentially cause cold damage. 32 degrees Fahrenheit is obviously a temperature where we really start to see the behavior and the foliar mass change. And when we start to look at tropicals specifically, we cannot allow tropicals to freeze. We don't even want to let tropicals, some of our tropicals getting below zero degrees Fahrenheit, we don't want to let tropicals freeze. So we're going to have to go 45 degrees Fahrenheit can cause damage if we're talking about buttonwoods and some of these mangrove species. But we don't want to let our boganvias, we don't want to let our, you know, our pemphis, we don't want to let our ficus get this cold. And we're saying even inside of our broadleaf costals, some of our coniferous costals, that negative two to zero degree Celsius, that 28 to 32 degree Fahrenheit is not going to be a tolerable range or maybe maxes out the brushstroke species very hardy species moderately hardy species and lowly harder low hardiness species are broken up into these categories with these temperature ranges okay now we have to think about species as it combines with container size okay and i've given you just again a broad brush stroke when we talk about large container sizes these trees in the in-ground environment are tolerant of these conditions because the in-ground environment has the buffering capacity of the soil mass of the heat of the earth etc etc right lack of airflow around the root system that's removing temperature from the soil mass all of it comes down to soil temperature and when we put a tree into a bonsai container a growing container as opposed to a bonsai container how does that change the cold tolerance well it increases the soil volume the bigger the container the less rapid heat is lost and that's important because we're saying listen the most susceptible plant organ to cold is going to be the root system that's the system that's supposed to be in the ground that's the system that's supposed to be protected so if we have a bigger and bigger soil volume that holds more and more water and water has a high heat retention capacity the bigger the container the more heat that is being stored in that container and the more heat that's stored in that container the more buffering capacity we have over the course of time right and so that's the system that's supposed to be in the ground right and so we say listen an 18-inch container typically tends to be the beginning of that size where we start to see an increase in cold tolerance based on the size of that container a 12-inch container typically tends to be that moderate cold tolerant container and a six-inch container typically tends to be that size especially when we start to talk about the shoheen size or these smaller forms of trees where we start to see susceptibility now how does a six-inch container alpine conifer that's tolerant cold tolerance always refers to the lowest common denominator the lowest common denominator in this chart so to say I have an alpine conifer in a six-inch container is the cold tolerance that of an alpine conifer which is very hardy down to 15 degrees Fahrenheit or 10 degrees Celsius or is a alpine conifer in a six-inch container cold tolerant to the six-inch container which is only tolerant to 28 degrees Fahrenheit or negative two degrees Celsius it is always the lowest common denominator and alpine conifer in a shogun container is only tolerant of the lowest common denominator which is the six inch container negative two degrees Celsius negative 20 degrees Fahrenheit 28 degrees Fahrenheit so we're saying listen I have a I have agypt pina sylvester so I have a scott's pine right we know Scott's fine alpine conifer I have a Mugo pine alpine conifer I have a ponderosa pine alpine conifer I have a Japanese white pine, alpine conifer. How cold can I let that alpine conifer get if it's in a six inch container? You don't want to let it get below 28 degrees Fahrenheit or negative two degrees Celsius. You don't want to let that tree with that small of a soil volume get so cold that the heat is lost and we challenge the sugar content to withhold that water in the vacuole crystallizing. We treat it as if it's this low tolerance, even though it's an alpine conifer, we're playing to the lowest common denominator. Container size and soil volume, if I have an alpine conifer and it's in a large container, I can assume that it's maintaining this degree of cold tolerance. If I have an alpine conifer in a moderate container, and we say 12 inches, 12 inches what? Is that 12 inches diameter? Is that 12 inches width? Is that 12 inches depth? Yes. Yes. Do you have 12 inches depth? Do you have 12 inches width? Do you have 12 inches front to back? Any of those dimensions creates a soil volume. That holds heat to make it moderately tolerant if it is a coniferous alpine. Now say for example, I have a coastal conifer in an 18 inch container. Does that mean that it's tolerant to this or to this? Again lowest common denominator, this is only tolerant here. That means even in a big container, it's only tolerant there, right? So when we look at this, this is just a broad brush stroke that allows you to make a very confident decision about how cold tolerant a tree is. And we start to recognize. Wow, I see how this matrix exists and I see how I can utilize this and apply it to making decisions for my own bonsai protection over the winter season and all of the things that trickle down. Okay, now this is a big one. This is a big one. When we talk about health, first and foremost, an unhealthy tree, we say, listen, an unhealthy tree is a tree whose energy is being potentially held back, right? And I'm not saying, listen, this is where it gets dangerous and we need to have a vocal description of this. I'm not saying plants in tertiary refinement are unhealthy, but I'm saying plants in tertiary refinement, yes, they have a lot of leaf mass. Those leaves are small. Yes, they have a lot of branching. Those branches are thin. Yes, they have potentially a lot of health. They've been built as a bonsai. They've got a super fine root system. Hey, recognize the proportions of a tree in refinement and bonsai cultivation are unnatural and abnormal in terms of their size and proportion. We have scaled a root system to be far denser with far more fine roots. Then it ever would hold in that square inch, square centimeter of soil volume in the natural environment. We have far more wood mass twigging and water conductive tissue in that square inch or that square centimeter of branching than it ever would hold in the natural environment. We have far more leaf mass in that square inch or that square centimeter than we ever would have in the natural environment. And consequently, we have to recognize that that creates cold sensitivity. That's a reduction of energy. That's a distribution of resources. That are not normal. And are not capable of holding up to the same temperatures that a more natural condition for that species in that environment that makes it that tolerant would otherwise possess. So when we say tertiary, I'm not saying it's unhealthy. I'm saying it's susceptible. And so we say health plus or with the consideration of foliar mass as well as that stage of refinement need to be considered. Generally, a tree in development comes with the caveat it's in a larger container. It's being allowed to grow untouched. And that means that that tree typically has a tremendous amount of needles, has a tremendous amount of growth. We are reinvigorating that tree. Now obviously, if it's a tree that's struggling and it's in development to recover, we're talking about a tree that has sparser foliage, right? And we see sparser foliage being a low hardiness in terms of this chart. We see tertiary ramification. Low hardiness in terms of this chart. And we see recently pruned trees. Recently pruned in the fall season. We're talking about a tree that's in development. It's in the fall season, heading into the winter hardiness. And we say, listen, that is a tree, even if it's a conifer, alpine species in an 18 inch or bigger container, if it has been recently pruned and we are going to experience inclement weather, it is not cold tolerant, okay? It is not cold tolerant, right? We look at the moderate tolerance and we say, listen, it's in secondary. It's still growing. It's not development. It's still growing. It's semi-dense, right? Because now we... We're sort of having this big gangly developmental growth. Now we have a little bit more tight compact growth. We're not all the way to tertiary growth. And it's been pruned within the past three months so that it's had time to acclimate to the hormonal change. It's had time to reallocate sugars and starches and balance the system, reaccumulate, compartmentalize, patch, mend, et cetera. Maybe regain some foliar mass. Probably not. But the foliage mass that exists is still capable of creating the sugar starch capacity to tolerate colder conditions. We're moderately capable, moderately hardy, okay? And when we start to look at, yeah, we haven't touched the tree, yes, it's growing and blowing and going and it's big and it's built up and we're getting ready for that structural styling. When we get to next spring and it's chock full of sugars and starches and we're going to rage, we're going to do a big repot or we're going to do a big styling and it's dense and it's untouched, well, that tree naturally is going to be cold tolerant, okay? Now if we have a six-inch shohin container that is filled with developmental growth, developmental growth and strong and big and bold, does that mean that this is developmentally cold tolerant even because its health is ramped up in its needle? No. We play to the lowest common denominator. It is tolerant to the soil mass, okay? Oh, I've got a 12-inch container that's in tertiary ramification. Which one? We're tolerant to the tertiary cold tolerance of that tree or the sparseness or the recently pruned cold tolerance of that tree, okay? And so you see that this is such a multifaceted, I mean a really multifaceted conversation, but when you are rolling the dice on trees that you have spent so much time working with, that you love with all of your heart and soul, that you've chosen to invest in, in potentially significant financial investment, you always want to err on the side of caution. Now you don't want a mother hen, you don't want a helicopter parent your tree. Tree's got to be a tree. It's got to be allowed to grow. These trees thrive in these extreme temperatures and conditions in the native environment for a reason. They need it. They want it. It helps them be a stronger, bolder tree in terms of its tolerances. But within the considerations of that confined environment and the actions that we perform in bonsai, we do need to have these bumper rails about how we handle the trees to be able to ensure the success of our tree through these colder temperatures over the coming course of time. And this gives you a reference, a really, really nice reference. Now are there even exceptions to this? Of course. If I have a tertiary pine, right, I've got a Japanese white pine in tertiary refinement. I've got a tremendous amount of needles. Yes the internodes are short, yes the needles are small, but white pine is really cold tolerant and I have this density. Yes they're small, but I have this density. Is it cold tolerant to potentially the very hardy degree? Yeah. Ponderosa pine? Yes. Japanese black pine? No. No. Japanese black pine in a developmental state will be far more cold tolerant than Japanese black pine in a tertiary state. Why? Because it's had the first flush of needles on the tree over the entirety of the year. We get the smaller second flush, which has had far less time to accumulate sugars and starches. And even though there's a multitude of shoots and it's a highly refined tree, a Japanese black pine is a coastal conifer that just does not have the cold tolerance of a Japanese black pine. So what do we play to? Lowest common denominator. That is where we can be confident that that tree will thrive and continue to survive. Do I leave my refined Rocky Mountain junipers out in the garden? Do I leave my refined Chimpaku junipers out in the garden at 15 degrees Fahrenheit? I do. I do. If they're dense. If they're healthy. If I haven't pruned them in the past three to six months. If they're in a large soil volume, I leave them out there and I don't worry about it at all. Right? But if I've pruned them. If they're in a smaller container. If they have any health issues, then I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to protect. And I'm going to start protecting probably in the moderate or maybe even protecting them if they've recently been worked. If they're really struggling with health. If they're an extremely small container, I'll protect them at that lower threshold of plant hardiness. Right? So we recognize that this is just a real interesting equation. But these considerations. Definitely are a big part of where you need to orient in order to make the decisions that benefit your tree. And again, we're not helicopter parenting our trees. You got to let a tree freeze. If it's tolerant of that. If it's ready for that. If it's in a soil volume that can accommodate that. You need to let a tree have sun and warmth. If it's tolerant of that. If it's ready for that. If it's in a soil volume that can facilitate that. Right? But when we have a tree that for whatever reason. Species. Size. The health of the foliar mass is compromised. We protect a tree to the lowest common denominator of these factors and we can have confidence in doing so that our tree will thrive. Our tree will survive and we will see that tree flourish the following spring as a result of the knowledge that we've applied. Good luck. I hope this helps. And if in doubt, always protect. You got to have leadership. So occurring by flowering a tree. Really. Holding a tree. You got to have leadership. This gets useful. This gets useful. You got to have leadership. They're way to putting them right and right. To do this. 
