Today we had talked about that whole Mediterranean concept of plants and whatnot, and one of the biggest Mediterranean pieces that we use, well I mean moving up into that temperate rainforest, is a redwood. So we're gonna focus today on redwoods in terms of how we prune them, maximizing this time of year in terms of training a redwood, and then taking a look at some of the aesthetics that we can start to work within in terms of maybe a bonsai versus a redwood, bonsai shape versus a natural shape. Just take a quick look, give you guys the cycle on the tree. Now this tree is absolutely phenomenal, and the trunk is a little bit moist because it stays in the greenhouse and we've had such a cold, cold nights and warm days that a lot of the condensation builds up on this thing. So it's a little dark, I'm assuming it'll dry out over the course of the stream, but you can see when we style a redwood for the first time, much like junipers or any other species, we've got to build up that foliage mass. I let this thing blow out and elongate, thicken, do kind of do its thing, gain a lot of strength, and then prepping it over the course of the season for this piece of work right here by feeding, fertilizing, hands off to a large degree to let it establish that structure. Now we can come back in and prune. And for redwoods, right now, early, mid, late December into early mid January, awesome time to go in, prune wherever you want a bud to push, and you'll most likely get a bud within a very close proximity of that pruning decision that you make. And so we're going to be pruning, cutting back, pruning back a lot of the long fronds and stimulating that back budding. If we prune outside of this time of year, right, we can get the same response come hardening off of the first flush. For us here, that's in early, early to mid-May, those two times a year, sort of that mid to late spring area of time where that first flush is hardened, or more ideally right now in the late winter or super duper early spring, whichever you choose to look at it at, is an awesome time to make those pruning decisions and have the redwood respond the way that you want it. So I'm going to go through the tree, open it up real quick, much like we did with the oak, and then we'll come back and we'll start to talk about pruning decisions and whatnot. I'm going to get rid of some of these really long guys here, and I don't know where we're going with this tree. So I want to leave myself as many options and opportunities as I possibly can. So I'm going to keep some of this length on the upper portion and just get rid of any advantageous growth that's coming off of the trunk. I believe actually we're looking pretty good there. Hugh came in and cleaned up all of our redwoods last spring and whatnot. Or excuse me, last fall before we went back to Australia. Hugh, miss you buddy. Well done, Hugh. Yeah, Hugh. Shout out to Hugh. Shout out to the land of Oz. Okay, so as I'm kind of working into this, one of the things that often happens when we let that tree really expand and grow is all of a sudden the tree starts to give us some input as to how it feels like it should be shaped, right? And I'm always wrestling with, is this going to be a bone size tree? Is this going to be a redwood, right? Now obviously a redwood, if we're going to make this a redwood, we're going to take a lot of these long extensions and we're going to go straight up with them. Okay, we're going to show that apical dominance. We're going to show that characteristic that makes these the tallest trees in the world, alright? It has a trunk that could anchor that kind of design. However, inside of it, having this much movement and deadwood and interest in the trunk leads me to believe that we may actually have a better tree in terms of a bone size shape as opposed to a redwood shape. And I think as a result of that, I'm going to be reducing a lot of this length, pruning it back and building a little bit of a tighter, more pine shape reflective canopy. And again, you know, everybody can form their own opinion about how they choose to use the material. For me, this material lends itself, based on the compactness, the proportions, this tree lends itself better to being a bone size than an actual natural representation. of a redwood. And I just want to show you some of the options that we have in terms of pruning. Now, obviously, when you guys get in here, we can prune at any time of year back to a strong secondary shoot. So say, for example, I make that cut there. That's totally legitimate, right? And let's just expand on why pruning timing matters for a redwood. So there are times of year where, say for example, I prune this shoot here, I'm actually going to get a bud and the resulting growth from the crotch of this branch here. And if any of you guys have worked with redwoods, gotten ultimately frustrated and said, you know what, I'm never working with a redwood again, that's probably your experience. Your buds are pushing from here, or even worse, if we prune them at the ultimate wrong time of year, right? They'll come all the way back to the trunk and be pushing most of the advantageous growth from the trunk. And you'll lose a lot of this. Now, letting this branch blow out, thicken and lignify like this, right? This doesn't necessarily cause the branch to get excessively large, right? The thing that causes a branch to thicken is multiplying the foliage mass, which is actually a response to pinching. However, what this does do is it allows the wood to mature to a point where when we do come back and prune, we are less likely to get buds pushed back on the trunk. So if this is still green and we prune this, chances are we're going to see buds back on the trunk at the inappropriate time of year. So when I say you can prune here any time of year, right, and you can count on this branch taking over as the new leader and sort of that epicenter of growth and not get buds pushed back to the base of the trunk, it's because this is already lignified. I fed this all year and allowed it to lignify so that this branch became woody, all right? This branch is now woody. It's not green. This is green, right? We see this as being green. We see this as woody, okay? If this were green and it were pruned at the inappropriate time of year, the buds would all come from the trunk and we may lose this entire branch, okay? Are there any green branches? So these are green, right? These are green. So it, okay. Right? So had I not let this grow, this wouldn't have gotten woody. It would have stayed green. Let's see. Right? And that's dangerous. It's dangerous to prune when it's green, okay? Yep. Outside of any other time of year but now, okay? Got it. All right. So we're kind of like, I'm like talking about, okay, let's prune these in February or March when they're just, when they're just starting to push out and they've already set their buds. All the tree is going to do is freak out and bud from the trunk, okay? Let's prune this in the middle of summer when it's kind of at a hiatus from growing. All the branches freak out and push back from the trunk, okay? In May, after that first flush has come out and hardened off, we can prune. Short window, right? Or we can feed and build up strength all year long and then right now, late, late winter, December, we come back in and prune and we can prune lignified woody tissue or green tissue and get a bud where we prune, okay? So this is, this is a big, big timing thing for redwoods. This will, this, small little chunk of knowledge will allow you to handle redwoods in a vastly better way and have success. And that's really the goal of this is to give you guys the tools to have success, okay? So I'm just going to kind of get into this here and show you guys what's possible, all right? So I'm going to use this as a sample. Now, here, wherever we have these tertiaries, right? Again, if we prune this green shoot at the wrong time of year, all of the buds are going to originate from the early part of the year or the rest of the year. And what I'm going to do is I'm going to cut these shoots, cut this drop off there and I'm going to shorten this back to any one of these smaller secondary or tertiary growing shoots, and this bud at the tip of this shoot will take over the growth habit. Now, here's an interesting thing. If this shoot is too long, I can actually come back in here and shorten that. And chances are we could get a bud at the axle of that leaf or get just spiked out and elongated super long over the course of the spring we can go ahead and prune that back and at least get a bud at that site or potentially at the base and regrow it so in the spring we can come back and start pinching and control that length right so it's basically a reset it's a reset right okay so if we wanted to handle that now I'm gonna say I probably don't want the whole length of this in terms of this entire scope of the tree Arthur if you want to take me back out let everybody have a really solid look at this and see what we can do there's a chance that we may want some some length in this branch so I'm going to take this back to here and cut back to a strong secondary one of these strong secondary shoots that I can use as my new leader okay and I'm just gonna kind of start there all right and I'm gonna work from the bottom up making some of those decisions to try and get a little bit of a more proportional growth on this tree since we've decided to go with the bone size shape so let me just let me just work on this for a little while and and then we can come back and take a look at it in terms of design and whatnot but Kendall was asking me about redwoods Kendall talk to me about redwoods a little bit what do you know about redwoods I wish I knew more yeah did this tree come from interesting yeah so this was collected by Zack Scheiman who's you know kind of like a you know kind of like a you know kind of like a you know kind of like a common name in Mirai in the Mirai world just based on the fact that he's obviously collecting the best redwoods and and all of his redwoods are harvested from old logging roads back in the day when they were chopping out the redwoods so they go in and cut a big massive ugly hideous road through the beautiful redwood forest and they lock down all of the old growth redwoods can't can't really knock anybody for that it's kind of the way the world worked and works but one of the beautiful offshoots of that is the fact that that they just beat the living crap out of anything that wasn't a worthy timber product at that point in time and a lot of times what they would do is they would actually bulldoze the entire kind of that entire road and it would just cut the trees off right at the top right at ground level so Zack will see shoots growing up out of the ground and and he'll go and actually excavate down into the ground to pull that piece of redwood out which is where you get your redwoods from and a lot of when you look at this hollow this was probably all underground most likely it was all underneath underneath the soil line so uh to him to some degree it's a it's a pretty interesting little um treasure hunt because he just sees the top of the tree and then when he starts digging is when he gets into the interesting pieces um is this in northern california this is in yeah so this would be in uh let's see zack's in mendocino and i think he does travel northern california coast he's got a lot of friends surfer buddies connections in california that allow him to access some pretty interesting areas but yeah most of his trees come from come from that mendocino humboldt area just which is obviously you know stunning along with a great resource for not only redwoods but also if he goes slightly inland the oak that we worked with last week um and then uh if he goes slightly farther north the pygmy cypress that um that that we've become so fond of at mirai so arthur can you bring me in close here i want to uh just kind of show you guys a pruned version now i haven't made i've got to go back and really start designing to make definitive length uh selections but you can see here this is a green shoot that's lignified up to this point green from here i've uh i've pruned that baby back and given it plenty of space to be able to bud from those leaf axles right there but this at this time of the year of the year totally legitimate cut to make and think that i'll probably get a bud somewhere in these first few leaf axles right below the cut right behind the cut so i've done that on a number i've done that on a number of these branches pruned back to here pruned back to here because these were just big long weak kind of wimpy fronds and you can cut back in in worst case scenario i'll get a bud right there and i'll start to regrow this branch and then next year i'll get a bud right there and then i'll get a bud right there and then next year to control its length as opposed to letting it grow all the way out i can pinch it and stop it where i want it all right so that's a really really beautiful thing so when i rotate here now right now we've got this big long piece again i'm going to go ahead and i'm probably going to take this all the way back to here we don't want this to be a big massive branch so i'm going to cut that there okay and now i've got these fronds and say for example i noticed that this was my growth uh the last portion of my growth last year i see this small little section of short leaves then i've got this much greener area i've got darker green leaves and you can see them small get wider taper down that shows the speed of that flush of growth i could prune it here okay and definitely get either a bud there or a bud at the origin of that flush of growth i could prune it here and go back a little ways definitely get a bud near that or somewhere along some of these stronger more vigorous pieces or i could prune it here and go back a little ways prune it here, potentially get a bud along here or definitively get a bud at the shoulder of that branch. So I've got options and it comes down to how long do you want that particular frond to be. But again, in knowing this, you can control a redwood much better than we've ever been able to control redwoods to this point. And then the follow-up will be, and we'll cover this in the spring, how we pinch that new growth to really manage it and dictate the length and the beginning of ramification. Okay. So anyway, sorry about that Deeds. I just had to, you know, just having to live stream and all. Trying to teach. Yeah. Record the live stream. Trying to share the knowledge. Trying to share the knowledge. I'm trying to educate these guys. No, I mean that trip, right, to see the bristle cones and the sequoias and the redwoods changed everything for me because it was the first time that I had been in the presence of that kind of ancient, right? Like bristle cone, oldest living. There's older things, you know, there's like what sponges and lichens that are like 10,000 years old, which like you look at it and you're like, oh my gosh, that's a piece of lichen that's 10,000 years old. It really doesn't hold the same, doesn't hold the same wonder as a singular being. Right. So seeing like this singular being that was, so incredibly old was like pretty humbling. Yeah. How old is it? Well, so, so the oldest known bristle cone up until this is, this is new as of like, I think literally a year or two ago, oldest known bristle cone was something like 4,062 years old. Okay. We'll just say that. And then they called that Prometheus. Now, if any of you have heard, we'll have a post on the new Mirai. Website once it launches, um, with the, with the radio lab story about Prometheus, but essentially I'll summarize it for you guys. Um, the, the, the general gist of the story is there's a grad student from North Carolina, I believe doing his graduate studies on the bristle cone. And he had a coring bit that he had pushed into the bristle cone pine and he's twisting, right? And it's this very small diameter coring bit, but the wood was so hard because it was so old. And he had a coring bit that he had pushed into the bristle cone pine and he's twisting, right? And it was so old that he busted off the bit inside of the trunk. And so here's this guy that is broke as a joke, living out of his car, doing this research, right? For his graduate studies, loses the instrument he has to have to complete his studies, like imported from Sweden or something. Right. And this is back in the day. So it's not like you just get on Amazon and get a new one. Uh, and so he goes down to the ranger station. Stories are mixed. Somehow he ended up with a chainsaw. He cruises back up and cuts that baby down. And he's like, I don't know, we down, right? Gets his coring bit, takes a cross section, goes back to his car, shines that baby up and starts counting the rings. Well, in the first day he was already something like 2,200 rings in to the tree and like perspiring because he's sitting there tweaking about the fact that we've never seen a 2,200 year old tree. And he's only like 30% of the way through it or, you know, whatever. However far it took him three days, counts all the rings, oldest living thing in the world. He chopped it down, right? Whoa. Bummer. Bummer. Okay. Now, now here's the kicker. He got so much hate from the general community abroad. So much hate that he ended up changing his, uh, area of study entirely and changed his profession entirely. He like, it like ruined his life, right? Um, and he ended up, he ended up, he ended up, he ended up, he ended up, he ended up, he ended up, he ended up studying. I believe it was the salt flats in, in Utah for a living after that. Um, and became an expert on that because he's a very smart individual. Like literally it was just an unfortunate circumstance that happened. Uh, and even to the end of his career, it haunted him. Well, he ended up passing away and I think it was something like four or five months after he passed away, they found a tree that was older than Prometheus. So he didn't even get to, he didn't even get to have that bird lifted. Right. It's, which is just like, oh, so gruesome. You can only feel for that dude, as far as I'm concerned, like he didn't even, nobody even knew, but you know, consequently the, the documentation of these ancient trees, study of the ancient trees, the dendrology, you know, that the science behind it has advanced so much because we were made aware of. How old these things actually are. And that, that, that to a large degree has also led to, you know, they were already supposed to be protected, but obviously being protected. And somehow he had a chainsaw from the ranger station that cut it down. They weren't really protected. I mean, like, let's be real. Uh, but that, that grossly transformed the way that we look at our forests now. I mean, like that singular event changed everything. So walking through it, seeing these, you know, older than anything I can conceptualize. I mean, you're talking about a 4,000 year old tree was around, you know, dating back to some of the most historical moments in, in man, as we currently know, man, right? I mean, seeing that was, was next level for me. Cause then you start to realize, oh, that's ancient. That's what ancient looks like. And, uh, actually there's a tree. The first tree I styled when I came back from that trip was, um, the Colorado blue spruce that was on the cover of BCI magazine a long time ago. And in the spirit of the bristle cones, I styled that cause that is a very ancient tree in itself. But, you know, each one of us, uh, JP found the bristle cones to be the most impactful. I actually found the giant sequoias to be the most impactful. We saw Kings Canyon and then we went to the southern entrance to Yosemite, which is called the Mariposa Grove. And, um, there's a very famous tree that, that one of my friends, my friend, who was a student told us about there called the grizzly giant. So it's this, it's a standalone sequoia. That's like, it looks like this battle tested, rugged, nasty, gnarly thing. Super, super beautiful. Very, very beautiful. And, uh, well worth the three mile hike to go see it. So we went and saw the grizzly giant and kicked it there. And then, uh, Glenn just found the Redwoods to be utterly, utterly amazing. And I mean, all of them were, but I think each one of us was struck, uh, by a different, by a different thing. We saw the, the giant sequoia up, uh, um, up Kings Canyon right as the sun was setting. So we had this beautiful red sunset passing through the trees and giant sequoias have this real reddish cinnamon bark and this massive buttressing trunk. And they're like so large, they are disproportionately larger than every other tree around it. Cause it's a mixed forest of ponderosa pine. And I mean, it was just like sunlight, cinnamon, red trunks, this massive prehistoric environment. I was waiting for a brachiosaurus. I was literally waiting for T-Rex to just come. And, and, and actually, you know, Star Wars was filmed in the, um, Star Wars was filmed in the Redwoods. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Return of the Jedi. I mean, indoor and all the Ewoks, that's all Redwood country that, that, um, experience of being in the Redwoods. I literally felt like I was on set. It was like crazy. And that was maybe even a little bit more like T-Rex is going to come get you. Did going to spend some time there change the way that you style Redwoods? No, absolutely. Absolutely. Yeah. So the one thing, and this is like, you know, where it starts to become complex because the discussion with bonsai is, is, you know, it's supposed to look like a natural tree or the Japanese way is the way that's bonsai. Okay. Well, yeah, you've got two approaches there, right? Draw a line down the middle of them. And if you polarize yourself, you only get to experience half of what's possible. With any piece of material, right? So from my perspective, you got to be able to sit on both sides of the line. This piece of material for me is going to look better as a bonsai. And as you can see, I'm pulling those branches in kind of closing that down that proportion and maximizing the visual interest of the trunk. Now with a Redwood, as they occur in the natural environment, you're going to extend, right? We're going to actually extend that length instead of compact it. We're going to extend it and illustrate that height. And that's really where we start to pull on the characteristics of Redwoods. The other thing I noticed, branches go up, not down. So for all these branches to come down, I'm sure you could find natural cases of this in the Redwoods because they really fit a lot of different shapes. By and large, branches go up. That apical dominance is a real thing. And so for me, starting to take those trees that can be natural reflections of a Redwood and taking those pieces of those trees and going up with them was like, that was like the a step in the right direction towards starting to recognize Redwoods as a legitimate reflection of American bonsai, like as a stylistic shift, because I've never seen a tree in Japan do that. You know, but I think, you know, to a large degree, one of the big differences that you're starting to see in this exploration is just the fact that you've got a different culture, but you also have a different environment that you're reflecting. If you're making a Japanese black pine in the United States, chances are you're going to style it in a Japanese way. I mean, that's the reference, that's the culture, that's the kind of the distilled historical interpretation of that species. But there's also room for a Japanese black pine to look like they do on the southern islands down in Shikoku, where they have this big flat spreading canopy, usually showing wind and looking nothing like they do in the, in the Kofu albums or, you know, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the, in the really kind of hammer that approach home. And that becomes a standard that you either live up to or you fail as a professional. And that's tough. That's really tough. So I think, you know, just to go back and kind of put a nice, like, red bow on this discussion of, like, oh, what did seeing the oldest tree in the world, the tallest tree in the world, and the largest tree in the world do for your interpretation of bonsai? It gave me my first real taste of what is ancient, what is massive, and what is natural. And even coming from the Rockies, I didn't have those three things until I went and immersed myself in that little piece of American dendrological history, right? Kind of cool. So if you guys can take a look here, I've made some extremely selective cuts. Now, this is one of the beautiful things about redwoods. They'll continue to elongate and grow. So these were both, I mean, these were literally, really big, long, strong, massive shoots, maybe even more, maybe more something like this, right? This is probably this long. I take that off. At the base of this, though, you've just got these unbelievable, nice, tight, compact, highly ramified shoots. And this happens pretty consistently. You can see how quality these pieces are at the base. And I remember, you know, talking with Bob Scheinman when I first started working with redwoods, and he said, you know, they grow out sometimes, but you don't have to be as concerned about maintaining their shape, because you can always prune them back to the tight interior growth. And to some degree, you've got to stimulate this, but then it also happens very naturally in stronger areas. Now, if you guys look at this, right here in the axle of this leaf, you can see this advantageous bud here, right? See that nice little pointed tip? Right in the axle there, okay? This is what I'm talking about. When we make these pruning decisions at this time of year, and again, we're speaking, we're talking about middle to end of December, you go in and prune on this green piece of growth, even if there isn't a bud that looks like this, chances are a bud will develop where you prune it, okay? If you make this same pruning decision next summer, absolutely, without a doubt, you will not get a bud like this, and it will push back all the way to the base of that branch, okay? And that's what makes this time of the year, again, so special, okay? So I'm continuing to just take these big, long, overly grown fronds, and make a decision in terms of pruning how long I want that to be in the eventual shape of the tree, okay? For the proportion that fits the tree's current size. We'll get a bud somewhere along this upper 30% of this piece of growth, and that'll be the beginning of our ramification moving forward. And a wild. This whole pruning technique that we're using with redwoods, this whole pruning technique that we're using with redwoods, this whole pruning technique that we're using with redwoods, this whole pruning technique that we're using with redwoods, really stems from the way that taxis, you, Japanese yews or European yews, are handled, and understanding their timing for pruning. You can do some really radical things, building up the strength of taxis over the course of the year, getting them to blow out and elongate like this, and then coming back and pruning them at this exact time. And although you can virtually denude them, not completely defoliate them, obviously, you need to have green growth at the tip of any branch you want, not completely defoliate them, obviously, you need to have green growth at the tip of any branch you want, but you can cut them back excessively, and what they'll do is just load up a tremendous number of buds to really start to grow next year. And that's how you push back a tree that's gotten really long and leggy, or a tree that, if you collected it, doesn't have any interior growth. And taxis may push back all the way to the base of the primary branches, or even the trunk. That's very, very common for taxis to do so. I'm so stoked to be getting to show redwood work, because people don't like redwoods because they don't understand them. And I think that's the only reason. That and probably, you know, they can't freeze, so you do have to have special facilities in the wintertime to house them. But as far as their limitations in bonsai, I mean, there really aren't any. They're super aggressive. They'll tolerate virtually anything in terms of root work. They'll tolerate anything virtually in terms of wiring, as long as they're strong. And just iconically, the redwood forest really set the tone for this concept of America being this plethora expansion of opportunity. It's like this, almost like a cultural icon for the way that, you know, good and bad for the way that we handle our resources. Yeah. You know, sort of claiming of the West and migration to the West. And still, if you can find that constantly in Northern California now, they're taking apart old buildings and places that were constructed with beautiful old growth redwood. If you can get your hands on that stuff, it virtually doesn't rot. Virtually doesn't rot. Getting up in it now. Take this piece out, and I'm just saving. Wherever I get those big, long, aggressive shoots, you know, those shoots accumulate so much traffic from photosynthesizing. This thing just photosynthesizing, pushing all those sugars and carbohydrates down to the roots and into the vascular tissue of the tree. But also, this foliage mass losing all of that water is drying that water and anything that's attached to that water ion, which that could be nitrogen, potassium, phosphorus, all of our nutrition from the roots, from the root system, moving up and then obviously evapotranspiration, that water molecule evaporates, leaves behind that piece of nutrition at that point of growth. So when we start to get these, all of those sugars and carbohydrates, wherever they transition into the trunk, or wherever the transition from the trunk to that branch happens for the water and oxygen and those ions like nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, that transition point is a great place for a lot of things to get caught up. And to cause growth and we get finer, more compact growth at the base of those really vigorous shoots. So when I'm cutting back, I'm cutting back to those really, really beautiful interior tight, compact branches. Understanding the limitation and the restraint of how far can I go to maintain density and establish shape is a really significant technique to learn. And for this one here, my main reference in this second working of this redwood is where do I want the length of my primary structure? That's really the focus that I'm kind of leaning on to guide me. Obviously, if this branch is going to stay the bottom branch and I am going to lean on a bonsai shape, this is going to be, for this tree right now currently, it's my thickest, very interesting, well placed, this is probably going to be my longest branch. If I make this short and I grow this branch out above it long, my design no longer has function because this is just going to get shaded out by this. Okay? Now, in the future, maybe this goes away. Maybe that's going to be too long. Maybe that's not going to be interesting enough. Maybe it's too formal of a shape for what is really a wild and tortured trunk. Right now, at this point in time, much like the oak, we're still developing this tree. We don't need to make that decision, right? This is defining those primary lines, the length, the structure, setting that secondary tertiary ramification, and then we'll start pinching and manipulating and working the tree to get it compact and to develop. This is third, fourth, fifth working. Maybe this comes off. Maybe that comes off. Maybe this comes off. We can start to change those things. But it's really, to go back to your question, Kendall, it's a decision based on length of my primary lines. That's really what we're focusing on. Okay? And it's good. It's good to be able to illustrate to you guys, oh, okay, this is how I'm dictating branch length. These are the decisions I'm making to prune. This is how far back I can prune. This is the response I can expect. Now you guys literally have every single chunk of knowledge to be able to do really fundamental structural pruning on your redwoods if they have gotten really long and you want to start pulling them back in and starting the refinement process. Okay? So I'm going to come in here. Now that I've removed this and I'm just going to, I'm sure this isn't on camera, so I'm just going to show you guys what this looks like. This is what we've removed. A lot. A lot. A lot. And that's great. This tree, because over the course of the fall, much like the oak, we started saying it's accumulating resources but the fall and that region of the coastal portions of Mediterranean climates, there isn't a lot of growth happening in the fall. There's just a lot of photosynthesis and storage happening and then once the winter rains hit, boom! Now the tree starts setting up for next spring's bud push. This tree now is taking all of that stored energy it worked up over the fall when it wasn't growing because it didn't have rain or at least a low quantity of rain and when we reduce it it's like boom all of that stored sugar it starts pushing out into the branches to to heal those cut sites because it's not freezing and there's still metabolic activity right this is why we greenhouse redwoods okay pushing all that energy to heal those cut sites and to put on new buds wherever that prune happened to grow next spring so this is stored energy over the fall being allocated to growth coming in the spring so i'm going to start working my way up from the bottom up this still has structural wire on it from the first styling which happened a year ago maybe even a little bit more and that just goes to show you how slowly these thicken the elongation process isn't how they thicken it's the expansion of the foliage mass via pinching that really gets a branch to beef up so it's gotten this long and that wire that was put on it 12 12 12 , 14, 16 months ago still isn't biting in okay so what i can do is i can come in here and just start dictating the length and shape of these secondary tertiary branches in here and this is you know whenever we think about bonsai training and styling a lot of the time it feels like we feel like okay you wire everything you unwire everything you wire everything you unwire everything and that's not true you may wire everything the first time set the structure the tree grows again before that wire actually bites in so we're going to put on a second layer of wire here and just give guidance to these pieces that we've pruned back to but when i get get up a little bit more and show you guys a few nuances of wiring redwoods and wiring them well so that you don't get a lot of die back because that's also another big issue is getting die back on these guys die back would be you know when we wire these branches and um the branch responds poorly either because we were too rough or um the timing of for the wiring wasn't exactly ideal right now being ideal may being ideal after that you start to get a little more fragile because the tree isn't responding the same way so die back we would see these fronds and the really green soft growth actually turn brown and die back and we want to avoid that as much as we can because a redwood can can tolerate die back and can tolerate a little bit of mistreatment they're they're very very durable trees mainly because the they're very very durable trees mainly because the sources are stored in their vascular tissue the big piece of the puzzle for elongating species and that that's what makes them so unique so if you have that vascular tissue loaded up with resources at the right times of year after they've pushed out that first flush of growth in the spring and that first flush of growth has hardened and re-accumulated the energy is a good time that's why we would be pruning then okay or after they've accumulated all of those resources across the course of the fall and then we get into that winter time where they're now getting winter rains they're adapted to being able to set up their growth for the spring season in the winter as opposed to most trees having to do it over the course of the fall another great time to prune also another great time to wire knowing when the tree is most full of resources for you guys if you can identify that point in a tree's growth where it's most full of resources that informs your application of technique beyond any other anything else right and that's this is simple stuff this is super simple stuff because the tree is giving you all of that information it's an it's an observation of what the tree is doing and then being able to speak bonsai and translate that behavior into horticulturally sound concepts and principles and i i have to say this is this is probably where our approach at murai far exceeds the approach of bonsai being practiced in other places because we can understand the horticulture of it right and if and if you guys can understand the horticulture of it which is a big part of sharing this nuanced work with with you your ability to manipulate and maximize the trees you know possibilities of advancing and accelerating its development exponentially increase exponentially increase you cannot you cannot replace the knowledge of what the tree is doing in how you work with that but it really means it really means learning to learn not not via being told but but watching and observing and that's that was the big that was the big shift for me in japan when i was in my apprenticeship was you know learning how to learn via observation and once i made that shift it was like it was like a waterfall okay so you guys can kind of see this this branch coming to coming to some degree of you know reformed shape and when i'm forming these pads i'm looking at how can i make that as flat and planular as it can possibly be because anything that's going to happen from this point on is going to grow up i mean this is the nature of redwoods this is the nature of any apically dominant tree in order to keep things moving in the correct direction if i tilted these up like you would say the way you would do a pine so the needles are up as opposed to being down right if you did that on a redwood you'd never be able to control the strength that you'd put into it because it's already going to do that anyways you're just giving it a head start so flattening that out now we can pinch and we can build that more pad commonly accepted pad profile pretty wild pretty wild stuff you know if you had the opportunity to do that to some degree you would be able to do that but again you don't see them use cryptomeria all that often but you do see cryptomeria bonsai from time to time cryptomeria and hinoki would be really similar to redwoods not in terms of their growth habit but in terms of well cryptomeria maybe to some degree but in terms of the environment that they come from like literally this hilton like natural environment you know ultimately available water you know fertile soil and a nice coastal view of the ocean they're such princesses they're they're they really are they really are yet somewhere along the lines like something just came through and just ripped ripped the guts out of this thing and it's like i'm good cool keep going so it's almost like it's almost like the pampering gave it more resilience to that you know okay so you guys can see how we've gotten through here now one thing that i wanted to illustrate with this close-up is notice that i haven't actually crushed any leaf so each turn kind of perfectly splits each leaf and and the reason for that is if i overlap a leaf and i crush it it's going to turn red and it will either become diseased or it will die you okay and and ultimately technically just like when you're wiring a pine they say you should never break a needle this this is true right although that's very difficult and if anybody can actually wire an entire pine without breaking a needle i would call you exceptionally gifted overly anal or a freak one of the three right but when we're wiring a redwood we want to make sure to the best of our ability that we avoid crushing those needles as we move out onto these really linear frond like pieces so i'm going to show you how to do that in just a moment so i'm going to just show you a real nice close-up of the technique to get through this so that you guys can can have a better idea okay so so as i'm coming up here i'm always supporting and i call this the pinch method so i'm pinching the wire and the branch together okay and i'm going to make sure and take the time to just find those spaces before i ever apply the turn of the wire i'm going to find those spaces that that wire can lay right in between those spaces and i'm going to make sure and take the time to just find those spaces before i ever apply those needles okay so if i see i'm starting to smash a needle say for example i bring this in here and i'm going to start to smash these as opposed to carrying out that wire i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to sandwich and pinch so that i bring that wire and branch together and have total control over where that wire lays in that frond now you guys might be saying holy crap that's going to take forever if you're doing bonsai to save time you got the wrong idea okay so taking the time to do this right and and the more that you focus on doing it right in the beginning the easier it becomes and the faster you get at it and the more adept you get at it but if you just say you know what that's too much effort i'm going to go ahead and just crash through this your redwood is never going to look that good period it's just not it's not going to develop the same rate it's not going to respond with the same kind of quality and growth and this is where you know you talk about the japanese approach of their craftsmanship and attention to detail this is what's led to their trees being phenomenal not the fact that they can wire but the fact that they insist on their wire being impeccable and totally functional and i i shouldn't over generalize in terms of all all japanese professionals have that approach because just just like anywhere else there's a lot of there's a lot of stratification of proficiency in japan just like there isn't i mean obviously in the united states or in europe or in any other bonsai practicing nation okay so now i'm going to cut that off now at the tip of this are we still in close arthur okay so at the tip of this here now i don't want this to be this long this is a back branch on the back of the tree we don't want a back branch to just continue to elongate so here i'm just going to come in here and i'm going to make that small prune knowing i'm either going to get a bud in the axle of any one of these or right here i'm going to get a bud in the axle of any one of these or right here at the junction where that new piece of growth started okay this one here is already nice and short and compact virtually the same length so that we create that nice fan shaped pad this one could elongate a little bit more this one obviously pruned back pretty heavily to restart the ramification this guy here still on the interior i'm not going to worry too much about that it's laying up there where it's going to get sunlight okay i can actually bring this in and even use it although i wouldn't promote doing this consistently so you may maybe be able to do that at home by doing theité at home right away right okay used to be smaller than this but now it's been that size even though you add this new one it's great considering all right if you know like so far that it needs to get this using this as a bit of a prop okay using that as a bit of a prop so that it so that it holds and supports that alright so I'm going to rotate here and I'm going to come into this section here now we're you're going to notice that we've got two dramatically different sized branches got a very thick one and a very thin one those can't be paired together that's not never going to work on a redwood because any movement that we applied to this very thick branch would damage this very thin branch it does not have the stability in the shoulder right here at the junction of the branch it doesn't have the strength and stability to anchor any movement we put in here so this is going to have to be an independent wire and then maybe we can actually join these two smaller guys together to get those where we need them to be it adds another wire adds another step but it also gives you a much higher quality product and therefore it is worth it what does poor wiring look like I think poor wiring looks like really really tight turns on the branch so that your wire loses function right I think it looks like too many wires in one location because your combination of branches that you're wiring together isn't well thought out I think it looks like a lot of spaces and gaps between your wire so that the wire loses function on the branch right you've got to have even even when we're turning through these guys you still have to have contact for this to work right if you lose contact it stops functioning and and if you if you lose function why'd you wire it in the first place like it's just now you're just wasting your time so like the idea of the wires gonna come off soon anyways so just just get it on there I just think you're I think that you're setting the wrong precedent and debilitating the opportunity to create a beautiful tree in so many ways so like the biggest tip that I could give people is learn fundamental horticultural knowledge right which everybody's like okay where do we do that at and it's like yeah that's a good question how about we start a live stream and we can start teaching you guys that that sounds like a good idea yeah so learn learn sound horticulture number two would be impeccable technique like when I was apprenticing Mr. Kimura would prune Mr. Kimura would prune Mr. Kimura would prune a tree and every single cutoff branch was fair game for the younger apprentices to take home and practice wiring and there were in the first three months of my apprenticeship I bet six out of the seven nights a week I was up till 3 or 4 in the morning wiring cutoff branches because I knew the sooner that I became proficient at wiring the sooner that I got to I got to start working on the work that I went to Japan to do what were some of the mistakes you made in the beginning with wiring yeah you know the biggest mistake that I made was not understanding how to handle my hands like you know we have these close-up cameras in this live stream to be able to to zoom in and you guys can see exactly what I'm doing and we're working on how we maximize that camera angle and those opportunities so that you guys actually can see my hands but you've got to learn how to position and control and maneuver your hands in order to effectively exercise technique and so I'll show you right here I'm gonna wire this I'm gonna wire this piece at the moment just kind of anchor it on the sticker guy but watch how my hands work here is this is this is really important ok so I'm gonna just bring this wire out to here is as kind of an anchor so I'm gonna carry this out to here but notice where I'm always grabbing this and notice this hand that supporting I've got that wire and branched sandwiched together totally tight so the wire doesn't move and I'm actually using the tip of this wire as opposed to trying to manage it in here I'm always controlling my copper wire from here because that gives me leverage I don't have to invest a lot of force to get the wire to do what I want if I'm using physics and this is just common leverage leverage right the length of the lever arm longer the lever arm less force you have to apply ok so I'm holding and supporting those two pieces together there and then using the tip of that to apply the least amount of force and maximize the greatest amount of leverage and this is how I can apply a 12 gauge piece of copper wire to a very thin green branch on a redwood no damage no needles crushed this is appropriate wiring technique right and that's that that ultimately trickles down into being able to wire thinner stuff with thicker wires is not optimal except for when you're trying to reduce the amount of wire you're putting on a tree. You can carry that thicker wire out a little bit farther and you can skirt around having to make another junction and another combination of a smaller gauge. Again making those prunes where I want that length to be knowing what I know about the seasonality of redwoods at the moment. It's such a glorious thing to be able to prune them exactly where you want them because for the rest of the year you have to sit there and look at them and say, I can either cut it all the way off, get a bud back at the base of the branch where it intersects the trunk or not cut it. Now it's just like, I want to cut here, I'm going to cut here. It's great. This tree post operation, this tree will explode with growth. It's going to be amazing. All right, we'll come around here and get in here. Now when I get inside these redwoods notice all of these dead kind of old spent needles and the interior fronds and stuff. When you guys first lay out the structure and these things are actually green and alive and they'll be really spiky and firm, you just want to leave them. Don't try to overly denude these because chances are all of this long elongated frond like growth didn't exist when I first started wiring this. A lot of these interior, these pieces right here, when they're on the primary branches and you're establishing those, they're really important. That's where the buds originate from that formed a lot of the fronds during the first styling or post first styling I should say. So don't worry about those. But when you come back now, they look really unsightly and they're no longer serving a purpose once they're dead or we've got enough foliage mass on the branch that we don't need to leave the green ones intact any longer. This is when we can come back in. And then go ahead and clean those up and get rid of them. I think what we're going to do is shut down the camera now and take a time lapse of the remaining work that I've got to do. And then we'll take you guys through the rest of it and wrap it up with a really nice kind of little bow at the end. Subtitles by the Amara.org community Thank you. 
