Aw, yeah, what's going on, everybody? What is up? Super Tuesday. Happy New Year. Good to see you all. Good to see you all again. Ah, 2020 left kicking and screaming. 2021, let's stay on the up and up, huh? Good thoughts from the very beginning, community-wide positive vibes. Got Eve on the mic this evening. Hi there. And Josh up in the mothership. Hey, Zeus on the detail cams. That's right, the Mirai crew grows stronger, grows stronger. Okay, so we call this Redwood revamp. And, you know, like the turning over of a new year, let's just be really honest. It's an arbitrary date, but it's not, though, right? It's like a reset. And for Bonsai Mirai, we are entering our second decade of business in 2021. We survived 10 years. That's a huge milestone. Very, very excited about it. And as we've kind of hinted at, we've been working on some very, very exciting projects. We've been working on some very, very exciting projects. Very big things that in 2021, I think, are going to be really functional and really effective for your bonsai education. So we're excited. We're working hard. We've been working hard. We'll continue to work hard. But celebrating that second decade is a big one. And I wanted to come back to just an iconic native North American species. But more than anything, the Redwood, as I was driving across the country in 2012, was the tree in my mind that I felt really embodied sort of the spirit of at least the Western United States and this concept of expansion. There are cultural concepts that dictate our approach to bonsai. There are traditional concepts, artistic concepts, all of those things. We kind of pull all of those together. And this piece is a very, very interesting redwood, very, very special redwood. This came actually as a stump that was dug out by a machine down in Mendocino from Zach Scheimann. And there was a whole slew of these pieces that had been used to make bonsai. And it dug up in the clearing of a property. And the character on the roots when we talk about redwoods and the nuances and how all of these lines are working through the design, right? I'd never seen anything like it. There was only one of those pieces that was dug up that actually survived. And it was this singular piece. So very, very special, very, very old, extremely established redwood. And inside of it, it brings up all of these concepts. Now, we've talked about the fact that at Mirai, we continue to evolve the knowledge. And we have some. I think antiquated redwood pieces that we're continuing to improve upon. When do we begin that process of styling? We know that wiring over the course of the fall season with Sequoia simpervirans, the coastal redwood, not a good idea. We do typically tend to see a lot of dieback. We say, listen, just north of a Mediterranean environment, they are stimulated by the fall and winter rains. That's actually when vascular productivity begins in the tree. And we typically tend to wait when we're working redwoods until we see the terminal buds. Really start to establish themselves, become really nice and swollen, delineate themselves, and really kind of take on that super nodular-like kind of formation. They have that, and you can see that tip set up really nice and bright green, ready to grow. That formation of that style of terminal bud is the preparatory bud for vegetative growth. And this becomes a major marker and milestone in the redwood because it takes a while over the fall season for that bud to grow. That bud to set up. Now, if we look at something like a spruce or a pine or even juniper, for that matter, over the fall season into the early winter, fall is when they pump all of that sugar and starch into that terminal tip. It swells. It gets big and beefy. We recognize this is really going to grow next year. Redwood, it takes through the winter, and we have to see that presence of that component, the swelling of that terminal tip, the establishment and the setting up of those buds back in along the interior portion of the tree. And even if we start to look at... The northern portion of the tree, the upper apical region, or at least the highest point on the tree at this moment, we see these really kind of vigorous, strong, younger pieces. And at the tips of these, we see that swollen bud, that swollen tip, set on these frond-like components as well. It's not the frond-like tip now. It is the actual established bud ready for vegetative growth, and that is our indication. Okay, so could we have been pruning prior to now? Could we have been wiring prior to now? Yeah, maybe. Within a few years. Within a few weeks prior, we possibly could. But generally, we see these things happen. When we get that moisture, when we see that vascular growth begin, that timing mechanism later in the fall, early to mid-winter, when we really start to see redwoods enter that prime phase of being ready for the action that we're going to take upon the tree. And this tree is sitting right inside prime time right now. Now notice, and I'm not saying this is a rule, but notice, this is just past the shortest day of the year. We are now headed in the opposite direction. That means that days are getting longer, although we're not seeing the incremental increase in temperature quite yet. We will over the course of the next, say, four to six weeks. And inside of that, that increase in photoperiod or daylight length with temperature is what starts to really stimulate this movement towards being able to work on our redwoods. Okay? So coming back to the notion then of how do we handle a redwood. I'm just going to come in here. I'm going to take off a few pieces that I don't think are going to be advantageous towards this piece to open up some of the space. I'm going to get rid of some of the structural flaws in the interior. And when you let a redwood recover from the collection process, we get a lot of these big, leggy branches. But we have to have these. So many people want to try and style redwoods when they have really green, soft, supple, succulent branches. Those are the branches that really suffer the most. But when we let them recover and we get these lignified branches, you see that these secondary branches coming off of them, very, very soft. But still, even the base of these has a little bit of lignified tissue. But definitively, the structural piece is very strong. Right? We're going to be taking off structurally flawed pieces like this knowing we're going to be simplifying the structure and really kind of breaking it down to its very bare elements. But allowing this energy, this strength to accumulate, this is what gets a redwood ready to become a bonsai and respond positively to the action of styling. Okay? So I'm just taking off a few of these structural pieces that are coming from the right side of the branch up over the top. I have other valuable pieces that are existing in the structure. And these are the ones that are in structurally sound locations in terms of their distribution on the tree. And just by getting rid of a few of these pieces that we allowed to stay on the tree for the tree to recover strength, we start to be able to see the real beauty in the interior of this piece. Now, the question with a redwood, right, and I will open it to questions here in a minute. I know you guys are chomping at the bit. I'm all about it. Let's rock out on some redwoods tonight. But let's just be really, really authentic with what we're talking about here. The challenge aesthetically is, do we go with multiple apices versus a bunch of redwoods? multiple apices vertically. This is the natural growth habit of redwood. Or do we have material that lends itself to maybe more of the bonsai form, or maybe we don't go full bonsai form and we pull in elements of the redwood, but we do consider this powerful trunk compression as opposed to elongation, narrowness of the silhouette, and this appearance of verticality. I see both options in this tree, okay? Notice how this just inherently and intuitively moves into apical dominance, auxin loaded, okay? The recognition that we could, we very well could go upwards with all of these branches and have this really firm base that had some sort of catastrophic event. We have multiple apices, and we could pull off the true to form redwood vine. Now, would that be the most interesting? I don't know, I don't know. I think with these shorter, stouter pieces, unless we have dominant differentiation and real straight linear verticality in the trunks, it's very difficult now to take these angular pieces coming off of this massive stump and then start to wire up these smaller pieces vertically and have it carry any degree of authenticity. It's not to say that it doesn't happen, and it's not to say that redwoods don't grow askew and then go vertical, but it is to say that that structure over the course of time, typically under the weight of that perpetual growth, would not be able to support that and typically collapses. And that's why we see redwoods being so vertically straight and the ones that are long-lived so vertically straight. The weight is distributed over the greater amount and bulk of that wood structure. And I think from that perspective physiologically for this piece, we push in a different direction. And that's where my head is going, okay? So if we start to think about, right, and I'm just walking you through sort of stream of conscious design concepts. If we start to move in that direction, could we cut this thicker piece? Yes, yeah, we could cut this back. We could use these branches. We could have a nice little apex. But, but, right, we have this massive trunk. It's in a round container. Round container, massive trunk, break the lateral boundary of the container. I'm not letting the container tell me what to do, but I am telling you what the container's encouraging me to think, right? So if we start to say, wow, if I take this big structural piece and if I can bend that big structural piece down, what if I can bring it here? What if I can bring it here? What if I could bring it here? And all of a sudden we start to create this big displacement of vertical weight off to the right side, off of the lateral boundary of the container. We pull on this big massive feature that this tree has, and now all of a sudden we start to create that asymmetrical flow. Can we pull in redwood elements? I do believe, right? But what those are gonna be is definitely not the verticality that we typically see. So to begin the process, I'm gonna set up a piece of rebar. I've already tried to bend this. It doesn't go well, right, in terms of it's not easy, but let's see if we can get some asymmetrical push. Let's see if we can bend this. If it breaks, awesome. Let's regrow. We're talking about cutting to be able to utilize this anyways, to have an apex all the way up here around this big trunk. It doesn't do much for me personally because we see that transition being so abrupt from big to small. So let's see if we can't increase that asymmetrical push and then play off of that in terms of design. That's where I'm gonna begin. I'll open it up to questions. All right. Up first, we've got Treebeard Steve. Treebeard Steve says, can the buds be expected to be well-established before sub-freezing temperatures are gone? I would think so. Yeah, I would think so. I would think that you're gonna see different timing mechanisms. And that's where I say, hey, listen, when we started the Redwood Knowledge with Mirai Live, we were talking about this notion of fall or this notion of when the tree is gonna enter a vegetative or a preparatory vascular phase of growth with those terminal buds. And we started saying, ah, you know, December, we get towards the shortest day of the year, December, and that timeframe in different parts of the country did not work out favorably. So we have had to come back. We had to go back to the drawing boards. We had to say, listen, this has worked for some trees and not other trees. This has worked in some regions and not other regions. What is the nuance? What is the tree indicator, first and foremost, that triggers our knowledge and confidence that we can go ahead and effectively style a Redwood, prune a Redwood, and get buds at that cut site, et cetera. And for us, the observation that has led to success has been the formation of a tree. It's the formation of that really strong, sugar-starch-loaded terminal tip. I think that's the moment where we really start to hit our stride and have some significant indicators that the tree is ready for that action and ready to respond positively, okay? I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna get my guy wire set up to my rebar right here, and I'm gonna walk you kind of through the process of applying rebar, the process of utilizing rebar, because it is not straightforward or simple. And this is going to be, I think, a relatively complex use of rebar, because I don't have a lot of physical weight here. I'm gonna be sort of distributing weight, body, et cetera. We'll see how this goes. But really what I'm looking for with rebar is I'm looking for the place that gives me the greatest mechanical advantage on the branch I'm bending. And so for me, that's the farthest length of the lever arm, right here out at the tip. Now, some pieces, if we go too far out, we end up bending the tip and not the base. I want all movement to source from the shoulder of that bend, okay? So I'm gonna be making sure that there's rigidity enough. The farther out I go to still focus the bend on the shoulder. If I focus on the shoulder, I always have more components I can bend moving out the branch. If I start at the tip, I never get to the shoulder. I'm never gonna go back and bend the shoulder, right? So start from the shoulder, making sure, but coming all the way out to the tip here, I have plenty, plenty of leverage and plenty of rigidity to bend from the shoulder. That's gonna be where the weight's gonna be distributed. Okay, so I'm gonna start there, get this set up, and I'll open it up to more questions. So are you ready for me or you want some time? No, I'm ready. You're ready, okay. I'm ready, I'm just gonna, yeah. Cool, all right. Richard says, where do you propose the front being? Yeah, yeah, so I think, I like the front that we initially had, and there are characteristics about this tree that are things we cannot sacrifice. The big stout dead trunk, and one of my favorites, although I will admit, and any student at Mirai definitely knows, I try to get you to objectively separate yourself from emotional attachment, but one of the features of this particular tree that I find super interesting and unique is this sort of aerial root slash deadwood piece that exists here that's hanging off, and I like to see this negative space in here. I have so much movement. I've got so much interest, and when this is stripped of bark and all of the deadwood here is brought out and we've got these slender live veins moving through there, I think it's going to be a very powerful aesthetic. So I want to see this. Now, I have a two-dimensional opportunity here that I've gotta be very careful of. If I face that towards the main screen, right, it is very, very flat. Now, you see the character in that tree, but this is very, very flat, and the more that I turn, now notice that you start to pick up that negative space and you start to see the quality of those lines. That's why I want to carry that upper branch out that way because I think we are right in this region in terms of the front. Right. We've got a question from Bentley. Bentley says, is that straight, thicker piece meant to be a sacrifice branch? Is the straight piece meant to be a sacrifice branch? Mm-hmm. There was never really anything on this that I was like, I'm gonna grow this as a sacrifice. There was definitely the notion with this tree that I need to get this tree as healthy as possible. There weren't many, well, there was only one that survived from this group, so they did experience a very, I would say a very, very extreme stress, and that means that the timeframe to be doing any sort of work on this and making sure that I allowed enough vegetative growth to rebuild the roots, to stock that vascular, the vascular system strength and elongating species, redwood being an elongating species, definitely comes from the storage of sugars and starches in the vascular system, so I wanted that vascular system to really recover before I got super deep into the styling process. Okay, so that's gonna bend. That's really good. Okay, first and foremost, now with the rebar, let me take you in close here. Go ahead and come in close right here, Jesus, and I just wanna show sort of the lever mechanism, right? Now, if you'll notice, we talked about that the longer that we tie in terms of the branch that we're moving, the farther down the rebar we have our tie wire right here, the longer our lever arm to apply mechanical advantage there, so we wanna really get this down into this region. The farther towards the tip we go, the shorter that lever arm becomes and the less mechanical advantage we have. The trade-off, however, is we wanna be pulling perpendicular to the line of this branch. The more that we start pulling at odd angles on this branch, the more force we have to apply to get it to bend, so there's a trade-off here between length of lever arm and the angle of application of force, okay? The other thing that we've gotta be aware of is where is that rebar going to be anchored to provide stability, right? I don't want this to slip. I wanna find a ledge. This is deadwood right here, even though it has bark on it, so I feel comfortable. If this was living tissue, this becomes a lot more sketchy and a little bit more dangerous because it can slip, tear, and really mar up living tissue, but I'm gonna use this as my anchor point, this ledge, as the ground, and this is my anchor point. I've got my grip, and now I've got my direction of pull. Now I get to actually think about how am I gonna hold this together? How is this gonna anchor itself to the tree? And this is where we have to be very, very insistent that when we start to apply this kind of pressure to these bends, it takes a lot of force, but we always need to tie to the tree. So many times you see people tie to the pot, tie to the box, tie to the Anderson flat. Not a good practice, okay? We wanna be tying to the tree so it is a closed system. It zeroes out the force, and the roots do not experience any of that leverage. When we tie to the pot, now the tree starts to get torqued, and we see that force exerted on the roots, and we start to experience potentially insidious health issues arise as a result of the misplacement of that guy wire, okay? So I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna carry it. I have a dead root down here that I think is gonna be pretty solid, but the line of this is not very good, and I started looking and thinking, can I tie to this piece right here directly straight down? Do I have enough leverage? Do I have enough wood? Do I have enough strength? And I think from the angle of the force, I think I can go ahead and apply it right here. That's where I'm gonna start the process, and we're gonna need to watch this area because again, we said this is very valuable. So let me go ahead and set up my tie wire for the process. Right, Douglas says, I have found dead wood to get pretty pithy. It looks like some of the wood at the top of the dead piece are getting spongy. Will you treat this or let it decay? So because this was a root, and this is the difference in redwood, the wood that is above ground typically is very, very rot resistant, okay? And the wood that is below ground typically has started the decay process to have the kind of interest that leads us to want to purchase and find value in that tree. And most of the redwoods that we utilize in bonsai are actually root systems. They're not above ground trunks, and that is what makes the difference in the formation of the deadwood and the durability of the deadwood because redwood, deadwood, and redwood in all honesty, is, and we hear about this a lot, rot resistant. Rot resistant in the upper canopy of the tree because that tannic content gives a lot of rigidity and a lot of structural support, resistant to rot, resistant to decay, resistant to all kinds of issues as a result of that tannic content, right? But when we get into the roots, the structure of that changes because with too much tannic content in the roots, we start to lose water conductivity. So the roots are a little bit more rot prone, and that's what we deal with when we're handling bonsai, redwood, that are collected as we're handling that more pithy region of the tree, okay? Troy, can I borrow you for just a second? Just because you're here. Oh, because I'm here. Just because I'm here, and because there's nobody I'd wanna do this without. Do you mind just applying some pressure there? Okay, so I'm gonna go ahead. I'm gonna watch the whole system, okay? And I'm gonna use my body here just as that pull point. And you can see there's quite a bit of movement there, but there is an awful lot of force. I'm gonna use my offhand here just to tie into that, okay? And I'm just gonna go ahead and see. Now, if Troy wasn't here, I would have to come up with some other securing mechanism. Okay, now watch closely as I relieve this tension. Let's watch this here. Oh, and it's gonna hold it really, really nicely, okay? It's gonna hold it really, really nicely. Now, I'm moving the piece a little bit in an awkward direction. My rebar is pulling here to the right. My guy wire is here to the left. There's nothing I can do about that because my catch point is here. It just means I'm gonna have to bend here more, or to be able to tighten this and get it to actually hold the lower down position, okay? So I'm gonna go again. You ready? Do you wanna lock that in? Yeah. Okay. Nice. Okay, here we go. Ooh. Okay, let's see how that goes. Okay, getting some movement. I'm gonna go ahead, I'm gonna up my rebar. Now, watch closely. I'm gonna hold the wire. I'm gonna go ahead and twist that. I'm gonna let that go. I'm gonna grab into this space, okay? Grab into that space with your plier. I'm not actually gripping wire. Here's why. Because that space allows my pliers to have a really nice, big grip point to be able to tighten that guy wire. And then when I get done, I just simply open it up, and you see that big space? That becomes my next grip point to tighten further, right? So if we think about, all of the applications and how we utilize our tools, in guy wire application, especially on rebar, you hold the rebar, you hold the wire, boom, and then you find that gap, okay? Going again. You ready? Oh. Nice. Yeah, it's gonna rebound quite a bit. But it will. Here. All right. Yeah, let's take a look at where we got. I heard a little pop. A little pop. Nothing bad. Redwood is extremely flexible. Now that's not to say it won't break. It'll definitely break, okay? But I'm looking for some sort of interest in that big line. a lot more asymmetry in the design it's already pushing it further to the right and we can start to conceptualize how do we want to handle this right because if we think about this is gonna be the apex here maybe we drop down notice these branches are pretty established here so we have the ability to think about an apex here maybe bring a lot of these branches down and around maybe in the future we look to cut back to some of these pieces on the interior we utilize these grow these out as structural pieces and now we have a compressed apical region we run that branch out okay we could think about this being the apex and this being more of an upward branch creating that impact of wind that you know we explore wind in the right material I don't feel like this is necessarily the best material to explore wind in and if we abuse wind we lose the value of wind so I would say that's an option but let's not push too far in that direction tonight I don't think it's quite right okay I think we try to go more I would love to see this now and we have to be careful here because if I go too far and I get it horizontal it'll be parallel to the rim of the container and we'll have that pattern duplicated so if we go further we got to go past horizontal right and we got to decide is that the decision that we want to make I'm curious what do you think it's not bad as it is now is it it's really not bad as it is now what do you think Troy well it's interesting has depth to see the base on the right side here this base right here this is just right here right in there depth right there you see that space the line this is kind of something magical maybe we go a little more maybe we go a little more it's it's coming to the chat they're almost there okay I'm gonna wait I'm gonna wait for everybody because I think this is a I think this is a pivotal decision I definitely don't think that the best apex is going to come from the highest point on the tree I I don't know that yet but I don't think so okay we're gonna go a little bit more while we're waiting for them to chime in we're here in just a tad more okay what do you got let's see Bentley says to turn it a bit more Sarah says she likes it as is likes it as is yeah so wait for more okay all right okay you ready bill says a little further Tyson says bend to the max bend to the max I like it Tyson Richard says you're 90% there yeah we're pretty much there huh they say more but they're also on a delay more gluttons for punishment okay I'm gonna come back this way Troy and I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna try to change the angle up just a little bit okay so the force now is gonna be coming diagonal in this direction right here okay so you might want to be right there okay yeah yeah you can hold that route yeah that's fine nope no I have no leverage I have no leverage now that that brought it just a smidge farther and I really really like where that's at now I think that's beautiful I'm looking at the image behind I think this has some real merit some real merit and again we're talking about a lot of things that we don't want to talk about but we're talking about really setting the stage for the future ideal time to be working Redwood ideal time to be setting structure ideal bud formation to be pruning wiring Etc but we're looking at hey that first big structural move that you make make all of the big risks and decisions now I like where we're at I like what this is offering and I think we take this and start to run with it in terms of how we handle it now when I take that off we do see that that is a very long line up here and we do have really fantastic strong strong vigorous young youthful pieces okay I'm gonna go ahead I'm gonna cut my rebar we may come back we can always redo that but we have a good nice setup up there if we need to redo that and now it's just a decision-making capacity do we go ahead and utilize these do we bend these down do we go ahead and form the apex right here and kind of build a little bit of a bigger tree that sits on this what do we do with this piece right here do we bend this down do we make this more of a bonsai form do we use this as a secondary apical region right here this is interesting this is really interesting let's go ahead and start there I'm gonna see how we feel about that get these two major primary pieces wired and then let's go ahead and come back and reflect we'll make branching length decisions apical formation decisions and all of those things all right uh we got some questions treebeard Steve has a follow-up to his earlier question outside of the Redwoods native range is it better to wait until the buds are set and temperatures have gotten above freezing or is it enough to have well-established buds I think if you get consistent freezing temperatures and a Redwood is in a bonsai container you're probably going to need to protect it because again we've said listen Redwood can tolerate freezing no doubt about it a healthy Redwood can tolerate freezing but when does it start to become damaged is it at 28 is that 25 is that 22 is that 15. nobody knows nobody knows I mean we've had a Redwood outside in two degrees and we've seen a Redwood die at 32 degrees so it's tough to really say what their winter hardiness is and how we go about handling that if you can protect a Redwood and you have a greenhouse well then I think you just play off of the buds because as long as that greenhouse isn't freezing or is barely getting into freezing temperatures uh not enough for the the root mass itself to actually be crystallizing and turning to ice then I don't think you have any issues and Redwood becomes a very very durable subject for bonsai creation but I think that's the cutoff if you've got the greenhouse which we do for all of our Redwoods we don't roll the dice then typically we'll go into the greenhouse and optimize their time of year all right next we've got Bentley Bentley wants to know is this planted in 3-1-1 or 100 Akadama this is 100 Akadama right here yep and I find that with Redwoods to get the the foyer mass uh really shrunk down nice tight compact to get the shortest internodes to get the smallest needles 100 Akadama is is a must okay now it gives the tree a lot of power because you have a lot of stored energy on those cation exchange sites as Akadama continues to deteriorate talk about that active decomposition Redwood very very vigorous very aggressive vigorous root growth consequently we see Akadama scale give us really fine roots but inside of that we hit that cutoff okay it can't go the same length as a juniper or a pine six eight years in a bonsai container never gonna work for a Redwood we're talking four five years uh we've pushed a Redwood as far as as seven or eight years and it was really challenging to keep that tree hydrated because it had scaled the uh soil structure so incredibly small that we really had to work hard to keep that tree healthy so I would say you're cut off four or five years if you can push it to five you're going to get more refinement but definitely solid Akadama gives you the best results all right um up next we've got Paul from Sacramento he said if you weren't doing structural work at this time would you use the same indicators to determine timing for repotting is now a good time to repot Redwood if you live in a place that does tend to have very short Springs that ramps up and gets warm very very quickly I think as far as collecting if you talk about collecting Redwoods which we do tend to I think to some degree confound collecting versus repotting in bonsai which are two totally different things and two totally different uh seasons that really favor that action if you're talking about collecting now is good because you've had some rain the ground is saturated the trees are are actively producing growth and starting to function and that's typically when we want to go about that collection process but we can also be repotting Redwoods and what we typically tend to suggest for most uh for most elongating species is right when those terminal buds just start to open and Redwood is no exception it responds very well at that time as well so you can yes and also there's that other time when the terminal buds start to open I think Redwood is one of the more vigorous I think uh flexible forgiving species that we work with in bonsai and inside of that the repotting season is very very versatile you know I'm just taking off some of these structural things that are less than ideal right we have these two beautiful branches and a very straight thick node I obviously have a junction here where I have two very dominant branches notice this piece right here because this piece right here is informing my decision that's occurring at the top of the tree right I love branching hierarchy but this big thick branch and my apex being small and my sub branches being even smaller I'm going to take this out as a disproportionate piece the other thing I'm trying to do push the trees asymmetry to the right I don't want that big beefy branch to the left but I do have this little small guy right here that occupies that same space with a little bit more proportional piece of growth so we're just kind of balancing all of these size thickness length kind of decisions when we make these initial structural moves by making those committed moves though we set ourselves up for beautiful functional wiring so it's necessary to make those decisions okay now I've got this piece here obviously I don't want this covering the entire front of the tree I could bring it to the back but I've got beautiful branches right here so I'm going to go ahead and I'm just going to accept that maybe I choose to use some of this length I'm going to come back to and notice what I've got here tight internode tight internode tight internode tight internode tight internode long internode bam take that long internode out if we don't know the length go ahead and cut out what is no longer necessary that will always be a great guide post to help you maximize what the tree has the capacity to give you all right we got a question from Treebeard Steve He says if Redwood is very flexible does it also take a long time to set into a new position as does Ponderosa um different flexible for different reasons uh ponderosa flexible Alpine snow Crush has a lot of um has a lot of malleability in the tissue as very coarse tissue also when we start to think about it very tight growth rings right and so when we start to see ponderosa with those tight growth rings tight growth rings there's a lot more shift capacity and ability for the tissue to maneuver move and distribute that force okay redwood when you talk about redwood being flexible redwood grows with such a linear long growth habit right it has to be able to tolerate wind although we do see the final apical region of most redwood broken by coastal storms but as it's as a young tree as a malleable piece of growth incredibly flexible genetically adapted maybe a tree falls on it and phototropically it continues to grow up right we see their their real flexibility in the youthful for portions and forms of tissue and that's where i think you have to make a division because i definitely have less flexibility in a branch that is this thick although we were able to get it to bend it was not easy right that piece of rebar had a lot of force being exerted on it but it was still flexible and it was able to get that move to take place but when we get to these smaller branches i can basically tie them in knots right so we have that incremental loss of flexibility once we get into bigger beefier older and more established pieces okay so now if we just look at it just by compressing here you start to see that really start to come to life you see that being being pushed into that directional insinuation let's go ahead and give this branch some character and some position and purpose in the design because i think this is going to be you know it's going to be a lot more flexible and more flexible and more flexible and more flexible and more flexible and more flexible and more flexible and more flexible and more flexible and more flexible and with the every throughout the tree one of the other two pieces of value do you know how to sorry so what you want to define it you want to define it obviously the defining branch and probably one of the more important pieces on the tree okay as a result when we start to establish the presence of those pieces we start to work back from that ok so i have my defining branch here i have an opposing branch here this of course is the branch that i didn't want to or that i was going to utilize so that this could go front we rotated this this now comes back totally great right serendipitously starting to create its own hierarchy here and we're just cleaning up now in the back i've got some wonderful structural absolutely impeccable structure on this piece right and because I'm going to be using the lower piece here I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to take off this lower piece and I'm going to save this high piece and that takes the place of the piece above it that I eliminated so you see that staggered effect of branch selection you take one you get one you take one you get one that's kind of part of letting the tree really guide the dance in terms of design in the bonsai creation process okay now we know we're gonna be going and let me go ahead and come back here we're gonna be going defining branch here and maybe that defining branch comes up and comes out let's give this some real interest if this comes up and out maybe these pieces are nice and short as a depth filled piece notice their presence here okay depth so if I'm going out here with length and asymmetry I want to come back to give that out in effect and depth is the friend that we tend to utilize in that return okay I'm gonna use the same long inner node reduction tight tight tight tight tight boom okay pull it in right I've got good stuff here I'm going to go ahead take that off and really reduce the length of that background piece okay so that sets us up to be able to give this movement and I think as I'm just looking at this in terms of combinations my best combination and structurally is probably going to be to carry it down to this piece right here so let me go ahead and get some really nice substantial wire now this is long and if I want this piece to be elevated and the weight of this foyer mass we're going to shorten this but we don't know how much the weight of the foyer mass acting on it we have to use a very thick substantial wire to be able to hold this in position so that it doesn't just fall down and get weak redwood if we let redwood drop redwood gets weak if we let it rise it gets strong okay if we hold it in the intermediate we can moderate its strength via the pinching process and distribution of strong to medium medium to weak over the spring season okay so if we go up you know what you're asking for if you let it go down you know what you're going to get and if you stay in that middle ground that's where we really breed a highly ramified highly strength distributed redwood right and that's where we want to sit in that middle ground so I'm going to use four gauge even though this is a relatively thin branch four gauge only thing that I see carrying that weight as it continues to evolve ready for some questions yes all right we got a question from Gary Gary says how would you do this solo and he's referring to the guy what are you doing you're out to right now Gary here today on he said is this actually what we're going to show ice big tree for winter you don't want to be a two inch long tree you want to be a small order or a pull out if you don't have a your can twister you don't need a stick to set the thing you're thinking I know a lot of people say but I'm saying it's CR7 and another guy used to use oak wood let's see what my buddy DM me what kind of feeling he's got but even though there's a lot of weed needs to be left and so we just have to use what we have I've got Bentu that's You need a Troy. You need a Troy. And the advantage with Troy is Troy is very, very accomplished at bonsai on his own. So it makes it very easy. We got a question from Richard. Richard says, when you bent the branch with the rebar, what gauge were you utilizing? Yeah, so the actual wire that I was attaching to the rebar as a non-permanent wire was 10 gauge. Okay? I, you very rarely will I even use 10 gauge as the guy. If I need more than 10 gauge, or even oftentimes if I need that thick of copper, I'll go to the galvanized steel as my wire of choice because I can get away with lesser wire and have a greater holding capacity. I did tonight because the steel is down in the greenhouse. I took it down there and did some emergency repotting on some trees recently. So I used 10 gauge. And then the wire that's anchoring it is 12. Okay? And I will say this. If you need more than 12, that again is a time where we would pull on to be sure, want to pull on that galvanized steel. Because once we get into that kind of thickness of wire, you don't want 10 gauge guy wire on your tree for the next say 18 months to two years, because it's going to take a little bit of a longer period of time for these branches to set based on it being so big. You don't want to look at that. It looks hideous. It's hard, doesn't function very well. So we tend to switch to that thinner gauge of the guy. Thinner gauge of the galvanized steel. I don't go over 12. Right. Jeff with the good hair says, would humid summers kill this kind of tree? Would humid summers kill this kind of tree? Here's what I know. Redwoods are grown in Phoenix, Arizona, in the middle of the desert, but they have to have just an absolute monstrosity of a mist system to allow that to happen. There are people with a significant enough green thumb and enough determination to cultivate redwoods in an impossible region like the desert and have made it happen. Redwoods have been cultivated in Tampa, Florida. Redwoods have been cultivated in Louisiana. Redwoods have been cultivated in Atlanta. But you have to stay on them almost, almost to a fault with treatment of fungicides, because they do become far more susceptible to disease. Now, if we just want to talk about sequoias, sempervirens, the coastal redwood, quote unquote, coastal redwood as a species in bonsai, used to occur all the way up to the Mississippi. Used to occur all the way up to the Mississippi and North America in terms of its distribution. Climate change, right, all things happening, changing of the American forest, competition, et cetera, and now it's resigned to a very small sliver of coastline in Northern California. But they used to occur all the way up to the Mississippi. They can tolerate humidity to a degree. Obviously, the weather was different then, right? But I would say you're gonna have the most success when you have dry summers and cool, wet, temperate winters. That's where redwoods really thrive and can give you the most as a bonsai subject. Otherwise, you're setting up mist systems in the desert or you're spraying fungicides in the humidity, okay? Now, once we get this wired out, now we get to see. Now we get to see what this has the capacity to be. And I like that push in that direction. Again, maybe we go ahead and we plan on shortening this piece and I really see, I really see the eventual tree being here, honestly. I don't see it being up here. It's too tall. We take out a whole, I would say four inches of length. By shortening there, we get close to that piece and we really start to set the tone of an interesting tree. But I'm gonna say when we get out onto this piece here, talking about length and talking about proportion of that length, we're probably looking at something, something inside of this region right here where we get a high level of ramification, okay? Where we see those branches starting to stagger, starting to divide. We have those opposing forces and we start to compress there as well. I don't think we'll save the length of either of those fronds and this is the time if we're gonna be pruning it to making those decisions, right? So now, this is aggressive, right? Because we're saying, man, you have all this growth up here. Don't you wanna use it? Yes, and the notion of compressing around the powerful design is how we make the powerful design more powerful, especially over the course of time, right? So if we come back to these younger pieces, these are vigorous. These aren't weak. It's not a little frond at an adventitious sight. This is a powerhouse of growth right here. I think that's enough to power this tree and when we start to talk elongating species, we can merge that gap very, very quickly if we allow these to take on that apical dominance and really start to thicken, elongate, fill out, et cetera. Redwood can go very fast if we provide the appropriate circumstances for them to really thrive. So I'm gonna say from this raw styling, right? And there are redwoods that don't demand this kind of a cutback. But from raw styling, I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna compress as much as I can now, thinking about the future of the tree, thinking about its progression over the course of time, and taking advantage of that experience, okay? Now when we do that, when we start to make that reductive cut, we have to recognize that if this is gonna be our defined apex, we can use this piece because it's below it in terms of the hierarchy. Highest structural element, this is lower. But I can't keep this piece here. And I certainly can't keep this one. I can't keep this piece here because they are higher structurally than the location of my apex. Notice this is here above it. This is here above that location. Gotta go. Okay, so we make that commitment so many times when we reduce the height, the physical height of a tree, we keep branches above the apical region, and we say, ah, I just don't wanna lose it. I want that branch. You don't get that branch. You don't get that branch, okay? It will never work out in the end. It will always be a structural flaw, right? We've gotta effectively shorten and reduce the height of the tree. We've gotta keep those things in consideration. And now, suddenly, we're like, wow, that redwood started out as bah, and now it's like, oh, mm, it's intense. It's okay, it's okay, it's okay. Because it was so strong. And we're at the right time of year. And this tree is going to, boom, explode, all right? So I'm gonna start on the secondary tertiary, and I'm really gonna work off of the length that I have here to reduce the length on the left side and see if we can push in here and push out there. We're gonna have a nice, small, underdeveloped apex, but a structurally sound apical region. We'll set those lines, structure, secondary, tertiary, photosynthetically efficient and ready to rock out. Now I can really open it up to questions and rap about redwood. Let's rap it. Treebeard Steve wants to know, how well does redwood backbud on older wood? I mean, redwood will backbud all the way from the root base up the trunk to the branches. In fact, we try to avoid redwood backbud backbudding as profusely as it has the capacity to backbud. That is how vigorously they will backbud. So we wanna be very careful, and one of the things when we talk about timing of pruning, so many people think timing of pruning based on the tree doing X, Y, or Z in terms of production of growth. No, sometimes the timing of pruning is getting the growth that you want where you want it, right, and when we prune redwood at ineffective times of the year, what we end up seeing is the growth goes all the way back to the base, all the way to the shoulder of the branch, right? So I cut here, and I get growth at the shoulder, wrong time of the year, right? If I cut here, and I get my buds all the way back here, that means that I made a mistake in my timing, but if I cut here, and I get buds on these fronds, or I get buds on these green needles right here, that means I nailed the timing, and this is where we talk about this moment right here where we see that terminal indication, that's one of the indications that allows us to know if I cut here, I get buds where I cut, right? The next time we talk about this post-flush hardened pruning, that kind of May, like late April, May, early June in the northern states of North America or Europe, northern countries, you will get buds at that site after the post-flush hardened prune as well. Those are your two moments to get growth where you want it. Pruning is not just having the tree survive. Pruning is having the tree give you what you want out of the action that you perform. All right, Kevin Ferris wants to know, do you have to worry about the patch placement on which side is showing for photosynthetic properties? Definitely. Redwood is highly, highly, highly, highly dependent and photosensitive in terms of its orientation, much like a Hinoki cypress, right? Although it's tough to compare redwood. When I came back and I started thinking about redwood, and this is in the earlier videos that we did on Mirai about redwood, I said taxus, taxus, the U, right, has a similar frond-like structure and that's where we jumped off, okay? But taxus doesn't grow in Mediterranean regions. That's not where taxus naturally occurs, or north of Mediterranean regions, right? Although taxus is pretty moisture-loving and taxus can be lower elevation or a little bit higher elevation depending on what species of taxus. There are some crossovers that allowed us to access the information, okay? The pruning style, the concept of how you handle frond-like growth, et cetera. But in terms of the reasoning, the physiology, et cetera, redwood really does stand very much alone, or at least I would say more in congruency with Mediterranean. So if you start to look at the fact that redwood is a California variety growing just above the Mediterranean region of California, the equivalent to that, southern tip of South Africa, southern tip of Australia, Mediterranean basin, Italy, Spain, France, southern regions, right? Or we start to talk about some of the regions of Chile in South America. Those are your five Mediterranean regions of the world, right, and so we can utilize some of those timing mechanisms based on regionality, the expectation of rain, and the rain is a trigger for a species like redwood to really start that vascular growth, and that helps us calibrate or at least begin the exploratory process. All right, up next we've got Bentley. Bentley says, when you set up the branches to start building secondary and tertiary branches, do you go for a pointed shape or more billowy? I'm good, yeah, thank you, Troy. Thanks for the help, man, appreciate it. Troy built some beautiful benches in the greenhouse. I'm just so in love. I like to go for, and it depends a little bit here, right, because we know the triangular shape gives more direction. Triangular shape shows a little bit more proportion when we're trying to show true scale of tree. The more rounded pad, more bonsai-esque, more traditional in form. I think I would rather see a little bit more of a pointed effect on the redwood as just a carryover of trying to have some of the nuances of redwood, even though we are creating design that's a little more compressed and not necessarily natural, quote unquote. We can have elements that bleed in to avoid just going full traditional on a species that really doesn't offer traditional opportunities. So I think I stay triangular, and I tend to do this almost subconsciously now with really high-level, oxen-producing species. So you talk about these skyscraper, elongating species. You talk about redwood, you talk about spruces, you talk about larches, you talk about hemlocks. They all have these pointy, apical regions, these really tall, slender, big vertical trunks based on their oxen hormone sugar starch and strength being in the vascular tissue of that storage device. You get that kind of behavior, you get that kind of nuance, and I like to keep it consistent because it really is representative. All right, up next, we've got Gary. Gary says, sorry if you covered this earlier, but why not wait for early spring for the scope of work on this species? Won't work, won't work, won't work in early spring. Okay, so that's the thing, right? Once we start to push too far into it and the redwood, bear in mind, again, redwood is a temperate species, okay? So that means that redwood, once it starts to make the transition into vegetative growth and you prune it, it's not like a maple, it's not like a deciduous where it just goes back to another bud, it has to make that bud. So you have to capture that pruning moment when it's making those buds, when it's setting up vegetative buds. They start to swell, it has the capacity, cellular division, vascular expansion as a result of that onset of moisture, right, and it's continuation through the daylight length cycle. We see it, boom, buds, I see that happening, I see them swelling, excuse me, prune and you get a bud at that site. Okay, so if you wait too long, you prune, nothing happened. Buds go back to the base of the branch, you lose that branch. And this has been, let's just be really honest about redwood, this has been the frustration of redwood to this point in time. Even still, even still, as we continue to refine redwood knowledge, and I feel very, very comfortable adapting and further investing time in redwood, coming back to you, having, you know, the first redwood video we did was one of the, I'm gonna say it was one of the first three or four streams on Mirai Live. You're talking 2017, trying to figure out how this whole thing works, how the trees work, like really, and already we'd been doing the seven years into Mirai at that point. We had a lot of experience, I had a lot of experience. But there's always more to learn, and hearing the feedback of Mirai Live members that said, yeah, it's good, we're not getting the same response, boom, we gotta keep working then, right? And that's what led us to this next iteration of how we think about, and really what we're observing, and how we're physiologically reconciling our application of timing technique and indication. Right, Douglas says, on branches that you don't want more length on, will you pinch extending tips or let grow out and then post-harden cut back to the length you want? No, I'm gonna pinch, right? If I have the length that I want on redwood, and I'm seeking, I'm seeking density, I'm seeking ramification expansion, if I'm seeking any of those components of the process of bonsai development, redwood is not a tree that we allow to elongate and we cut back, okay? Because the inter-node length gets so significantly long if we allow it to elongate, you've gotta be pinching and stopping that process, setting up lateral buds in the pinching process, and then those can actually start to elongate and form your secondaries, and then you pinch those. And those, the next iteration or next round forms your tertiaries. But if you just let that first flush run, you're gonna cut it back and you just keep run, cut back, run, cut back, run, cut back, we never get a refined tree, okay? And that's why, when you establish a redwood, let it get strong, let it get super strong, because now with this action, this tree is going to explode and I'm just gonna be pinching and guiding and directing. Let's see, a couple of people in the chat answered this, but maybe you might have more to expand. Bill was curious if you could share some resources of collected redwood material, so who they could reach out to, where they could find them. Yeah, I think, well, Mendocino Coast Bonsai, the Shimans have always been the high-level reference for redwood material, and I would still push you in their direction. Obviously, Bob and I have worked together a lot, Zach and I, tremendous friends. So I would reach out to them. They have a website and always have great material, good people, good to work with. The whole shebang. I recommend them 100%. I love those guys. Richard wants to know, are you cleaning needles to facilitate your wiring as you go? I'm cleaning needles to facilitate my wiring, but I have different sets of needles here, and that's a really keen observation. I'm glad you brought it up, okay? So when we start to talk redwoods, and let's just kind of start over here on this bigger branch, okay? I've got a highly, highly lignified branch. Let me carry, I'm gonna carry actually my structural wire just a little bit further, okay? So that I can see. Now, as I'm carrying this wire, I have these needles. Let me go ahead and rotate. I have these needles that are still attached to the lignified portions here, okay? These are needles that are just gonna dry up and die. I have short inner nodes because of the way that I pruned. I've got good staggered branching. I don't need there to be buds here, and more likely than not, these are not gonna hold buds. These are old. Notice how long they are. Significantly longer than the current growth, right? Really proportionally different. Notice how this is already shrinking. That's the scalability that Akadama affords us. Anyways, I get these out of the way, okay? They clog it up. They get stuck under the wire. They tend to turn brown, look ugly, make you think that you got a problem with your tree after you've designed it. You don't need that kind of stress, right? It's good practice. It's like cleaning the third year needles on a spruce. It's like going ahead and taking off some of the needles on a pine so that we don't crush them on a redwood. That's what we're cleaning. But when we get into these more green areas or these younger, just starting to lignify areas, I am not plucking these needles because I will tear the tissue and more likely than not, I will actually weaken this shoot. The tips will be highly disease susceptible or potentially even start to dry out and die back on their own. And that atrophy of that wound site can really start to cause a lot of problems, right? So I hold back on too much needle plucking on redwoods. That can contribute to tip dieback, right? We have two things that we fight, desiccation or the drying out of a redwood or, right? The application or the impediment of fungal issues. And this tree does have a little bit of fungal issue that I'll show you in a minute. Actually, let's go ahead and hit it here, okay? And this is how you tell the difference. When you're getting your tips dying back, most of the time tip dieback on a redwood is a desiccation related issue. Whether we pluck the needles too much, whether we damage the tissue in wiring, that typically is where we see it. But notice these little spots here, okay? Starting to get big and brown, but notice how kind of obscured it is. How clear that one is. Nice and small and red, no big deal. Seems really harmless. Let me see if I can get that. Can we even? Yeah, there we go, okay? Seems kind of harmless, right? And if we start to look back through these pieces here, you start to see these little red spots. Just these little red, it's no big deal. It's no big deal, right? That's just a little red spot right there. No big deal. But if you let that go, it'll wipe out the whole tip of this branch, okay? I don't know what the name of it is. When you look up redwood, redwood disease susceptibility, you're gonna find sudden oak death, sods, right? Phytophthora cinnamonia, no, ramorum. Phytophthora ramorum, okay? We're talking about something totally different here. That's in the native environment. That is something that's happening in the forest. That's not something that's happening here in domestic cultivation, okay? But redwoods aren't domestically cultivated. Redwoods aren't nursery material that's in high nursery productivity, right? And so, and when it is being grown big and long and strong and wild, it's very resistant to this type of red spot. But if you take it to a humid area, you take it to an ultra dry area, or we confine its space, they can, over the winter time, when there's a lot of moisture sitting around it, they can become susceptible. Mancozeb will take care of that. One spray, done, boom. You don't have to worry about it again. But when you see it, address it, okay? So tip dieback, typically desiccation. Red spot will turn to tip dieback, but we have the indication that is a fungal issue we need to treat. All right, we got a question from Gary. Gary wants to know, what other species would what you said about the timing in spring not work to apply as well? What's that? Sorry, I read that funny. Okay, Gary said. I'm sorry. What other species would what you had said about timing not working in early spring apply to as well? Ooh, you know, so there are some other species, say for example, common juniper. Juniper is communists. Or rigida. Or I'm trying to think of what the European needle juniper is. It's not coming to mind. Okay, needle junipers in general, though, don't early spring work, no, not gonna happen. Okay, for different reasons, though. Not because the buds aren't gonna occur at the right spot, not because of a lack of water or anything like that. Okay, with needle juniper, they need heat. So a little bit different motivation, a little bit different reasoning, but definitely early spring, not the time with needle juniper. Okay? And I think that's part of it. I think that's been a big part of juniper's communists being a very difficult species to have success with in bonsai because a lot of people tend to try and work them at other times that juniper's, typical juniper species are worked and it doesn't really happen. But beyond that, you know, it's tough to say. I think some of the Mediterranean varieties need more heat or become more flexible. I know with tamarisk, I don't work tamarisk in early spring. I wait till tamarisk starts to push in mid spring. And that's when the branches are most flexible and most workable. So that's another nuance. But in general, right, and we talk about Japanese maple, we prune and maybe it bleeds and there's a lot of different discussions about pros and cons of that. Okay, cool. There are nuances to so many species. Most of the trees we work with in bonsai, early mid spring work is one of the prime times for styling, pruning, wiring, et cetera. When we talk about redwood, we've missed the window. Okay? So I'm just gonna go through. And this is really where I like to take this whole process in a staged approach. Because even though I have the four-gauge on the tree, right, coming back in and doing the secondary wiring and layout allows me to organize, allows me to make decisions. If I start wiring all of this, I'm gonna come back in and I'm gonna start pruning it all off after I wire it. And it becomes a very significant waste of time, waste of effort. And then my wire is not very functional because I've wired it, I prune off the pairing, and suddenly I've got a seesaw teeter-totter. The branch doesn't go where I want it to. I overwork it, I get dieback, and I'm like, wow, redwood is such a pain in the butt. No, the process, the process is how you harness the capacity and the power of the redwood. If you master the process, you take care of that structure, you come back in, you start to work on those secondaries, and then you finish off with that tertiary work, that's where we start to see redwood really start to be more malleable and versatile as a bonsai species and subject matter. So to come back and say we're gonna do redwood revamp and then to bring an established tree in here and prune it for you is not very effective, because it pulls into, when we revamp this knowledge, it pulls into account the process from day one, from the first styling, yes, this is an impressive tree, but it doesn't mean that this is a tree that you can't get your hands on, find something similar to it, or apply this knowledge to a tree that is more accessible. That's totally okay. All of this knowledge is very fundamental knowledge that we're applying in this styling session where we are kind of readdressing the seasonal marks and the indicators that the tree's giving us to do the work. All right, Doreen wants to know, how will you achieve secondary branch thickening when you've cut off the terminal ends? So I haven't cut off the terminal, oh, I see, where I'm cutting off the big course. So I'm drop crotch pruning, right? And drop crotch pruning means I'm cutting back the thicker branch. So I cut back this big thick branch here. We in tight? Yep, good. Okay, cut that back there. Now I have good buds set up on the frond that's taking over, okay? Much like a juniper, you want to cut back to a strong secondary. When I'm dealing with redwood, I don't want to cut back to the weakest interior pieces. I've got multiple buds set up on this. Now the inner nodes are tight. You can see, you notice, that's a bud. That's a shoot right there. That's a bud on the left side. I've got my terminal tip right here. I've got a little bud back here on the left, right, left, and then tip. This is a highly ramified piece of growth, okay? That will definitely take over. Now these are going to run. I'm going to be pinching these. And we say, well, if you don't let that run, right? Common consideration inside of bonsai. If you don't let that run, it's never going to thicken. But when we... Let me just drive this point home, okay? Look at how long that is. And that is no more than a chopstick, you know, like a Chinese food chopstick thickness, okay? But if that were a pine at that length, that would be the size of your thumb, right? At least, okay? So when you start to look at redwood, you say, well, then what causes redwood to thicken? Number of needles on the branch. How do you expand the number of needles on a branch in a compact way that gives you an aesthetic that lends itself to representation in miniature? You start pinching. Okay, and pinching causes ramification. And ramification expands the number of needles. And the number of needles creates more sugar. And the amount of sugar is what causes the thickening process. For redwoods, the pinching process is actually how we start to mature that branch and go about controlling the manner and the nature in which it thickens. Now maybe you pinch, get ramification. Maybe you let one of those pieces run. You let it run too long, it takes all the strength. It wants to be a big tree and you lose all the interiors. So there's a balance to be struck there. I just pinch. I don't like to let them run. I don't like to develop redwood that way. I always end up starting over if I do it. Pinching and allow it to accumulate needle mass, that's how you get that thickening and that transition. But first and foremost, build your material before you style. Build your material to have this kind of thick branch so that you do have the pieces to style and you're not trying to grow it after that styling process. Again, I started off saying we tend to work redwoods too early. Case in point. Case in point right there. Good questions though. Really, really nice thought processes. All right. Up next we've got Treebeard Steve. He says that another branch can't be left higher in the structure than an intended apex. How generally can that be applied? For example, can that be applied to pines? Well, so here's the deal, right? If, if, if we're going to be, and this happens a lot, this is again when we talk about wind, oftentimes you'll see a branch be higher than apical region when we start to talk about influences of wind, the alpine, et cetera. There are a lot of naturally occurring times where we can totally defy that. Okay? So, so be careful because you see me do it a lot and you're like, well, wait, you're saying, you're saying we can't do that, but I watched you do that. Yes, exactly. When we're deviating from the traditional model of bonsai. Traditional model of bonsai, there's a little bit more of a rule set there, not necessarily rule set like adhere to this or you're not doing bonsai, but rule set that says, hey, listen, this is how the orthodox style is set. And that's really where I was orienting from. Now we said, this isn't going to be a vertically growing redwood, but maybe inside of this design, we do pull nuances of redwood in terms of maybe the triangular formation of the pads or maybe some other element that allows it to feel more like a redwood. It definitely has more of a bonsai vibe. And that's where I have to respect that. That's where I have to respect that apical formation. All right. Next, we've got Douglas. Douglas says, sometimes when I cut at the wrong time or the tree is just in a funk, my tree doesn't produce buds at the cut site at the base of the branch. Does rubbing off the base bud get the tree to recommit to the main branch or is it lost? It's tough because now you've reduced the needle mass of the tree. It's trying to, and again, when we prune, we close down, number one, we remove the auxin at the tip. Naturally, redwood, high auxin productivity, it wants to grow again. And that's where we're trying to direct that next budding and take advantage of the appropriate time. We do it at the wrong time, it goes back to the base. We have to let it build back up strength again. We can't start pinching off all of that growth at the base of that branch. Otherwise, we pruned off the needle mass. We took away its navigation system of auxin productivity. And now we're trying to say, no, no, no, no, no. Not right there. But it doesn't have the strength for us to be like, not there, not there. I don't like there. I'm gonna take you off there. Just grow where I want you to, but I pruned it inappropriately and now that's the only place you can grow and I'm stopping that from happening. That's where we see a redwood, take a tailspin, okay? Hands off. All the growth goes back to the base. Now, if we prune and the tips set buds and start growing and we're getting growth at the base, which is very common because it is very vigorous, take that growth off of the base. Because the tips are what we want and they're growing. But if we prune at the tip and everything goes back to the base, you gotta wait. You gotta wait. You gotta let the tree grow. You gotta let the tree recover and you gotta hit that timing the next time. All right. Up next is John. John is in Kentucky and he's wondering what antifungals are appropriate for redwood. If lime sulfur in the winter, what concentration? Product inserts vary from recommending one tablespoon per gram to one pint per gram. Yeah, the lime sulfur discussion is such a monster, John. I feel... I feel for you. You know, we've talked about concentration of active ingredient is what dictates the quantity. And even then, Troy went through a big experiment on his pomegranates to figure out... Because the label recommendation will turn your tree white. And in Japan, there were a lot of gardens that just went so heavy on the lime sulfur that when we would get them in at Mr. Kimura's to do the work for their client or for them or for the Coke Fu or something, you know, your boogers would be black because of all of the lime sulfur debris. The foliage is white. The copper wire is black. You're touching it. There's dust. You can taste it in your mouth. Like, nobody wants that. That's not what we want to do. Okay? That's not serving us. Yeah, it's killing everything. There's no doubt about it, including you. Okay? So, when we think about it, what we're trying to do is we're just trying to hit that threshold. And again, that threshold that allows us to knock things down, destroy overwintering eggs, spores, etc., without having to inhale, you know, Chernobyl in terms of the bonsai form is a slippery slope that hinges on the quantity of active ingredient. But what I'll do is all... I'm reluctant. I'm always very reluctant to talk about that concentration. It is a continual question. I recognize other professionals have tried to answer it. I didn't find it satisfactory. Maybe you didn't either. I'll talk to Troy because Troy has done a lot of experiments with it on his pomegranate and seems to have found a really worthy recipe in terms of the concentration we have. I'll give those numbers and then you can take it and do what you need with it. All right. Up next is Treebeard Steve. I'm curious about this one, too. Would you briefly discuss a few of the key differences between Coastal Redwood and Dawn Redwood? The similar names lead to some confusion. Well, Dawn Redwood is a moderate to higher elevation deciduous conifer, so it loses its needles entirely. And the only reason that they're called the same thing is because they're both of their trunks or, you know, when we talk about this, the redwood, yes, the trunk is slightly red if you scrape the bark, but the interior, the heartwood, the highly tannic-loaded structural wood of redwood is what's red, whereas Dawn Redwood, the trunk is red, and that's where it gets its red name. So it's just talking about aesthetics in terms of quote-unquote redwood. They are not at all close in proximity. We've got Sequoia simpervirans. You have Metasequoia. Metasequoia, much like Pseudotsuga with the dug fur not being a true fur and also not being a suga or a kind of pseudo-suga, right? You have Metasequoia. These are almost like imitation or that separates them in terms of they don't have a proximity but there are characteristics. Frond-like character in terms of shape, yes. Texture, no. Region, no. Growth habit, no. Handling, no. Pruning timing, absolutely not. Okay. Very little relationship. Very, very little relationship. But they both have red trunks. Well, that's rather confusing. And that's why it's confusing for all of us. For all of us. All right. Up next, we've got Erin. Erin says, I've got a redwood with multiple branches coming out of a low, chunky trunk, several of which I've turned upright to become multiple trunks. Cool. I want to let those run out for several years to thicken up and become true trunks. Should I keep pinching the lower branches to keep them compact or let them sprout crotch growth to replace the lower branches down the road with thinner replacements? How do you balance letting the trunks run out top with maintaining or refining the lower branches? Yeah. Yeah, it's not possible. And here's why. Because it's so apically dominant, if you pinch those lower trunks and you're allowing the apex to run, the lower branches are going to die regardless. Right? And that's where you start to get into this challenge of developing, quote, unquote, developing redwoods. If you're going to be thickening that tree, because it will push back on the trunk in the future, you're probably looking at regrowing all of the branches that you're trying to save and refine. And it's not like a Japanese black pine in terms of, we can't be developing some portion of a coastal redwood and refining another one. You're either refining or you're developing. And that's, because of the apical dominance, that's really where we have to delineate that line. Okay? Now, I just started playing in here. These two branches back here, this for me, although I could come in and wire these a little bit more rigidly in this initial early stage, just to get, just to get, not necessarily loose and not sloppy. There's a pad there. I actually, I probably will handle this piece just because it's outside of the realm enough that it's hard to see the definition. So let me go ahead and wire this, but I'm not going to wire all of these pieces. And in fact, I really like when I cut back to these smaller interior pieces, I like to use the wire on the lignified portion to spread, to go ahead and orient. I orient there. Now I can push down here and kind of get that flat pad formation, a little bit of that nice undulation. You see it right here, virtual same level. I just wired these pieces. So the lignified pieces are wired. I'm going to go ahead and I can spread these out just a little bit more, get a little distance between them. Okay. But I'm not over wiring a redwood. Once they get more mature, once I've pinched, once I have a lot more woody tissue around the finer branches, now I can come back in and I can go a little bit more detailed. Okay. Now I'm not giving you permission to be sloppy. I'm not saying that your redwood can look like crap and Mirai says that that's okay. No, we have to execute craft. We have to execute aesthetic. We have to execute superior and I will say superior, right? Notice the pinch methodology, taking the weight off of the frond in between the fronds, not crushing the fronds, supporting the shoulder. Now out. Okay. Still using the highest level of technique to be able to set the tone for these. But if you come through and you wire every single little branch, it is very stressful for redwood and does tend to lead towards a lot of branch dieback. So just be aware of that. You can go as detailed as you want. In this first iteration, most of the growth that I'm going to use in this tree is going to start back at the base of these branches because these are weak. We've cut the tip back and it is going to push from the base with tight, highly vigorous, ramifiable growth. These things will wither away and we'll use that as the replacement and as the better, highly ramifiable branch formation. Okay. So we're just understanding that in this initial styling. That's what we're going to get. We'll take it. All right. And this is just a reminder for all your folks that might be joining us publicly, just letting you know, if you would like to ask a question, you need to sign up for a live, you need to sign up for a pro membership at live.bonesamurai.com and we can get your question in tonight about redwoods. Join us. Join us. Join our chat. We aren't answering chats from YouTube or Facebook actively. I'm just there to make sure you guys aren't misbehaving. Up next, I've got a question from Kim. Kim says, I wired my redwood midsummer. It's soaked and bronzed from a bit of freezing. The buds are popping now. Should I be checking the wire for bite yet? And if biting, should I replace the biting wire? Yeah, redwood. So again, I held up that really elongated branch and I said, look, this is the size, basically the diameter of a chopstick. Very small for the length of the branch because you really have to have that foyer mass to cause redwood to thicken. And so length doesn't necessarily cause redwood to thicken excessively. It's the needle mass that's on the tree. If you didn't get a big response when you pruned, you said it bronzed, right? Is it wire going to be biting in, et cetera? You really would have to have a lot of foyer mass acting on the tree in order for redwood to thicken because just letting them elongate doesn't cause them to thicken, right? We recognize, ooh, it's a little challenging. Redwood's a little, as much as we think of them as these big tall trees and they grow so fast, they don't thicken really, really quickly. In the ground, yes. Uncontrolled growth, yes. Is that what creates the best budding? No, it creates big, huge, long inner nodes. We recognize that. It's why we're talking about all the techniques to pinch timing for pruning, et cetera, right? So I would say you're probably fine where you're at in terms of not needing to unwire, although you could see if the wire were starting to bite in or not. But more than anything, we need to let the foyer mass reestablish itself. That's how a redwood recovers, and that's how a redwood really starts to move forward as a bonsai subject. All right, up next we've got Bentley. Bentley says, time for the obligatory call to Don Redwood question. Does that pinching process also apply to Don Redwood? No, no. So we did a Don Redwood pruning stream. It was a mini stream, I do believe, where we took a really interesting field-grown Don Redwood and handled it. And I would say Don Redwood is much more closely related in terms of technique to bald cypress, pond cypress, that genre of deciduous conifer. They do have a timing mechanism that falls in line with that group of trees. How are we doing on time, Eve? We are at 7.15. Oh. That happened fast. I know. Back into the groove of it. Yeah. Good. Let's stay in the groove. Let's see. Sarah says, can you talk about the timing of the pinching? Is it all year round, or how do we do it so that it doesn't cause back-butting too far up? Yeah. Pinching is happening more often. Pinching is happening while the tree is producing active growth. And while that growth is relatively soft, that growth is relatively supple. Because pinching, we just want to stop that terminal tip. We don't want to pull off established branching, right? Now, this is an area here, you'll notice, where there's really no organization to these pieces. Okay. I'm going to have to do a little bit more wire work here. And I do, I wanted to come back and just, I want to be careful when I say, hey, you don't have to wire Redwood aggressively. We do have to put in the time where it's necessary. Okay. But when we're pinching, it's just as it's producing foyer growth. And as that foyer growth is very, very soft and supple, and we're able to transition that energy, if you let it get too hard, number one, you're going to damage the tip when you pinch it because it's over-solidified, and it's not going to cleanly separate. Number two, the tree will have dumped so much energy, if you allow it to harden off, it's dumped so much energy into the production of that, that you have to let that growth reaccumulate the spent energy. So it means if you tried to pinch at that point in time, you're actually doing more damage because the tree's not recovering, the growth is not going to respond the same, the function of pinching has been lost, right? So when they're showing you that light green, soft, supple tip, growth tip, and it's just really, really nice, that's when we want to be pinching our Redwoods, and that's right as the foyer mass is elongating. All right. Joe says, when you repot, will you bring the apex back or reposition? It looks like the tree is bowing forward a lot right now. Hmm. Is the tree bowing forward? I'm going to say, I'm going to say if this is the front facing me, you're seeing that. I don't consider that. That's almost still in line with everything else. It doesn't feel too much to me, but we'll kind of readdress it as we work through it. Yeah, maybe. Maybe a little bit, but we're just starting the journey with the apical region. And I like a forward bow. Anybody who watches, if you've ever gone to the kokufu, if you've ever seen Japanese trees, if you've ever seen a tree that really pulls you in, the forward bow is a big part of that orientation that helps you guide your experience and understand how you interact with the tree. So there is an aesthetic reason for that forward bow. It creates this kind of an effect. Beyond that, compression, oftentimes if you compress an apex, you don't want to compress an apex in two dimensions. It's tough to push it to the back. You push it to the front, and that also gives it a forward bow. There are definitely trees at Mirai that initially started with what I felt was an acceptable forward bow, but as the branches elongated, as things developed, it became too excessive. Because what we should understand about an initial styling is this is going to be the smallest that this tree ever will be in its aesthetic age. If we're styling with the future in mind, making decisions that are functional for the establishment of the structure, etc., it only gets bigger and adds growth on the decisions that we make tonight. And that's not to say we're not going to cut it back in the future, but it is to say that probably when we do cut it back, it's still not going to be smaller. It's still not going to be smaller than what it is right now. So from that perspective, we understand that if it's bowing forward now in the future, it's only going to be bowing more forward. And maybe in the future, we develop branches back behind the current apex that allow us to either shorten it or transition the apex to a more appropriate piece. This is just part of that evolution of the bonsai form. Okay, backside here, nice and dialed in. And you can start to see some of that definition. Let me show it to you from the side. Okay, now you start to see really flat, nice sharp pads. I'm not worried about having, you know, body. I'm not worried about having density. This is not the time for that. We're really working in terms of redwood. We're really working with just trying to lay out, set the structure, have photosynthetic efficiency, put our secondaries in a location where they're going to thrive and have the ability to contribute with branch pad formation, etc. That is the primary goal. That is the primary component of an initial styling on a redwood is just setting yourself up for success. Okay, so these pieces, this piece, primary piece, primary branch or a structural branch comes off of the trunk. We've delineated this as the continuation of the trunk. So now these become secondaries. Secondaries can represent their own pad. But these are just singular fronds. I'll start pinching these. They'll start to ramify. And all of a sudden, where these might be used as one pad tonight, I can offset them as they mature and form two pads. That's how we use secondary pad formation on a really minimal structured tree. What does minimally structured tree mean? I have one, two, three. I have three structural branches and a trunk on this tree. But if I start to turn these secondaries into pads, right, now they start to add to the complexity. I have 10 pads. I have 15 pads. I have 20 pads. As these secondaries evolve and develop and I'm able to show a much better scale and proportion to my design, the more pads I have and the more apparent complexity that I obtain in the design process. Over its maturation. All right. Up next, we've got Mr. Reno Casey. They want to know, what are some requirements for a structure to be an effective greenhouse? In Ryan's opinion. Oh, I'm sorry. That wasn't stream related, but I already said it. It's already 20s and teens here overnight. Ah, to be an effective greenhouse? Yeah. Yeah, that's a good question. That's a really good question. That's like, what is dirt? That's a tough question to answer. To be an effective greenhouse. Well, I think that you have to be an effective greenhouse. That's a really good question. That's like, what is dirt? You have to have, I think, ultimately, what a greenhouse would tell me is you have the ability to dictate and control temperature as well as light exposure. Those are the two things that we're really looking for with a greenhouse. Because you can bring it inside and control temperature and you say, well, is that a greenhouse? No, it's not a greenhouse. That's bringing it inside, right? Because you can't get light and you say, well, I put artificial lights. Does that make it a greenhouse? No, because a greenhouse has a transparent glazing material and a sort of insulation, R factor, R value that allows you to maintain the heat inside of the structure. And I think heat and light are the two components that we need to consider most. All right. Dottie says, is this tree currently housed in your greenhouse? New growth is observed. Should new buds slash growth be seen for trees outside in North California? I would say, I would say that you would see the same bud swelling and formation in Northern California that would trigger your action. Is that happening now? Well, I think that's a good question. Is that happening now? Did that already happen or has it yet to happen? That is where the big, and if I have to just be honest, the California response for redwoods. I've had a number of students from California that have studied here taken this evolved knowledge, gone home and applied it in California. But the timing is so different than it is here that we're almost talking about two different things. Now, if you're functioning off of indicators, then it doesn't matter when I'm doing it because you now have the knowledge of the visual and physiological indication that allows you to adapt to where you're at. So Northern California, I can already tell you, is going to be dramatically different than the timing that I'm seeing here in the Pacific Northwest and we're not that far away from each other. But as long as you know what the tree is telling you when it's doing what it's doing, then you can make that decision and find that timing for you and your environment. Microclimate especially, California dominated by microclimates makes it very, very tough to give you a date, a month. We're just talking season at this point in time. All right, up next is Paul. Paul says, what is your preferred method for removing the bark from dead areas on redwood, especially when the bark has been on there for a while and is not easily removed? Yeah, this is tough, isn't it? Because we don't want to mar the underwood. We don't want to mar the texture of the wood underneath it. And so when we start to say, gosh, I don't want to destroy that, but I do want to get that bark off, it will cause it to deteriorate, especially what we talked about with redwoods primarily being as bone size subjects the root mass of the trunk or above ground components. I still use the Fordham and I use the Fordham with the carbide burr because I can be so gentle, so light, and so incredibly in control of just the removal of that singular surface. You can preserve when you really start to master the action of a Fordham, the pressure, the technique of the Fordham, you can preserve every ounce of the surface of the wood and still take off that bark so that you get down to pure grain. That's what we call the xylem. You got to get past the phloem, you got to get past the cambium, and what we leave behind, what deadwood is, deadwood is the xylem of the tree. It's the core of that vascular system. With the Fordham, I find it to be effective. I use it on the redwoods just the same as I use it on the junipers, just the same as I use it on any tree that has bark adhering to the deadwood. I want to expose the contrast of or reduce the water holding capacity of that bark along that deadwood to help it last a little longer. I like that actually. Although the contrast is great, I don't typically bleach the deadwood of my redwoods, but I do find that as far as longevity and preservation, getting the bark off allows the deadwood to have a lot longer longevity in the bonsai form. Rich has an answer on what dirt is. Dirt says it's, sorry, dirt. Richard says, dirt is what you track inside and the rest is soil. So the way they defined it in contrast to college is dirt is soil that you don't want. Interesting. And I thought that that was a real educational. Is it the same thing with weeds? Yes. A weed is a plant that you don't want. Exactly. Yup. And that was, I paid a lot of money to learn that in my college education. How do you define dirt? It was, I remember it was on one of my finals one year and I was just like, well that is such an interesting use of my time. That's a funny question to have on your final. I don't know, you know. That's what a horticulture When you're studying horticulture it's a very common, very common and acceptable question. That's awesome. Yeah, it was awesome. Victor and Richard have a cool request. They want to know if you could show us with the branches that you've already cut off how to properly pinch redwood. How to properly pinch redwood. I cannot show you on the branches that I've already cut off because it's not actively growing so I don't have the growth to show you. But what I would like to do is I would like to bring this tree back when it starts to elongate and show you how to pinch on a tree that you've seen the design process, right? And this is again strength of, the strength of this platform is coming back to these things and just following their progression. Let's go ahead and plan on walking through the continuation of this tree over the course of this season and see how far, how far can we get this to go in one year with a solid application of technique. How much do the branches thicken? How much does the aesthetic change? How much does it change the way that we anticipated? Let's do it. Let's make this a very significant subject matter for 2021. All right. Let's see. Jumping back real quick to Paul's question about the bark removal. He says, what do we do if we don't have a Fordham? Buy one. No, I'm just kidding. You know, one other thing you could do because Fordhams are an investment. If you're going to be doing bonsai in a big way, especially with conifers, it feels like just because it does serve the purpose of being able to give us control of the wood, in particular, the ability to expose and create that contrast of live and dead. Okay? But the other thing you can do, especially in the fall and the winter, when you get seasonal rains, when you get that real high moisture content on the wood, if you allow that wood to sit for a year, two, maybe even three on a freshly created, for example, this upper piece, I've got this. If I just leave this to sit, now redwood will continue to grow if I continue to remove all the suckers and I actually kill this, the bark will eventually start to slough off of the heartwood. And when it's wet, when they're thoroughly soaked and saturated, Troy and I, especially with pine, I don't like to go and do the same kind of cut, split, tear on pine in terms of gin formation. I really, pine, spruce as well, empirical deadwood, hemlock also. We might work the tips, but beyond the tips, I'm not gonna make this heavy grain exposed singular branch or stub. Now, maybe on the trunk we did the pine deadwood stream, I'm all for that. That was a really good utilization of deadwood creation to solve aesthetic issues, to enhance the value of the material and to give it a much more wild appearance. But as far as just a singular gin, spruce, pine, hemlock, these are cylindrical gins. They maintain the structure of that cylinder. I like to let time take care of that and then come back when they're wet and go ahead and remove it. And it comes right off. Once it's aged and once it's mellowed enough and the wood grain has had time to season, then that bark really does, when it's thoroughly saturated from seasonal rain, really does come right off with just a nice nylon brush. And that's what we're going to be doing. So, what are the next steps for the tree? Certainly, they want to know what will the fertilization look like for this tree next year? Fertilization. Yeah, so we talk about fertilization on redwood and let me just kind of update you on where we're at. Okay, I've got that branch and it's out there. It's, I think, right over the trunk when we start to look at it, right? It does, I think, demand and warrant that kind of distance. The apex is underdeveloped. It makes it feel a little bit disproportionate. That's okay. We'll get there. We'll build it. But I like that giving us that asymmetry. It starts to form the backbone for our design. What was that question again? Bring it back now. Okay, so let's talk about this tree because this tree we're trying to, we're going to be trying to get a lot of growth. We're going to be trying to and we have to commit to redwood, right? You only have, if you're a normal bonsai practitioner, if you're, and I would say that's anybody who's not psychotic, then you only have room in your collection for a few redwood, okay? Because they do demand so much attention, right? You have to be pinching them. Redwood, you've got to be a ton of redwoods. Even without fertilizing, they will aggressively push from that stored sugar starch energy in their vascular system, right? So if you're trying to refine, you're trying to get ramification, you're trying to really dial in shorter internodes, shorter needles, you're not going to fertilize at all. It's much like a deciduous tree that you're trying to get tight internodes with. You're just not going to fertilize. But if you're, and when we talk about this tree, I want this tree for any other species, meaning the quantity for moderate fertilization and the timing for moderate fertilization. For a redwood, the response you're going to get is so aggressive that that moderate application of fertilizer on a redwood equals a heavy application of fertilizer on other trees in terms of the response, okay? If you fertilize these heavily, you'll never be able to control them. You will not be able to keep up. They will absolutely blow you out of the water with the demands that they place on you. Moderate at best for development or secondary. But if you're going to light or even no spring fertilization for the refinement process, and that's how we control them. Again, the container is the constriction device. Akadama is the scaling device. And fertilizer, it's just very supplemental. It's not the mechanism by which we get a redwood to do what we want. It just supplements the process. All right. Up next, we've got Danny. They say, when a redwood experiences browning and dies back, even buds that had started to set or browning up, can one start to investigate what are the steps for recovery? Yeah. And this is what I was talking about, Danny, when I showed the fungal issues as being sort of spotted lesions that are obviously unevenly distributed without a pattern. It typically tends to insinuate fungal issue. If you have regular distribution, tips across the tree are dying back. Typically, that's a root-related situation. But I would tend to believe that tips dying back on a redwood is a desiccation. That is a drying out. That is a reduction of the root mass and water conductivity having an impact on that. These are high water, high water utilization, high water necessitating trees. The tips dying back generally speaks to root-related issue. And that's where I was going with that and in response to the tree that you showed me pictures of. I think something, something, I don't know what it was, but I think something probably impacted the ability for the roots to thrive. Okay. So the, in my opinion, you know, one of the things I didn't think I was going to talk about today is just the fact that if you live relatively close to the ocean that can have an impact. Right, oops. Okay. Up next we've got Gary. Gary says, how can you tell if slash when you have removed too much foyer mass during the scope of this work? Yeah, I think, the the the tolerances right we talk about elongating species as strength is in the vascular system and what that means is we can heavily reduce the foliar mass if we're not reducing the root mass or we can heavily reduce the root mass if we're not reducing the foliar mass okay and when we talk about redwood we know that in this initial move if we build up the strength and this tree was strong strong i mean it had growth everywhere and what we've cut back to you're all like i'm sure a lot of us are saying golly that's a lot and you're right you're not wrong it's it's a lot we took this tree back but we took this tree back to the bones that set us up for success in the future and that's what we need to do in the initial styling okay getting it that strong is what allows me to do this getting it that strong that many branches and i'll just give you an idea this is this is about half of them that we took off right so we've taken off a lot right there's a lot of branches that's half of what's on the floor right now that has stocked my sugar starch storage in this tree to a maximum degree right so high quantity from that vigor over the fall season vascular productivity as long as i don't touch the roots i can heavily reduce i can't fully reduce but let's just be really honest with a redwood if i cut off every branch it would grow again without much strength stored it wouldn't kill the tree okay i'm not saying do that don't do that but you could do that right well we are now back in the house do you have any uh 2021 bonsai resolutions 2021 bonsai resolutions i i you know what that's a really interesting question i do i think uh i spent a lot of time over the break uh thinking about thinking about where mariah's headed as a team we spent a lot of time prior to the break talking about where mariah's headed uh and i'm i'm i'm more amped than ever to be doing bones i in 2021. i'm i'm kind of bursting to to get at it and my bonsai resolution is just to make an entirely new body of work there's a lot of trees at mariah that are that are historical that have been developed that um you know were a part of the first decade at mariah i i really want to start creating trees from scratch again that that carry with them in the initial structure and creation process kind of this the the evolved concepts that i've learned over the past 10 years so that's my goal and we've already started there's a few trees in the workshop that we're working on that are pretty cool but i would say this tree as well is going to carry with it some of the wisdom or at least experience that the past 10 years has taught me uh and i and and that's fun there's a few there's a few new concepts maybe some saucy stuff that's going to be coming your way that that nobody's seen yet we're we're excited to launch that but you'll see we're coming uh bill says how can redwoods be propagated Redwoods can be propagated by literally tearing a branch off a tree throwing it on a pile of dirt and waiting they are so incredibly quick and effortless to produce roots they really are very special you can cut a branch off and you can do a rooted cutting you could generate an air layer you can stump cut a redwood you can do anything you want you can just pump a and plant it and you have a fairly high rate of success so redwood prolific prolific root production and again this was a piece that was dug out of the ground probably didn't have a single piece of green on it and from the root mass started producing growth and needle mass they they are champions champions of vigor and survival all right next we've got Joe or so up next we got LA David they say I came in late so I'm not sure if this is already been asked but what wood hardener would you use on the dead areas it's a good question no hasn't been asked yet so I will say this I I have a line on because I know see Pez and Troy using see Pez and I still think see Pez is is a brilliant one and I think it's a brilliant one and I think it's a brilliant one and wood hardener as especially see Pez and there's a video on it LA David if you haven't seen it or dove into that part of the library yet I'm sure Eve will give you a link see Pez you have to buy a large quantity it's relatively expensive it's it's super stinky right there is a product that I'm kind of experimenting with right now that once I have a little bit more time tested and and I see how long the preservative capacity of its hardening effect is it's it's a furniture product as opposed to a boat product that does look like it's gonna give us some opportunities to be applicable in the bonsai realm so let me let me give it a little more time under the trigger and then if it feels like it's worthy I'll let you all know see Pez is that spelled capital C P easy is that I think but no every time that I look for see Pez I try to I have to rediscover how it's how I find it yeah if any I think it's cap I think it's CP easy Bentley but just maybe double check with the community on that one can we get a community-wide vote on what that's how we spell it's all the product that we're promoting our own new product guys please educate us on how we do bonsai I think it's well I see some things for see Pez I don't know if it's the right thing I mean yeah it's a weird one it's a weird one let's see we got a question from Richard Richard says on the branch structure that Ryan is working on are you concerned the long branch is too horizontal I don't know let me step back I'm I'm here in my myopic world and and part of the bonsai process when you're styling and designing especially under under a time frame demonstrations live streams Etc is is I tend to after I make the big structural decisions we did the big rebar Bend uh felt like we got things in the right right place and that opened up the door for asymmetry right and and I'll always say when you're styling and designing always do the big risky moves and always do the moves that give you the asymmetrical push first because now you can respond with the way that you handle the branches you can build out the balance of the design okay so if I hadn't bent this first then I don't know how long these need to be or how long that needs to be or where the apex is gonna be that big push now I can respond do I need more length here to counter that what do I have here anchoring that visually all everything is created by the most significant structural work to create asymmetry that guides all of my other decisions about branching so once I get into branching you know as long as I don't cut it way too short which I I definitely tend to avoid I like to keep length I like the asymmetrical push most of the time those first push pieces will always be shortened over the course of time I'm not worried about it right now right but I'm also in this hole where I'm kind of up close the tree is in my face I'm doing my thing I'm really not sure that I can create something like this for sure but if you want to create something like this particularly a flippen or something like that then you'll need to step back to see that and maybe we do need to shorten it or maybe we need to change some of the horizontal nature of it okay now what I want to be focusing on though is even up in the apical region I'm just creating nice really nice simple flat pads okay just really nice flat pads I'm not trying to stack things on top I'm set that photosynthetically efficient system. Then we can start pinching. We can start guiding that energy. We can start getting ramification. Then we start to get this accumulation. Then we get this age and maturation. All of those things come with time. We have to earn them with the elongating species. Spruce is no different. Hemlock's no different. Redwood's no different. We do have to work with that over the course of time. So I'm just starting out very fundamental. Now, this might sound exactly like a pine, exactly like a juniper, et cetera, et cetera. I think junipers specifically have more of a capacity to be created than any other tree. I think pines are built and I think elongating species are earned, right? So junipers are created, pines are built, and elongating species are earned in terms of what you have to put in to get out that investment, right? Big, big moves on junipers. Lots of live vein, deadwood, cleaning, contrast, days and days of washing, raffia, heavy, you know, spines, application of technique to the nth degree. It's a lot of work. Happens quickly, but you got to have all of that, right? With this, we're just talking time. Keep it simple. Keep it super simple from the beginning and allow time. Earn that, earn that shape, earn that design. All right. We have a clarification from Marsha. Ding, ding, ding. You are our winner. Smith's Original and Clear Penetrating Epoxy Sealer, CPEZ, C-P-E-S. Voila. Bam. Thank you, Marsha. Bam, ba-bam, bam, Marsha. I love it. Up next, we've got a question from Treebeard Steve. He says, this is developing into an atypical design, which suits this atypical tree. I think so, too. What elements of design say redwood to you, Ryan? Yeah. Yeah. Currently, I would say that there aren't a lot of identifiable elements that say redwood. I am going a little bit more pointed, but even so, I'm more cutting back to tighter inner nodes, knowing I'm going to be pinching. And I'll get to that. I'll get more to that expanded form over the course of time. I don't think there's a lot of identifiable redwood traits at the moment. And we did, and I will say, could we find it? Can we find it? Because we're going to have to earn it, I'm going to say that in this styling, at least I haven't been able to find the redwood in the design. I'm not panicked about that, though. It'll happen. Redwood, no matter what, redwood's going to redwood. You can't make a redwood a pine. You can't make a deciduous shape of a tree. Redwood's going to be a redwood. We'll find that over the course of time. So if it didn't happen tonight, which I just said it hasn't, it'll come. It'll come. I'm not trying to force it. I'm not trying to spend too much time thinking about it. I'm not trying to earn it too hard. All right. It looks like we're all caught up on questions. Bentley came up with his own definition for CPEZ, which is conifers, pines, and elongating species. That's C-P-E-S spells. Very well done. Yeah. Very nice. Very nice. Okay. Well, I'm just at the apex here. I've got a few little smaller pieces, and this apical line really does have to respond. And before I make it, I'm just going to step back and take a look because there have been a lot of questions. What do you think about the branch? What do you think about X, Y, and Z? Okay. I like that base just being there slightly off of that two dimensions. Yeah. It's kind of interesting the way that that trunk is creeping. There's a little bit of discrepancy here, although it is interesting. I like this piece kind of thinking about this coming back and compressing on that side. I like the length on the right side. I love the depth. Okay. It feels very sparse. I love the depth that this gives. We come out. We push back in. This is going to be magic here. Okay. So then the question is, does the apex here, does this come back? Do we carry this back in this direction? If we carry it back to the left, I think we have to carry this piece to the left as well. I don't think we can have this piece come back to the right and this piece come back to the left because it would create a circular region right there. Right there. Boom. And we don't want that. We know we're trying to avoid that. So from that perspective, you know, I think we kind of have to come back as much as I thought this would come here, just through the simple logical reasoning and kind of design. If this comes here and this comes here, now we get this kind of a formation here because this is going to go and this is going to go and you already have that shape built in. So what that means is, watch this. Okay. I'm going to go boom here and then I'm going to come boom there. Right. That's the move. The first move in and then return it. Okay. And if that's going to kick out that way, now this piece comes more in. This piece starts to come this way. Creates the space for this. Allows this to be sustainable because now I'm going to drop this down. Okay. And inside of that, and I hate to, I hate to take, I hate to take the sexiness out of bonsai, but inside of that, that was all logic. That was 120% logically deduced design. Every single one of us could have made that logical decision. Doesn't mean it's the most artistic, right? This is not, this isn't really the time. Like we made creative decisions. Yes. Right. But there are ways to set ourselves up when we're pursuing more of a fundamental design. There are ways to set ourselves up for success. That's the decision making that we've just applied. Right. Got to be able to do it all. You have to be able to envision. You have to be able to be creative and take advantage. You have to be able to execute fundamentals in order to make good bonsai. It's a very wide world of technique and understanding. Let's see. Up next, we've got Joe. Joe says, wouldn't oval pot be better for this form in the future? I don't know. As long as the apex breaks the lateral boundary, which we, which we are currently working on diligently right here, then I don't have any sort of preconceived notion that it needs to be in an oval versus a round. I like the round, right? I think we could use a little bit more of a lower, lower branching system over the bottom. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. For the course of time maybe, some of you will say that you cut it off, that is not going to be valuable... So I don't feel bad in the decision we made there, and maybe we start to look at this and I think the discussion, was it too lateral? I like the fact that it drops down. It works here. It could come back up, but that would change the shape of these. I think we will leave it here, and as it evolves maybe we choose to further explore that design. I am not upset with what we might have to explore but that is the way we are all doing it right now and things have changed a little bit over the course of time. Maybe we want to really with where it's at right now though, I feel like we do have a really nice, solid foundation established to be able to kind of base this first iteration on. And I just, again, I'm always, and I will say this, 10 years doing bonsai with redwoods, and I'm still shocked at how fast they develop. I'm also still shocked at during that first styling, how minimally they come out of the design process because by the time we make the decisions and we cut back all the long leggy growth because we've given them the ability to be strong and have all that stored sugar starch to give us the best possible product from our pruning decisions, there really is just a fine number of branches left. And with those fine number of branches left, we have to execute really solid and fundamental wiring application or else redwood can be very sensitive to the wiring process. We have to hit the timing mechanisms or else redwood can be sensitive to the wiring process. But if you hit them and you execute techniques that are unique, redwoods will outperform almost any other species that we use to create bonsai with. They are so incredibly vigorous, aggressive, and capable of developing rapidly. Okay, fundamental, simple, simple, simple, keep it simple. Okay, nothing too complex. All right, and let's go wide again, Josh. Okay, now maybe over the course of time, the apex on the upper right is gonna need to rise a little bit to create a little differentiation from the apex on the left, or maybe even now, right? This is feeling a little bit elevated here. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm just gonna take this down because if it's already too high, it's not gonna get less high over the course of time. Okay, so I'm just gonna compress that a little bit and we may need, this is gonna build in body over the course of time, right? What a craggly, what a craggly, awesome, just awesome tree. A radical, radical piece of material, as above. A bone-sized subject matter. And I'm very content and happy with where we took it this evening. That turned out quite nice. I really didn't have a vision for it. I knew it was gonna happen with you all on the stream. Super excited that we got to do this together. Yeah, a lot of people are mentioning how this kind of has a feeling like a little elephant or a mammoth kind of shape. It does have a little elephant, mammoth vibe, doesn't it? A little prehistoric, which I like with coastal redwood. Right, a little bit of a dinosaur, not quite, but we're getting there. Richard wants to know, what's gonna happen to the top four inches of the top in the future? I think he's referring to that little, Yeah, the piece that I left right here, yeah. I definitely, what the tree is gonna do is it's gonna try to start pushing buds there. Even though I cut all the foliage off, we said, listen, redwood's so vigorous and so stocked with sugars and starches from the branching that we left on over the vascular productivity, it will push buds there. I'm gonna have to take them off. Probably what I'll do is I'll go ahead and use the Fordham to remove the bark, right? We talked about letting it weather. That's the alternative to the Fordham. I'm gonna use the Fordham, remove the bark, allow that wood to start weathering and aging and turn it into kind of a terminal tip. Treebeard Steve says, given the characteristics of redwood, can the upper apex be expected to become dominant and keep it in a round pot? The upper apex, so this piece, if left untouched, would certainly become dominant. And this one would also become dominant. Probably what would happen is a bud from one of the shoulders, is a bud from one of the shoulders would take on the dominance though. Elongate, take all the water as a, as like a, what do they call them? A water sucker, right? And just skyrocket with oxen, get jacked with oxen, become the next leader. And the tree says, I'm not gonna be a small tree anymore. That's where the pinching process comes in. That's where the continual, and with redwoods, we do this first working. Even if we do it at the right time, at the shoulder of the branch, you're gonna get a plethora of buds. And you've gotta control those buds. As long as the tips are growing and the tips are healthy, you take those buds off of the shoulder. Over the course of time, when we start to get the timing down, when we calm the redwood down, and when we train those buds out of the shoulder and train the sap flow to the tip of the branch, you won't have to clean it nearly as much. And in fact, for my most mature redwoods, very rarely do we have to clean off the shoulders anymore because we've trained that epicormic growth out of that vascular tissue. All right, and the last question I have tonight is from Gary and he says, are the two apices pulling the tree apart visually? I think it's tough when we're dealing with such an underdeveloped, obviously this is such a small apex. It's a little tough to say that they're moving in opposite. This is just that fundamental structure, primary lines, shoulders, layout of secondaries, et cetera. We're gonna have to dig more into that as they mature, but there will come a time where we really do need to, I think, adequately analyze and make sure that we're headed in the right direction. I'm satisfied with the lines I've created. I'm satisfied with the growth that we've laid down and the photosynthetic efficiency of it. I think we're okay. In the future, we'll come back to that, Gary. And let's see what happens when we're pinching because once this tree starts to grow, it's gonna take on a completely different aesthetic. Josh has got a before picture before we cut out so that you can see where this thing began. Yeah, the big, bad redwood mop. Okay, and then bring us back into studio. Yummy. Like 10% of the needles left on it. There's a lot of branches on the ground here. I feel completely confident in a redwood piece of work at this time of year with this kind of reduction based on the health of the tree. And that's, again, the key. Get that tree strong and healthy, and then you can rock out. Wow! 2021, off to a big start. So excited. I hope you're excited. We're excited. We got bigger things in store for you. You don't even know yet. Anyways, thank you all. Thank you for the support. Anybody who joined us on the show today, you can find us on social media. Thanks for rocking out with us tonight. If you liked it, start your free trial, live.bonsaimirai.com. To the Mirai community, all the newbies that joined us, welcome, thank you. Those who have been with us, hey, time for another great year, and this one's gonna be the best yet. Let's stick together as a community, positivity. We're gonna get through this winter, spring season, and boom, life is gonna get good, I promise, and bonsai is gonna lead the way. We're here for you. We're charged, we're ready, and it's time to rock out. Love you all. We'll see you tomorrow on the live Q and A at 10 a.m. 
