What's up everybody? Hello! Wednesday mini-stream. This is gonna be fast, filled with knowledge, and hopefully positive for scales. Okay, first and foremost, I believe Eve is on the chat. Jesus is producing the mini-stream. Lonnie's on the detail cam. What what? I've been excited to get to this because the Dothostroma and Phomopsis mini-streams, in terms of identification, understanding how we go about the process and information to take care of these issues, has been really, really big, including the abiotic initial one that we did, where we assess the fact that wide distribution across the tree often indicates an issue with the root system, an issue with care, an issue with soil, an issue with cultivation, okay? And we're gonna continue this process of consistency as we analyze issues, right? Discussing scale insects today, not to give it away, but let's just back into this, okay? My first bone side tree when I was 12 years old. Juniperus percumbens, this tree I've had since I was 12. That means that I've had it for 27 years. That's crazy to me. I didn't manage to kill it. It's been attempted on multiple occasions, okay? Really healthy this year. A tree that I've put more time into just out of obligation and respect for the fact that this tree hasn't died yet in my care over 27 years. Started out as a steak-trained nursery tree. I'll give you the 360. That was really beautiful, by the way. I'll give you the 360. We put it in a Ron Lang pot a while back, which I think is magic. But this is no special tree necessarily. And percumbens, we tend to handle percumbens, and they're so durable, and we tend to mistreat them. And so when things happen to percumbens, a lot of times, at least from my perspective, I tend to be like, ah, it'll probably fix itself, right? But that's the wrong attitude to take when we see a tree that's going to die. So let's see the things happening that are happening with this tree. And let me just tune you into what is happening. So a great spring, productive growth, things are going well. And all of a sudden, I started to see these patches in the tree where I was getting necrotic tips, okay? And when we talk about necrotic tips, there's a big difference here between a necrotic tip and a tip that's producing a pollen cone. So if we look at the major apex here, this tree is starting to flower right now. And the flowers are indicated by these tan-colored, round tips that are eventually going to open up and distribute pollen and allow for the formation of berries, okay? Now, I want to be very careful. People talk about pollen cone formation as a sign of stress. No, this is not a sign of stress. Oftentimes, pollen cone formation is a sign of intense vigor and health because the tree has the excess resources to be able to add this extra layer of energy expenditure to be able to reproduce and give rise to offspring. Now, we can see it happen with stress, but when we have healthy foliar mass, when we have a robust tree, that's not necessarily a concern. Now, I see the pollen cones, I identify that, and I recognize I have a healthy tree. But when I look at the right side here, I have a lack of pollen cones, I have a lack of growth tips, and what I'm seeing is I am seeing a much browner, dead, dried-up tip forming at the tip of all of my pieces of growth over here. And it is unique and compartmentalized to this area. Now, when I see this kind of a thing, a lack of pattern, a lack of consistency over the tree, I start to analyze the tree. And as I look in these other regions, I'm starting to see the exact same thing here. And let me move out of the way of the camera. I'm seeing a really nice green shoot, and then I'm seeing the terminal tip of that shoot showing necrosis, showing brown dying dieback. And if I touch it, if I touch those, that brown dead piece just kind of flakes off. And what's interesting about that, as I look underneath it, is on the scale needles of that foliar mass, I have white specks. Now, it's too small to see in the camera, but we understand what scale is. Scale is an insect, very tiny, almost microscopic insect, that forms a waxy covering over its body. And that waxy covering protects it. It protects it from chemicals, it protects it from rain, it protects it from oils, it protects it from all of the things that we try to do to eradicate that insect. And it insulates the insect as it pierces the physical cellular structure and sucks out all of the chlorophyll, the nutrient-rich, sugar-productive green pigmentation in that cell. And the problem with scale is initially scale was a very identifiable issue in North America, in Europe, in Japan. But what has happened over the course of time, scale almost eradicated as a horticultural pest, and is now coming back with a vengeance as a much smaller, much more discreet insect that, even when we see necrotic tips and we rub that off, we don't see the scale anymore. We don't see that identifiable white speck with that caramel-brown or red center to that speck. And that's where it's become a very precarious and cumbersome insect to identify. Now what we will see, as we continue to look, and I recognize I have a spot here, I I have a spot here. Necrotic tips. Why? Why is this necrotic and all of this is green growing, tips intact, and everything's beautiful? Irregular distribution of the issue, right? I come over here. Again, necrotic tips. Necrotic tips on the inside here. What the heck? What is going on here, right? We see this irregular distribution of pattern. Can you come in even closer on this, Lonnie? Can you get really, really in tight here? I want everybody to see this because this is something that is becoming a bigger issue. Notice those brown tips. I've got beautiful green growing tips right here, and I've got these brown tips on the interior. All of these pieces in this little patch have that necrotic tip. Out here, I get a little bit of necrosis right there. We see that blackening of that tip, the browning of that tip, and if I touch it too much, it just falls off, and what's left at the base is a very, very tiny, almost microscopic spec now. So even the waxy coating is so small that it's hard to see, and this is where we have to readdress our knowledge of scale. I'm going to continue to look. I'm going to continue to analyze. I see an interior area here where all growth tips are knocked off, and I'm actually losing entire little branchlets at this point in time. This must be an advancement of scale to the degree maybe this is where it started. Maybe it's been feeding on this area for a very long time and I see one in here that I finally get an identifiable spec of scale on and I want to show you this because this is of utmost importance to understand. I'm going to hold this in my hand here and I've got the scale insect right on the tip of that dead needle. You can just see that white spec right on the tip of that dead needle. You see the needle dead below that piece. That's what we're dealing with and that's literally the small microscopic and when I start to look at these needles after I orient to that dead needle I see two and three scale on this needle. I see three and four scale on this needle. I see scale on the stem of that piece right there and I recognize holy cow I've got like 10 scale insects feeding on that little piece right there causing the death of that tip, causing the lack of health and eventually causing the death of the entire branchlet that we're dealing with there and I would never, I would never have seen that had I not looked at the tree and I would never have seen that. recognize that there's an irregular pattern here, an irregular distribution, something outside of a root related issue. I'm dealing with now a biological problem. Is it a disease? Is it a pest? What has happened here? And now we start to talk about the symptoms of scale. Okay, so first and foremost let's back into the symptoms of scale. Number one, general loss of vigor and color in spotted irregular distribution. This is a primary identifiable component of scale, also a primary identifiable component of spider mite, also a primary identifiable component potentially of a root related issue that is vein specific in a juniper, which is where we need to be careful, right? But I see that loss of color and loss of vigor. Something is causing that foliar mass to turn yellow away from the green healthy chlorophyll related growth. This is the scale insect feed. This is an insect feeding on those components. Another issue that we typically tend to see, especially on our running junipers. In this piece right here and let me hold this up for Lonnie to focus in on. Go ahead and transition to that. Notice the distortion or disfigurement of the growth. This is crooking of the growth. You see that. Let me go ahead and rotate this out. Sorry, I'll give you, there we go. You see the crooking of the growth. Now I'm going to hold up. a non-infected piece right here. This is a standard running juniper formation of growth, spiky, elongated, right? And then you see the bent crooking that's happening along this growth. That is not normal. That is deformation. And that is deformation that is occurring because the scale insect is feeding on the sugar starch productivity at the tip, and it's causing an irregular elongation on one side of that tip and an irregular loss or stunting of growth on the other side of that tip. It's causing the crooking to occur. Now, if I look at this tree, there are branches that have crooking, but the majority of the tree is straight. That's that irregular distribution again where we're seeing a non-patternized expression of symptoms. So number one, we have a loss of color and a loss of vigor irregularly distributed around the tree. Number two, we have a distortion of the growth irregularly distributed across the tree. And number three, when it gets to the point where there's actually physical damage taking place to the degree that we're losing portions of our growth habit, we get necrosis or death of that small regional tip that allows us to really start to key into the fact that, hey, this has got to be some biological issue, right? Now, you might be looking at this on the percumbens and you might be saying, well, isn't that the same thing that happens with phomopsis? And the answer is no. No, because with phomopsis, when we get a dead tip like this, that tip continues. It continues to yellow, continues to occupy, continues to kill off down that branch. Whereas with scale, we get the definitive termination of the terminal tip of that piece first. It delineates, it dries up, it falls off, and then we will start to see recession of the remaining branchlets in that area over a more prolonged period of time. Now, when I used to see scale at Mirai, I would say, hey, scale insects, I've got a lot of biology in the garden. I've got predatory insects. I've got insects acting on my trees. Those will probably take care of scale. But as scale has started to become stronger, more resistant to chemical, probably dealing with either an adaptation because of their rapid reproductivity or a new species of scale that is so much smaller and seems to be a lot more economically damaging, we start to recognize that we have to confront this issue of scale or else we're going to have significant damage to our trees. And I do have trees that literally had thousands of scale insects. On the growth tips this spring that I couldn't even visibly see with my eye, I could only see under a microscope or a loop, but it was indicated by the loss of color, the deformation, and eventually that necrotic tip. And so you start to say, oh, my gosh, how do I treat scale? I've dealt with scale. I deal with scale. This is an issue. Does it only apply to junipers? No. Scale applies to pines, dug firs, spruce, juniper. We see this across the board, bigger scale on deciduous trees that latch onto the leaf or even the branchlets. This is an issue that we need to be aware of. How do we deal with it? First and foremost, a healthy tree. Because when we talk about balance of water and oxygen in the roots, we talk about that symbiotic relationship of fungi interacting with the root mass, enzymatic reaction at that junction of fungi and root, that gives rise to the capacity for the tree to fend off, compartmentalize, and prevent that insect from having a tasty morsel to continue feeding on. Health is the biggest way. That's what lead. In terms of this precumbance, to just a very spotted distribution but a relatively healthy tree throughout the rest of the canopy, the tree has a good, strong balance of water and oxygen, established root system, therefore resistance to disease and pest. And that is why it hasn't progressed further. A weaker tree, we would have far more damage. So number one, health. Number two, can we go about this process of removal with something that's less aggressive than a big heavy chemical? Absolutely. This is where we start to talk about a dormant spray. When we think about dormant spray in bonsai, dormant spray or the lime sulfur utilization in Japan initially was utilized to control scale insects and spider mite eggs. Those were the two reasons that lime sulfur began to be utilized. Now, with lime sulfur came almost a complete eradication of scale insects and spider mites. And all of a sudden started recognizing, oh, you can actually start to treat pathogens and suppress spore population as well. And it became more of an odd thing. And that's when we saw a broad spectrum off-season wintertime spray to be able to manage all of these organisms that are attacking these trees in these confined environments. And that, with that lime sulfur came a lot of opinions about lime sulfur stains the container, bleaches the bark, leaves behind a residue that when we unwire, wire, prune, et cetera, we inhale and causes a lot of respiratory issues. What's another option? Oils. Oils became another dormant spray option. Now, with junipers, oils, and we've talked about this a lot, junipers having a thin cuticle and the use of oil, oils dissolving that cuticle, oils can be very, very detrimental and damaging to junipers. So I steer clear of that. I would say lime sulfur as a dormant spray, first line of defense to eradicate scale, eradicate spider mite, and protect from disease. But what about if we have these during the growing season, right? I saw these on the trees. I saw the proliferation. I saw the disfigurement, right? And I have another one here just to show you how bad this got. Just to show you how bad this got. And let me go ahead and there you go. Okay? This is the distortion. The distortion to the degree that every single tip on this is completely distorted. This is the worst Rocky Mountain juniper. I mean thousands of scale insects on this. And the color of the entire tree, by the time I recognized what was happening, was kind of a putrid yellow. Now, this is winter color right now. So that's not really a justification, but it's an excessive degree of winter color. Now, I'm going to show you, and Lonnie, if you can just zoom in here, I'm going to show you this area right here because we should be able to, to see the white specking. Can you see that, Jesus? Okay? You see that irregular distribution of white specking right on the edges, right on the margins, right where the scales join each other, okay? That is scale insect identification. That's where we're getting that feeding. Notice how small that is. And these are the most obvious that I can find to show you on film. And there still are, although they've been eradicated, they've already done the damage. They've already compromised the tree. I won't see this recover until I get new growth next year. But they definitely are probably still active because the population was so significant. You say, I see this during the growing season. How do I handle this? Well, this is where we have to dig into our bag of tools, tricks, and understanding of our ecosystem. Are there predatory insects? Absolutely. Ladybugs love to feed on scale. Are there predatory insects? Yes. Parasitic wasps can start to take care of scale. But when we get to a population that is so, so extreme that we're seeing that kind of disfigurement and that kind of distortion, ultimately we need to start leaning on something that more rapidly allows the tree to remove this stress from acting on its system and begin the recovery process. And this is really where malathion as a contact spray does not work on scale anymore. The waxy covering is too protectant and insects are becoming resistant. Imidacloprid, bare, used to be the tool for scale. No longer does it have an impact, or at least in my garden this spring, imidacloprid had absolutely no impact on the scale. And I really had to go to what I would consider to be a fairly aggressive neonicotinoid in terms of safari as a methodology to get the chemical into the actual plant tissue and have the scale feed on that to begin to gain control. Okay? And I'm not promoting the use of chemicals. There are chemicals out there that are biologicals, like an actinivate, which I've never tried on scale, but I have students who are saying it's very, very effective. I would love to use that biology. Bacillus thurgiensis, which is basically a bacteria that attacks the exoskeleton and the interior guts of the insect and over the course of time kind of erodes the insect. There are biologicals that the insect ingests and it causes a problem in their digestive system. I want to be looking towards those modes of action, but I don't have anything that gives me immediate control that I've had experience with, so these will be experiments for next season. Currently, I had success with safari as a singular event that could knock these insects down after having failed with malathion, failed with imidacloprid. And moving forward, I think a dormant spray this year at Mirai because of this scale issue that we've seen accumulating is going to be necessary to try and get a broad-spectrum knockdown, eradicate some of the accumulating spider mite populations, which are totally foreign to the Pacific Northwest, but the changing climate is facilitating, right? And really grab hold of some of the disease and pathogens from the historically warm winters we've been having over the past three years that have allowed dothostroma and phomopsis to return, right? And we just make these decisions. We are reaching a critical mass of influences that are compromising the state of some of our trees, and now we have to take action. My action is going to be a dormant spray. We did have to take action during the growing season with alternative methods, and next season I would like to move into. With these actions that we're taking, a rebuild of the biological system, right? The beneficial insects, inoculating with ladybugs, predatory wasps. We've got great mantis population right now. And moving towards actinivate or some of these biologicals that give us a greater amount of success and a much more sustainable application methodology in the garden, right? But we do have to have multiple ways that we deal with this. In case one doesn't work, we've got another one that we can follow up with, all right? So a scale insect, not a lot to talk about, but things that we need to know. How do we identify? We see a general loss of color and a general loss of vigor. Excuse me. First and foremost, irregular distribution. Irregular distribution of a general loss of color, general loss of vigor. Irregular distribution of a distortion of growth. Irregular distribution of necrotic tips. These are your three. Any one of those, we're going to be looking for scale, right? All three of those, we can assume it's scale, okay? How do we handle that? Initially, we would love to start with a biological predatory insect, right? If that's not going to work, we may have to take further action. A dormant spray in the dormant season or we might move towards one of these systemic moved chemicals to be able to take care of a significant population until we can move to a more biological means. But one thing we do need to be aware of and the reason that I wanted to address this is because it is a growing issue and it's a growing issue I'm seeing on student trees and it's a growing issue I'm confronting as I travel the world and do bonsai. It's a growing issue that people are having a harder time eradicating and that means that we need to confront this head on and find solutions that allow us to rectify the issue, okay? Ooh, scale insects. I hope that helped. Hopefully, some of you are like, oh my gosh, that's what I've been dealing with. I had no idea or some of you are saying, I knew scale. I'm seeing these issues. I'm not seeing what I've historically identified for scale. This is an evolving new iteration of scale insects. Okay? Good luck. Good horticultural practices first and if we have to take action, you now have the ability to identify, to make choices in the actions that you take and find the ways to help your tree regain its health vigor and capacity to resist these biological issues in your garden. All right, that's it. I'm off to the bristle cones. Have a great rest of your week. Thanks for the support. Love you guys. Bye-bye. 
