What's up, Mirai Live viewers? I wanted to circle back to a question that was asked on the Q&A, and that question was, how do we secure a tree when we live in an area that has elemental influences potentially causing our trees to tip or be blown slash knocked off the bench? And this is a very fundamental aspect of bonsai that not many people really discuss or go about talking about aesthetically pleasing solutions that are functional to maintaining our tree's safety on the bench. So today we're going to really dissect how do we strategize with a tree in a tiny container the ability to secure it to the bench in a way that's both functional and beautiful. So before we talk about the actual technique, I just want to talk about potential materials that allow us to create this kind of security and anchor our trees to the bench. We have here two different types of bonsai. We have rope that we utilize at Mirai frequently to tie our trees that are susceptible to blowing or falling off of the bench down to the bench to be able to secure it. Now rope number one, and the choice that we typically tend to lean on at Mirai, is a basic braided nylon rope. Nylon rope is a really beautiful material for securing our trees to the bench because nylon rope actually has a little bit of elasticity and stretch in it. With that elasticity, we can get a really tight, secure hold on the tree to the bench and be able to tie it so that that elasticity is actually applying a significant force on the container to the bench. And it's easy to tie holding that tension in the rope so that we maintain that security even during the knotting process and that finality of tying it down. Now another rope that we frequently use at Mirai, depending on availability of the local hardware store, is a braided natural rope. Now the difference between the braided natural rope and the nylon rope is the fact that the braided natural rope does not have elasticity in the material. What this means is our tie down technique has got to be very on point to be able to get this rope to function. And during the knotting process, we've got to be a lot more aware that the rope doesn't lose the tension that's holding that tree to the bench. However it is very, very strong and does give us a good solution if we don't have nylon rope available to be able to secure our trees and prevent them from blowing off of our bench. When we talk about the two ropes together. We also need to talk about durability. Because one of the aspects of a tying a tree to a bench is that the rope is going to decompose whether it's nylon or it's an organic material over the course of time. What we found at Mirai is that the nylon tends to have a little bit more longevity than the natural fibered rope. And so we always lean on nylon if we have it available. Another thing we should consider though is the fact that when we look at the color and sort of the aesthetic of these two ropes. The nylon is definitely a lot more durable than the natural fibered rope. And so we always lean on nylon if we have it available. But the nylon is definitely a lot more durable than the natural fibered rope. And so we always lean on nylon if we have it available. But the nylon is definitely a lot more durable than the natural fibered rope. And so we always lean on nylon if we have it available. We're kind of weighing out those two things. For the past year we've been using the natural rope. It's broken so many times, we've found it's not functional. And because it was more aesthetically appealing we really wanted it to work better. But we're now firmly convinced that the nylon is going to be the best solution. So now that we understand just a brief overview of materials and sort of that function aesthetic trade off. And we've landed on a rope that's more durable than the natural fibered rope. that's more durable, we now need to start to discuss the idea of the dynamics that influence a tree's susceptibility to blowing or being knocked off the bench. And when I say being knocked off the bench, we think about the idea of people potentially bumping an unstable tree as they walk by it in the garden, dogs bumping the bench, children's balls hitting the tree, and a lot of times an excessive accumulation of rain when we have a very big dense foliage mass or snow can also take a tree off of the bench when we're least suspecting it has susceptibility to coming down. So when we start to talk about this, the biggest thing that we're looking at is the proportion of the bottom point of contact on our container to the bench in association with the asymmetry of the canopy. How far does that canopy move off of the base of that container as well as how much foliage has accumulated in that canopy. The sale effect, the accumulation of foliage mass that will catch that wind, that rain, that snow, or other elements of the canopy, will affect the tree's susceptibility to coming down. One of the elements that could potentially lead to that tree falling off the bench is a very real thing in bonsai. And because we're putting these trees in tiny containers, oftentimes gaining elegance by having a reduced footprint contacting the bench, we start to see trees develop a greater significance and susceptibility to being at risk of coming off of that bench. We're going to start with our most fundamentally stable container, a rectangular container with a contact point with the bench almost equal to the rim of the container. However, we have a tree that has a big large foliage mass asymmetrically pushed far off of the edge of the container and we have an accumulating needle mass. Now when this tree was initially worked, the needle mass was quite sparse and it didn't have a great degree of sale effect and so it was perfectly stable on the bench. As it's grown and accumulated foliar mass, we've started to notice that in the wind that foliage can catch a lot more of that wind. That wind has a greater impact on that asymmetry of the design leaning off of the edge of the container and we've seen this tree start to take on a little bit of a susceptibility to tipping. As a result, when we start to see that or even prior to seeing it, if we have any apprehension, proactivity is how we prevent damage or unforeseen things happening to our trees. If in doubt, secure a tree to your bench. Let's take a look at how we do that strategically to make sure that we guarantee our tree is safe in the garden. So knowing that we have an increasing susceptibility to the potential for this tree to be knocked off the bench, either blown off, snow load, bumping of the bench, as that asymmetry of the form starts to carry that weight away from the container and that accumulation of needles increases the sale effect. I've always wanted to tie this tree down and generally in the garden this tree is maintained tied to the bench to prevent proactively, anything negative from happening to it. Now interestingly enough with this tree, I actually had a moment where the rope had broken and it wasn't tied down and that happened to be the day that an edge of a branch caught on my sweater as I was walking by it. I pulled the tree off of the bench onto the ground, I split a branch, it didn't die, it didn't fully break off of the tree, but it was one of those moments in sort of the curation of a bonsai garden where I just had to kick myself that I had allowed that rope to become so brittle it wouldn't break, not maintain the garden correctly and because of that, because of my negligence, that tree fell off the bench and was at a great risk of being damaged. So now we go through and we check all of our ropes. Now in order to understand how to properly tie a tree down, we've got to look at the dynamics of the tree and the container combination. When we're thinking about the fact that this weight is cantilevered over the right side of the tree and moving away on the right side of the container, if I want to protect this tree from having any sort of potential opportunity to come off of the bench, I naturally need to anchor this tree on the opposite side of that big long push of foliage. If the tree is moving to the right, which this tree is, I'm going to tie down to the left side of the container. We've got varying degrees that we can actually secure this tree to the bench. Starting here is sort of the most fundamental, easiest solution to anchoring this tree so that wind and snow don't allow this tree to tip in that direction. Now when we have our rope, there's multiple ways we can use this rope depending on the aesthetic of the rope and what we deem to be visually appealing as well as functional. I'm going to start out with the most minimal method that we can utilize to tie this tree down, and then we'll show you those increasing degrees of security to be able to fend off all of the potential opportunities for damage that could present themselves in your garden. First and foremost, I need to be looking at this soil mass, the characteristics of the tree, and the shape of it. I need to be looking at the location, counter to that movement of asymmetry on this container where I can actually put a tie down around the container and have it stay so that it doesn't slip off the pot if it starts to experience that force. Now what we notice here is we've got this rounding at the corners, which means I need to have my rope inside of that rounding of the corner to be able to properly hold this tree to the bench. When I start to pick my location. Or actually cross over that soil mass, I want to be aware of any details in the container that I could potentially be damaging by the real tightening and cinching down of that anchor so that I don't detriment the aesthetic of the tree in the process of anchoring it to the bench. I have a small piece of gin here hidden underneath this moss. I don't want to break that off. That's an interesting feature that when we come back and we clean up the deadwood will be a valuable piece of the composition. I'm going to make sure that my tie down is just to the left side of that. I don't impact that. Now I'm balancing that with the idea that I also don't want to get into the rounding of this corner. Sometimes and on occasions, the container shape will cause us to have to actually lean on some of the features of the tree to go over a strong root or a really established piece of deadwood as the anchor point that holds that tie down in place so it doesn't slip off the shape of the container. In this instance, this location right over this solid piece of deadwood. It would also be a good decision in terms of getting a really tight tie down so that the rope doesn't move off the container. However, if I can avoid it, I always want to keep elements off of the deadwood and off of the live vein so that I don't cause premature accumulation of moss or algae and so that I don't see that color differentiation that the covering of that rope over that bark, over that live vein, or over that deadwood will cause over the course of time sheltering it from the same activity of weathering from rain, from UV. That's a good decision. The rest of the deadwood, the live vein, or the bark is going to have. In this instance, because I've got a rectangular straight face to this container, I can get outside of those details while still having a perfectly straight line in my tie down. I can cinch this down to the container without hitting this rounded corner. I'm going to go ahead and place my tie down right at this location just past this little detail. Now, when I tie down, I've got to make sure that all of my lines are completely and totally straight. Notice how when I have a diagonal here, just by pulling that straight, it loosens up my tie down. We've got to be accurate and detail-oriented in terms of finding that straight line, making sure as it crosses that soil line it's straight, and as this rope comes up the bottom of the bench, we're at the same point on this backside of the container as we are on the front side. If we miss this in any way, if this has an angle to it. If this is curved across the soil surface, you've automatically put slack into the system by not creating the shortest possible distance of tie down that is capable of anchoring this tree. Over the course of elements acting on it, it will find that slack and create susceptibility to coming off of the bench. Now, when we tie this down, we're saying this is sort of that initial first degree of tie down. Say, for example, we have a big thick rope like we're using here, we may only choose one loop. We may choose one loop around the container to the bench to tie this down. One loop around the container and the bench doesn't allow us to get the most secure tie down possible, whether we're using nylon or a natural fiber rope. Two loops around the container actually gives us a stronger hold. Sometimes we end up, length of rope, size of rope, that it's more preferable to just do one loop for the aesthetic or because that's the limitation of material that we have. We can still get a solid tie down. Sometimes we make sure to perform the knot activity with a really precise technique. I'm going to show you the formation of the knot and the action that we take just so that we make sure we understand how to execute a single loop around the container. Now, when I've got my two ends, I always want to try and tie my knot in a location that's least visible to the viewer viewing the front of our tree. This is just general bone side principles, but also in terms of curation of a garden, creating an experience for people to view the trees. It's always best to hide those big, cumbersome portions of work. I'm going to pick this lower corner, and this knotting activity needs to be focused on a corner. I could focus it on the rim of the container, or I could focus it on the corner of the bench. I'm going to focus it on the corner of the bench to make it least visible. I've got two ends of my rope, and I'm going to start this process by really applying a lot of tension to one end first, and then tension to the other end second. You'll notice that the tension is going to be a little bit higher than the other end. You'll notice as I apply tension to this nylon rope, we see it stretch with that elasticity. This is what really anchors that in place. Now I'm going to hold that tension with my thumb and just cross that rope over. I'm going to come up behind this rope, and I'm going to wrap that rope underneath so that I've got that full twist. I'm going to find that space between the rope and the bench, and I'm going to pull it down into that tension. What you'll notice is at that point, when I release both pieces of rope, I'm going to hold that tension because the tension is actually sandwiching that tip of the rope in location and holding that anchor. We know over the course of time, this is definitely going to loosen up as we continue to have forces act on this tree. The way that we secure this knot is, again, crossing over, coming back under, and with a nice clean loop, just pulling that nice and tight right there, maybe balancing out the length of the loop to the tail of the rope. Now we've got a secure tie down that will not come undone over the course of time. I can come back in, prune the tip of that rope to the same length, maybe clean up any ends that are starting to be frayed, and now I have a very simple, clean, aesthetically pleasing tie down that's going to secure this tree so that it cannot blow off of the bench. The beautiful thing about this knot is in the tie down strategy. We never want to have this be so cumbersome to remove that we don't want to move the tree or we don't want to undo it. Simply by pulling that knot and undoing that piece, this knot is now free and we can move that container. Okay, let's take a look at how we tie that knot again to get the best possible tie down with a single loop around the container. First and foremost, I'm going to apply tension to one of the ropes. Second, I'm going to apply tension to the second rope and I'm going to hold that point with tension in both ropes. Third, I'm going to wrap around that first rope and pull it down right to the corner where that tension is maintained and now I give myself the ability to be hands free. Finally, I'm going to cross over the front, bring that loop around the back and I'm going to pull that tight, gauging that length of loop to be equivalent to the tail so now we have a system that will not lose tension over the course of time. Now we've seen that sort of stage one, most minimal approach with the single wrap around the container. We've tried that anchor or tie down to keep our tree from blowing over or being knocked off the bench. Let's see what that next step looks like to get an even more secure tie down over a longer course of time to maintain that connection for the tree to the stand or the surface that it's sitting on. Now in this instance, I'm actually going to take two loops around the container. I'm going to double up the tension that I'm applying force to the tree with and it's going to be able to give more elasticity and tension on the pole between the two ropes. But the bigger point is when I go back and knot it with those two ropes as opposed to one, I'm going to hold the greatest amount of tension in the system and make sure that no slack enters. Now this being a small tree, one turn around the tree is probably plenty to be able to hold the tree from blowing over with that cantilevered weight. But the bigger a tree gets, the more turns around the container we're going to want. And so understanding how we execute this correctly, both in terms of locating those turns as well as tying them in, is an important technique we need to have in our arsenal of tools. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to just follow that same path. I feel like our strategy on the path was very accurate. But this time, because I've got to have room for two ropes, I need to make sure that all of the I's are dotted and T's are crossed to give us the best possible tie down. And this is where we may need to, when we start increasing the width of this tie down space, depending on the shape of the container, we may need to reconsider. Where we locate our rope. I feel like with this rectangular container in that rounded corner, we have plenty of space. But one of the things that I want to really make sure of is that I have these ropes straight in the same consideration as the single loop. And I also want to make sure that I avoid these crossovers here so that the ropes are parallel through the entire system. This is both aesthetically pleasing as well as a functionally important aspect of using multiple turns around the container to anchor it to the bend. If I cross over, when I start applying that tension, that crossover pins the underside of the rope and it can't stretch and take up the slack and we start to decrease the function of that hold down. So I'm always going to come back and check and just make sure that these ropes are always paralleling themselves across the surface, down the face, underneath this bottom side of the bench as well, so that all of our ropes have independent mobility when I come back to apply that tension. Now, the same technique applies here with two turns as it did to one. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to first apply a significant amount of tension to this first rope. And you can see how that tension stretches that rope out. You get that elasticity. Now I'm going to take this bottom piece and I'm actually going to go ahead and I'm going to start to get that tension and elasticity placed onto the rope by relieving it from this corner and really getting this to stretch across the surface. Now when I get to the back. I'm going to give that another good hold, another good tug, another good hold, another good tug. And I've got my two ropes here on the backside. Just the same, I'm going to come over the front of both ropes this time. I'm going to pull down into that bottom corner to pinch those ropes between that point on that corner. And this corner is what allows us to really lock in that tension that we've created in these two ropes. And then I'm going to use the same action. I'm folding over, coming back under, and tightening up that rope so that I have no potential possibility of slack entering this system over the course of time. I can gauge that length of the loop, make sure that I find that to be attractive, come back, trim my tails to the same length, and now we see a beautiful functional double rope tie down with absolutely no possibility of moving that tree or having the wind carry it off of the bench. Now that we've properly learned how to anchor our tree, we've got to ask ourselves, is our concern this directional susceptibility? Or is our concern the fact that maybe our environment is so windy, we've got snow, we've got kids, we've got dogs, that we need to actually secure both sides of this container to make sure that no matter what direction the wind comes from or what element is acting on our tree, it's not coming off of the bench. We can apply the exact same strategy that we applied on this side of the container to this side of the container, making sure we locate our tie down at a point where it's not going to slip off of the edge of the container, making sure it crosses over the root system at a point that benefits the tree, doesn't harm or detriment the aesthetics, make sure that it stays really nice and tight and snug on that container, straight lines, accurate execution of the knot. Let's just take a look at that so that we make sure we create the most solid stable system. This would be sort of that third tier of tie down to really ensure that this tree is not going to move. And just for the sake of rope utilization, I'm only going to use the single rope for this. But we could double this up and just make sure. This is literally bomb proof on this bench. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to place my rope over the edge of the container. Now I've got a completely different set of considerations on this side of the root mass. Notice that this root mass is sloping towards the edge of the container. Now I know I need to stay away from that rounded corner of the rectangle. So I might choose to go ahead and get to a point in this soil surface where I'm actually above that slope. So that when I apply that tension, my rope doesn't slide. It's going to slide down that soil surface. I find this level point. I make sure that my rope is nice and straight to have that shortest possible distance. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to apply that tension on the surface. I'm going to apply that tension on the bottom. I'm going to use that bottom corner, cross over that rope, pin that tension to that bottom corner. Now hands free, the tension is held in the rope. Over the top underneath that loop, go ahead and take a little bit of that slack out. And we've got a second tie down. And I mean literally, it would take some magical feat of nature, lightning, fire, razor sharp blades cutting through this for this tree to come off of this bench when we tie it down on both sides. And we could even up this again with another loop. So when we look at this, we've got these degrees, that single rope, that double rope, the addition of a single or double rope to make sure that there is no susceptibility. But this is a very clean action. All right. So this is an easy to execute, easy to undo, easy to replace. That's going to make sure your tree stays on that bench and doesn't come off to the detriment of the tree. So, now that we've seen how to tie down a very simple rectangular or square container, a container that has edges, we now need to dig into the more complex strategy around how do we handle securing a tree in a round container. Now, this tree epitomizes the ultimate instability in a tree on one of our benches. It's a very slender limber pine. That slenderness in the trunk is complemented by this extreme angle in the wall of the container, and we have a very narrow point of contact with the surface that it's sitting on compared to the rim of the container and that cantilevered weight of the foyer mass. Consequently, if you just breathe on this tree, a light gust of wind, a small dousing of rain or snow will absolutely tip this over. Now, some people might say, well, you shouldn't put a tree in a pot like that if it's that unstable. I have no doubt. I mean, it's very clear that it sits by itself. It could stand in an exhibition, and the aesthetic of this container is such a big part of the bonsai execution. So when we start to look at this, in order to be able to facilitate this kind of aesthetic and take advantage of this elegant tree mimicking that in the containerized form, we have to have the technique to be able to secure this on our benches for the longevity of the composition. Now, when we talk about the round container, obviously the biggest limitation is that this round edge to the container. It causes any exerted force on that tie down to slip off. Let's just take a look at what would happen if we tried to tie this down to the edge of this bench, and as we apply tension, we see that just sliding off of the edge of that container. Well, how then do we get this thing anchored so that it doesn't tip over with this cantilevered foliage mass and all of the elements that are taking place inside this tree? This is where we've got to do a double wrap around the container, but they have to span both sides of the root system to be able to secure the tree on both sides of the container. And in between that, we've got to centralize the force on the back rim, centralize the force on the front rim, so that we have the ropes pulling opposing each other, holding them in that location and giving us that downward anchor to the surface that it sits on. Let's just take a look. This rope is going to take a minute. It's a little bit cumbersome, but let's take a look at that strategy and how we execute this to maximize this tree's ability to be placed in this container and anchored to the bench. Okay, now first and foremost, I just want to get the length of rope that allows me to go around this tree two times. So I'm just going to sort of arbitrarily find that length of rope that allows me to get that distance around the tree. Now I know I'm not going to. I'm not going to cross over the bark or the root or anything like that. And even in measuring the distance, I want to be sure that I don't damage the features and characteristics of this tree. Now once I feel like I've gotten a good sort of sum of rope, a good idea of how long that's going to be, I'm going to give myself just a little bit more so I've got some wiggle room in terms of this system. Now I've got this isolated length of rope that gives me the capacity to tie down two loops on both sides of the container. I'm going to fold this rope in half. And create a singular loop, sort of that midpoint in the rope. Okay? I'm going to place that midpoint of that rope at the back rim of the container, hiding our work as much as we can so that we don't have to look at where this tie down is going to take place. I'm going to take these pieces of rope that are going to tie this surface down, and I'm going to make sure that they're placed on a point in the surface of this tree where they're not detrimenting the features. It's the same as we did with the rope. It's the same as we discussed prior. This is where we start to enter that realm of creating the technique or the strategy to get these ropes to stay where we want them to stay on the round container. I'm going to rotate and twist right at the front rim of that container so that when I apply tension to these ropes, they can't independently slide off of that round lip. Really nice, simple twist. One twist is enough as long as we keep those ropes functioning independently. Okay? I'm going to keep those ropes parallel to each other as they go down this surface of the bench and make sure that they stay parallel so that that twist doesn't leave that system. On the backside here, I'm actually going to utilize that loop that I've created to be able to be that point where I can suck down that tension on that rope and really get that elasticity. I've got it continually referenced. Notice how we've been twisted up here. I want to make sure that I don't have those ropes twisted and I just have that crossing point. I may need to change a little bit just to pull this back piece up so that I can get that elastic hold, which means I'm going to have to change that location for the twist up in these ropes here. Kind of fudging with the system, but really using that front face. If this continues to come unraveled, by all means. We can create a new system. Another twist just by changing that overlap of the ropes so that those don't shift. Now, let's shift to the backside and see how we execute this. Straight lines located where we need them to be across the soil surface in places where they can't slide and get slack. Straight line here. Twist to make sure they're pulling in opposite directions. I'm going to go ahead and use these two ropes to apply this downward force and gain that elasticity. Watch how these stretch through here. Get that beautiful stretch. Now we start to see that that tree is not going to be able to move, not going to be able to go anywhere. Now, notice that these ropes right here, these are not yet stretched out or elastic. I'm going to hold that stretch there and I'm just going to crank on this bottom piece here and slowly cinch that down. As I pull in, I go ahead and eat up that space and now we start to see those gaining that tension. Okay? Now, in order to secure this, we're still going to use the corner of this bench. I'm actually going to take both sides of my rope. I'm going to find a slight degree of tension under this bench. Get that cranked down and I'm going to pull back to that corner. Now I'm hands free. I've again used that corner to stabilize that rope. I'm going to take one of my pieces of rope over the top here. Formulate that stretch. Formulate that same loop over, under, and around. Now we have a very stable scenario where this tree is going nowhere against the elements that are going to be acting on it to potentially knock it off the bench. Let's take a look at that tie-down methodology again just so that we're very clear on how this system actually acquires the kind of tension that we're struggling with. Okay. Let's take a look at that tie-down methodology again just so that we're very clear on how this system actually acquires the kind of tension that we're struggling with. Okay. Let's take a look at that tie-down methodology again just so that we're very clear on how this system actually acquires the kind of tension that we're struggling with. Okay. Let's take a look at that tie-down methodology again just so that we're very clear on how this system actually acquires the kind of tension that we're struggling with. Okay. Let's take a look at that tie-down methodology again just so that we're very clear on how this system actually acquires the kind of tension that we're struggling with. Okay. Let's take a look at that tie-down methodology again just so that we're very clear on how this system actually acquires the kind of tension that we're struggling with. Okay. Let's take a look at that tie-down methodology again just so that we're very clear on how stretches this backside still has some open availability of tension. I'm going to pull here and I'm literally stretching here and then eating up that excess slack. Okay now I can do this multiple times just to make sure I've gotten all slack out of the system. Now I've got tension and elasticity on my backside I can feel I've got tension and elasticity on the front side. Now while I'm maintaining this tension along this straight line underneath this bench I'm going to be able to find a little bit of slack and space. I'm going to cross over that wire and utilize that pinch point on the corner of the bench to secure my two pieces. Now in order to get these to fully tie off I'm going to cross over with one piece again pull down into that corner and now form that loop over under and pulled through to create that nice space. Beautiful tie off that will hold tension and not allow this tree to move. So as with anything knots are a monster right and sometimes one tie down method can work for one individual another tie down method is a lot more intuitive physically capable easier or more executable by another person. So I'm going to show you a second tie down method to this round container securing and tie down to the bench. Now all things stay the same this twist of our ropes this parallel straight lines where they're located over the surface but I want to shift to the backside of the pot and I want to show you another piece of methodology to be able to execute a secure tie down once we get to the point of applying tension to the system. So I'm going to release this system go ahead and give it some slack you'll see this release here I've got a slack in the system back here. Now I'm going to take one of my two ropes we have this elbow here. We fed both ropes through this elbow in the in in sort of the option one for tie down. In option two I'm only going to feed one of the ropes through the elbow. Okay I'm going to use that one rope to acquire the tension watch the tension in the back increase. So step one is applying tension with this singular rope on the elbow that tightens and gives me elasticity in the back of this. Step two is applying tension to this singular rope which gives me a lot more tension on the front side of this. Now I'm going to bring this rope down straight so that I can carry this secondary rope that has the tension from the front side of the container and lock that in on that elbow. When I release we see that tension is held in that whole system. Using that same rope I'm going to cross over I'm going to bring my loop back under and I'm going to tension that knot so that there's no possible way that this tree loses that snug secure anchor to the bench. I can come back finish off my tips and now we have an aesthetically functionally beautiful anchor to our bench. And again I've got that nice secure tie down where this tree is not going to move. Now let's talk about the pros and cons of the two tie down methods. Tie down method number one had two ropes that had the exact same tension on them moving through the elbow secured underneath the bench on the corner. This is the most secure way to utilize this round container tie down method. However it also is a lot more complex to find that space in the rope on the underside of the bench and it's a little bit awkward in the way that we secure that tension on this backside on the corner. Type two when we divide the ropes in half there are less steps but we put a lot more force on that singular rope grabbing that elbow on the back and so we started little bit of a loss of longevity in the securing of this tree. Both will give you a solid anchor, a solid tie down. We do have some sacrifice of longevity for the gain of ease in the type 2 tie down method. Either one is going to give you the kind of anchoring that you're looking for. Now with this round pot we can look at how either way we try to move this there's no possible way that this tree is coming off of the bench. We've been able to tackle a rectangular pot. We've seen how we can anchor one side with a loop, use two loops to provide further strength, anchor both sides of the pot to make it bomb proof, and now we've seen how we secure those ropes so that they can't follow this rounded rim and come undone. Provide two different methods for the knotting of this round container securing. You guys have all the tools you need to secure your trees regardless of the shape of the container or the issues that we could encounter in the structure or the details of the tree. This is exactly what you need to know to protect and proactively prevent your trees from somehow mysteriously falling off of the bench. Good luck, secure your trees well, and happy bonsaing! 
