Particle size is one of the most important tools that we have to customize the containerized environment for the horticultural cultivation of our bonsai and having a concise understanding of particle size that allows us to accommodate any root situation of any species to accommodate and really cater to the needs of that tree is an absolute necessity of the bonsai practice. Now I wanted to come back to the whiteboard just to solidify these figures of particle sizes and how they overlap from the imperial to the metric and talk about their functions seeing the nuanced diversity that we can accomplish through the professional sifting screen set. Now to understand let's just draw our. You know our our calibrated mind to the way that the inches and millimeters overlap okay we say the aeration half inch to quarter inch standard imperial empirical system we see that reflected in twelve millimeter being the equivalent of one half inch and six millimeter being close but slightly smaller than the one quarter inch totally okay gives us a great diversity and actually gets our aeration slightly closer to the particle size of our interior which helps water mobility move much better through the soil system. Now we say in the empirical one-quarter to one-sixteenth is interior that one-eighth inches is what we can utilize to pull out the finer particles or pull out the quarter for showing one-eighth to one-sixteenth we see six millimeters slightly smaller than a quarter four millimeters slightly larger than an eighth three millimeters slightly smaller than an eighth and two millimeters slightly larger than one-sixteenth okay so that allows you to calibrate now I love that two millimeter being slightly larger than one-sixteenth because I would like to take a little bit. More of the fine soil out and this is where I feel like one-sixteenth is a little bit too small of a screen size. Now it's such a challenge to try and move between millimeters and inches when we start to talk about the screen sizes that give rise to our particle science in the bonsai container and so we just wanted to break down the fundamental tools that we've utilized to date to help us with that. So we have a visual reference that then connects to this next evolution of particle size and the utilization in the containerized environment. Now we know our aeration layer in Mirai knowledge quarter-inch is the backbone of that concept of aeration quarter-inch to half-inch is our range and that is what we use at the bottom of our containerized environment still to this day quarter-inch is our reference we've used the one-eighth inch as that stop gap measure to pull out finer particles open up oxygen space and have that one-eighth inch to one-quarter inch be that more oxygen rich cultivation environment for interior root development inside of the bonsai container and that's really where we see the one-eighth inch start to play into our bonsai cultivation strategies and tactics. Trees that need a health improvement trees that need a better balance of water and oxygen larger trees and larger containers. Where we want to decrease the amount of moisture being held or trees that have low water mobility low water needs more oxygen rich environments to strike that balance of ultimate health the one-eighth inch screen has become our standard reference. Over the course of the past ten years at Mirai we've been kind of trying to figure out how do we find something that we can replace the one-sixteenth screen with. To really have a little bit more control but not go up to a particle size as large as one-eighth and lose some of that moisture retention surface area for nutrient holding capacity and not increase the oxygen spaces to a size that really only caters and customizes to our driest species and our largest trees. However we still do utilize the one-sixteenth as a reference to base our knowledge on it still is effective and that is what forms the base of our sifting screen set. And this is where we step into the metric system and we have a more nuanced control. Now I'm going to start with the biggest screen of the professional system. Sifting set the six millimeter screen. Six millimeters is slightly smaller than our one-quarter inch screen. What does that mean? It means that our aeration layer when we use the metric system is going to have a slightly closer proximity to the particle size of the interior layer in our containerized environment. Is that good? Is that bad? It's going to be a nuanced shift that's going to help water move freely through the containerized environment and still provide that oxygen space we're looking for in that aeration layer. When we get into the professional sifting screen set and we look at that next screen down we're talking about the four millimeter screen. Now the four millimeter screen is a really nice screen because it's just slightly larger than one-eighth. What that means is is we do have the ability to really refine the size of the oxygen spaces between particles in that interior soil column and have the capacity to open up a fresh, further degree of oxygen space for those trees that really need it, for those extra-large trees and to just have that nuanced control. Three millimeter being just slightly smaller than the one-eighth gives us that nuanced control for trees that need more oxygen, less surface area and moisture retention to increase that balance of water and oxygen. That gives us ultimate health. I've really become a tremendous fan of the metric system for the two millimeter screen specifically as a new reference for the particle size that I really like to lean on, especially in my smaller trees, medium-sized trees, to hit that balance of water and oxygen and really cultivate that ultimate health. This rounds out the new professional sifting screen set and I think this is a tremendous improvement with the diversity of what we have to nuance the containerized environment and really maximize our ability to refine while cultivating the best health in the tree over the course of time in that reduced soil column and that gravity impact of the bonsai container. Now, the best part of the professional soil screen set is the ability to adapt to the current situation that you are in. We can use one of these screens on the fly as we're repotting to remove a particle size, to increase the particle size, to rapidly change what we're putting into the containerized environment. We can stack two of them together and utilize that in a freehand way, or we can pull in the base and we can utilize the base to really take the weight and the effort off of our hands. We're maximizing the rollers, maximizing the handles, and having the capacity to stack any number of screens, unlimited, to be able to stratify your soil system and customize your particle size. It truly is the next level of innovation in the particle size system for our repotting and containerized environment and we're super proud to be offering you this diversity to be able to refine your approach and maximize the health of your trees. Now, as you can see, our quarter eighth and sixteenth still applies and still has a very significant front end. It's not just a function in terms of our soil sifting and particle size considerations, but this next nuanced level of the professional sifting screen set allows us to customize and nuance our particle size to truly maximize and meet our tree where it's at. You have all of the tools, you have all of the knowledge, and now you understand how the Imperial system meets the metric system in allowing you to select the particle sizes that are going to maximize your tree's health. Whether we're talking about sifting bulk soil or nuanced particle sizes, we have every single tool to meet your needs. Check out goods.bones.com. I'm rye.com and get your sifter today. 
