In order to understand how we control boars we've got to understand their life cycle and when they go about that process of laying those pesky little larvae that feed on the living tissue. Now obviously as the tree is expending its energy to create solar panels we're not getting a lot of payback for an insect to feed on but once those solar panels start to photosynthesize that sugar starch production is exactly what any sucking insect or feeding insect wants to consume and boars are no different. We see the adults exit the tree right around that sort of early to mid spring in the northern hemisphere may and june the two most prominent months for boars to fly after the solar panels have been produced and as sugars and starches are returning they lay their eggs and craggly portions of the bark and deadwood eggs hatch larvae bore down into the cambial layer where that nutrition is rich and being paid back to all of the different areas of the tree and we've got to stop that. We've got to stop that proliferation and that reproduction if we ever stand a chance of protecting our trees and this is where the sticky trap is our very best friend. Now our sticky traps start with that rigid plastic of the appropriate color but we need a few more things. We need a strong adhesive. Sticky stuff coating is the one that has risen to the top as the best for trapping boars. We need something to hold that and for us a wood dowel dictates and allows us to manipulate the height and have control over how those boars are going to live. We need something to hold the trap on that dowel. We've found recycled nursery containers filled with gravel is just the ticket. Mobile, light, easy and strong enough to hold those pieces at the correct height where we want the sticky traps to exist. Production of our sticky traps starts with heating up that adhesive to make it more malleable and easy to utilize. While it's heating up in hot water we adhere those plastic cards, glue them onto that wood dowel using hot glue. After that's adhered and dried we come back, we spread that adhesive over the surface of that card. We take that dowel, we put it into the nursery can, fill it with gravel and now you've got a functional sticky trap ready to trap those beetles. I like to put all of the colors of the sticky trap in singular locations to observe how many areas of the sticky trap have been trapped. I like to put all of the colors of the sticky trap in singular locations to observe how many insects and of what variety of borer those sticky traps are attracting. Bear in mind different colors attract different beetles. We like to locate those traps right at the height of the foliar mass which is where the height of the dowel comes in handy and gives us some flexibility. And we're going to start just prior to flight in the middle of April and we're going to end just after flight ends towards the middle to end of June to be able to give ourselves the widest span of time to trap those bores and observe their population. In our garden you understand the steps to create them now it's time to go about that process of taking care of your trees on that next level. Good luck! Let us know how it goes and enjoy being relieved of the burden of the mysterious bore impacting your trees any longer. Happy cultivation! Closed Captioning by Kris Brandhagen. brandhagen.com 
