What's going on guys? Super Tuesday? Yes, we made it. Another week. One day at a time right now. One day at a time. Super excited to be here with you guys tonight covering some what I would consider to be some rather exciting and I also think long overdue knowledge this evening for you guys to be able to apply to your bonsai practice. Summer watering, its shift in mentality from application of watering in the spring which we covered several streams ago as well as how that summer watering kind of rolls into the process of grafting and you know finally way overdue in terms of its presentation to the bonsai community as a very major what I would consider to be fundamental technique approach grafting to change out foliage, improve shape and open the door to make trees better. So very exciting evening for us. We're super excited to have you guys in the studio. For all our tier one members, welcome you guys. Love to have you guys live with us and enjoying the techniques and what we're sharing with you. For all our tier two mastery members, this is going to be one that you're going to want to go back to again and again in the archive and be able to access that knowledge that we're going to be giving you guys about watering and about the technique of approach grafting particularly as it applies to juniper. at this time of year. For all of our tier three members, the innovators, we've got some super sweet tertiary footage. Ricardo went above and beyond this week to give you guys knowledge about watering and the application thought process. Things that I go through as I'm taking care of this massive garden of trees with all the trees having differing needs. If you guys have any questions about watering or you want to refine your watering knowledge, tier three members, that tertiary content is going to be absolutely on point for you guys. To further advance how you guys practice your watering over the course of summer. So, in studio tonight, we've got Ricardo on the detail cam. Miss Kendall with us behind the keyboard. Hello. We've got Arthur on the switcher as always. Hello everyone. And we've got Mr. Lime behind the sound making sure we all sound buttery smooth. Without further ado, Kendall, do we have anything we need to lay down for everybody? I don't think so. No? I think the streams have been going pretty smooth. Just to remind everyone on the chat, I'm going to prioritize questions that are relevant. To the stream. But I'll do my best to answer everybody. Cool. Cool. And for you guys, last week, we did not have an impromptu Q&A. This week, we're going to be pumping out an impromptu Q&A. Tuesday, 10 a.m. What's that? Tuesday? I'm sorry. Thursday, 10 a.m. Thursday, 10 a.m. Bear with me. Bear with me. Tuesday and it's already been a long week. Thursday, 10 a.m. Come in. Come with your questions. Come ready to get some knowledge. And see if we can't help you guys advance and answer some of those things that are causing you problems in your garden. We're good to go? Yeah. All right. Let's take off. Okay. So without further ado, let's get this summer watering business addressed so that we can get kind of to the fun at hand this evening. Summer watering, very, very pivotal time to be watering our bonsai trees. Now, when we talked about watering in the spring, we discussed water as a vehicle to move heat through the system. There's no season that we see this being more applicable than right now. So we're saying, listen, 85% of water functions as a vehicle for air conditioning. Air conditioning in terms of that movement of water through the system because that tree can't seek shade, can't get out of the heat, it's got to be able to move heat through its system. Water moving through binds to that heat energy inside of the vascular system, carries it out to the mechanism that's shedding that water, which is the foliar mass through its stomata, evapotransmitters. So we see this system work very, very well at this time of year if we have a tree that has ultimate health. Okay. Now, this is also one of those times a year where we start to see problems that could be arising as a result of a potentially impacted root system where the uptake of that moisture is not happening at near the rate we need it to. This is where we would see potentially root-related issues from repotting, where we would see potential issues as a result of over-aggressive foliar reduction. Those things start to show themselves by that lack of movement of water. And we would see that lack of movement of water in the container if the container is failing to dry out, even though we have warmer conditions. Okay. Now, if we're saying 85% of water is air conditioning, we have that other 15% that we would say goes towards, and we're not saying that the tree is done metabolizing, but we say that goes towards metabolic. Metabolic. That is definitely misspelled. Activity. Okay. When we say we're losing this 15% of water utilization, what that is to say is all of that new soft growth that was expanding, elongating, and did not have any protection from excessive moisture loss over the spring season is now forming that cuticle. It's starting to shut down that aggressive loss of water. It has that layer that's protecting that rapid loss. And so, we start to see that tree get back into that energy-positive photostimulation by the formation of that cuticle. Well, that formation of the cuticle stopping that rapid water loss also allows us to somewhat decrease our water utilization. And a lot of times, if environmental conditions are such, we will see summer watering actually drop in terms of the utilization of water compared to the spring season. Now, there are obviously a lot of exceptions to this. One of the big things that we discuss, RH, relative humidity. As a major factor that will be either decreasing the loss of water or, if we lack that relative humidity, increasing the loss of water or the movement of water for air conditioning. Okay. So, in Japan, over the course of the summer season, we would actually be pulling back significantly on the water. Containers not drying out as much because the relative humidity is very high. The trees go into their summer dormancy. And they're not adding any more new growth at that point in the season. Now, if you guys live in Colorado. You live in Nevada. You live in California where you guys have a very low relative humidity through the summer. You may not see a tremendous change in the amount of moisture that's being used by your tree. You just might need to realize that that moisture is being used specifically for cooling at this time of year and less for the addition of that new growth. Okay. So, knowing that and knowing that we could have some shifting quantities of water that are being taken in through the tree. We've got to understand how. We've got to understand how we kind of work inside of that to be able to maintain that appropriate balance. And we say balance of water and oxygen. Okay. And I call this the pendulum theory. Anybody who studies at Mirai and the defining concepts courses will know the pendulum theory well. Right. And this is to say that when we start talking about bonsai, we either have too wet or we have too dry. And these are the far extremes. Now, a lot of times what happens is if I go to a client's home and I say you're not watering enough and they were watering once a day, they may start watering four times a day. Right. That would be a swing of the pendulum from too dry to too wet. Okay. And then you go and you say, gosh, you're watering too much. And they were watering two times a day and they start watering once every three days. That would be a swing of the pendulum from too wet to too dry. Now, the sweet spot for ultimate health, that balance of water and oxygen is going to stay very close to this center line, which would be perfection right here. Right. That perfect balance for that tree and that container in that environment. And what we're saying is now at this time of year where we're using a little bit less water and the water's utilization is simply for cooling. When we come to a tree on a daily basis, if every time we come to that tree and that tree is still wet and we water it because we've got to take off for the day, we know that we could be potentially keeping that too wet. So, we know if we come back at a time where we may have a little bit more capacity to invest in allowing that tree to dry out, we let that tree get a little bit drier and then we choose to water to bring that back to center, striking that balance of water and oxygen. If we can stay right inside this range, we almost inevitably can give our trees that perfect balance or at least close enough to it that we're going to be able to maintain a stellar bonsai moving forward with a lot of momentum, giving us that great balance of growth and ability to continue to develop it. Okay? Eric has a question about just what is the best way to make sure that you're letting your pot dry out enough? Are there signs that you look for? Yeah. So, I think that it is a discussion similar to the spring when we talk about foliar mass, right? How much foliage is losing water? How much additional foliage was added that year? What is the reservoir or the container size? Is there still growth occurring? Are we adding that extra 15%? What is the species and its tolerance? And then once we get through all of those, what is the weather? Do we have a high relative humidity? Do we have high temperatures? Do we have intense sun? Do we have intense wind? Do we have rainfall happening on a regular basis? When we take all of those into account and we say, listen, I've got a large foliage mass, healthy tree, small reservoir. It's a species that has a very fine root system and loves moisture. I've got a minimal amount of humidity. I've got high temperatures. I've got high temperatures and I've got wind. When that tree right there, when you look at that soil surface and you say, are you wet or are you dry? Whether it's, if it's damp or it's dry, I'm going to water that tree. Knowing that all of the systems and all of the factors that would be moving water out of that are functioning against it maintaining itself with that reservoir of water. So, when people start to say, how do you make that decision? I'm looking at the foliar mass. I'm looking at the growth. I'm looking at the container. I'm looking at the species. I'm looking at the conditions in the environment. And then I look at the soil. And we're going to take you guys through that process of analysis of water in a few of these tertiary clips coming up. Before we do that, do we have any more questions about water? Yeah. Bishop was wondering if there's a good range for relative humidity. I mean, it's tough to say, right? In Japan, we would be sitting right around that 70 to 85% mark in the summertime with temperatures in the high 90s or 38, 40, 42 degrees Celsius. And so, that percentage at that temperature meant the trees shut down. In the Pacific Northwest where we're at, we function in the 75 to high 80s, low 90s. Very rarely do the trees actually take a super full summer dormancy here. We also have relative humidity in the 30, 35% range. If you go to Denver, Colorado, you're talking about relative humidity, single digits or low teens, high 90s, low 100s during the summertime. And each of those in the summer time, those environments create a different watering need. So, for Denver or Colorado or that kind of low relative humidity and high temperature, you're going to be actually increasing your water compared to the spring. For us in the Pacific Northwest, a lot of our trees are backing off just slightly. So, we're letting them sit with that dampness longer than we would have in the spring. In Japan, it was a definitive backing off with that high relative humidity where when they were sitting with that 70, 85% at 90 degrees of temperature, they would be watering them once a day or even every other day for some of the trees in Mr. Kimura's garden. And he was very insistent on that accuracy of watering because if we accumulate too much water in the container and we get that abundance of heat raising that temperature, that over accumulation of water can boil the roots or it can break down the organic content of the roots and that's when we get an entry point for root rot. Okay, one last question. Cruz is wondering if you can water in the middle of the day with the sun beating down. Cruz is under the impression that for some reason he thought that you should only water in the morning or at night. Yeah, I think you absolutely can and I think you also should water in the middle of the day if the tree needs the water, right? Now, Peter Warren talked last week about watering the exterior container of the azalea to cool down the temperatures. There are places in the United States or places in Australia or the southern hemisphere or closer to the equator where the intensity of light is so great that people will coat their containers in tin foil to deflect the intensity of the sun and decrease the temperature. But the fundamental fact of the matter is watering while a container is warm is not a bad thing if the tree needs that water to continue cooling itself. It would be more detrimental to hold back on water at that point in time where there's heat and the tree needs that water and not give it to them than it would be to give it to them when they need it even though that container is warm. Okay, so those are the kinds of things that we've heard and we've got to process through and understand. We've got to understand the mechanism for the tree to cool itself and that is that moisture uptake, transpiration through the foliage mass. So we've prepared a couple of tertiary clips for you guys to check out on the stream tonight where I walk you through the theory, talk to you guys about summer watering. Have a look at these. When we come back, we're going to be up in the studio. We're going to dive into grafting. But we can come back to watering and just answer some of those lingering questions before we jump into design, all right? Check them out. We'll catch you guys up top. So summer watering is a fairly significant shift or there needs to be a fairly significant shift in the way that we consider summer watering as opposed to that big massive influx of growth that we experience in the spring and how that growth is handled. Now obviously, that big push of stored sugars and starches in the tree that's occurring from that vascular system, the root system, and the branches into that production of new photosynthetic mass in the spring is a massive mechanism for water driving all of the transport via that new foliar mass transpiring very rapidly because it lacks that cuticle and is expanding and cellular division is taking place at a very rapid pace. But when we get into the summer season, we've hit the peak of the length in the day. We're starting to hit maximum temperatures. The tree, as an entire unit of energy, is now at a neutral or slight energy positive, right? It's no longer as favorable for the tree to be producing new photosynthetic mass. But because of that rapid rate of transpiration via that heat, via that prolonged daylight length, this is when trees typically step back and take a moment off to go into a second phase of dormancy, winter being first, summer being second, and allow the tree just to photosynthesize, cool itself via the process of transpiration, but stop that addition of either new vascular tissue or new photosynthetic mass. So during this piece of time over the summer season where that tree is taking time off from growth, we have to respond in kind with the way that we handle the watering, right? And what this means is we don't want to be watering as aggressively because the tree isn't producing that foliar growth, because the tree is simply using that water to cool itself. We want to be allowing the tree to gain a little bit more oxygen in its system, keep the water content in the container at a moderate level so that we don't accumulate heat in the water in the container, and continue to deliver the kind of watering approach that achieves that balance of water and oxygen. That keeps that root system healthy and keeps that tree's ultimate health moving forward, resistant to all of the things it experiences as a bonsai. So at this time of year, we've got to look at all the environmental factors that are contributing to the things that we're considering when we're watering a tree. First and foremost is health of the tree and the size of the foliage mass, right? Because the more foliage we have on the tree and the healthier it is, the more water we're going to be losing via that transpiration. We also need to consider the size of the container and how much water is actually in reserve for the tree to be taking up. After we look at those things, we've got to be thinking about the species. What is the tolerance of this species in terms of needing water or having the capacity or desire to potentially have more oxygen in a little bit of a drier situation? And one of the big ones that we've got to be thinking about is environmental factors. For example, we may be in the summer season in Colorado and because we have such low relative humidity, such intense ultraviolet rays, and such high heat, we actually might be watering more in Colorado during the summer season than we would be in the Pacific Northwest. Or we may be in the southeastern United States where we have tremendously high relative humidity, tremendously high heat, and we actually may be watering significantly less in the southeast than we would be in Colorado or the Pacific Northwest. So we're thinking about that temperature, intensity of the ultraviolet rays, whether or not we have wind, whether or not we have a high or low relative humidity, and looking at the state of the tree and all of its factors to start to determine how do we water this tree at this point in time. Now one thing that I tell my students consistently when they're talking about watering and when we're learning how to create that balance of water and oxygen in the tree is that balance of water and oxygen is a cumulative average of all of the actions that we take on that tree. So there may be a tree that's damp, it's not dry, it's not wet, and we're saying, I'm not going to be home in time to water this before it fully dries out, and we water it that day, right? But we may be home on the weekend and we may see that tree in that same situation and say, over the course of this week, I've been watering it every day that it's damp. Now that I'm home and I'm going to be able to address its watering needs a little bit more closely when it's damp, I'm going to hold back on water and allow that system to accumulate a little bit more oxygen to strike that balance over the course of a week with that individual tree. If we're constantly thinking about sitting right inside that range of that ideal balance, even if we swing outside of that with too wet or too dry, the fact that we come back to that range of balance of water and oxygen that gives us ultimate health for that species, this is how we cumulatively maintain the health of a tree in a bonsai container. All things to consider when we're talking about summer watering. So most of us, when we start to try and identify if a tree needs water, we immediately start to feel the soil surface. And although this is a good indicator of whether there's water present or not, it doesn't necessarily answer the question, of whether this tree is using a tremendous amount of water or not. After we've considered all of those factors, however, we do need to look at the soil and look at the water content in the soil to make that final decision of whether or not at this point in time, in this tree's current health, current condition of moisture level, current condition in terms of today's weather, current condition and species tolerance, whether this has enough moisture to sustain this tree for the time that we need it to while we're either gone or while we're at home. So when I look at these two soils, this is a very good comparison of what is wet enough to not be watered versus what is dry enough to definitively need water. And ultimately, when we start to compare these two things, we're looking at the color of the soil and the water content of the soil to make that final assessment. Now, Akadama is one of the major components of our soil mass, but it also has one of the most dramatic color shifts in terms of a dry particle versus a particle that is holding a lot of moisture. And you can see the dramatic color difference between the two. This darker particle of Akadama is a particle of Akadama that's filled with water molecules. All of its porous spaces have water inside of them, and this has a high plant available moisture content. Now, we can see the dramatic difference in the color of this drier particle of Akadama. This has a lot more oxygen, a lot fewer molecules of water in it. This has a very limited amount of moisture to be giving to the tree. When I start to see an abundance of that surface layer of soil showing this dry color of Akadama, that's giving me an indicator that if it's a species and in the right condition that need that moisture, it would be time to water. Okay, well, I hope that that kind of helped close some of the gaps. Now, there were a few questions that came at us that you guys were feeding to us while you were watching that that I wanted to clarify. You know, the depth to which we check and the depth to which we should be looking for moisture content in the container. For us at Mirai, we believe very, very strongly in top dressing our containers. And the top dressing method, which I believe we've talked about in potting fundamentals or repotting fundamentals on the shore pine. If you want to see that, go back to that because we show you how we create our top dressing and talk about the sizes and the materials and the proportions. That top dressing on the surface layer of our soil acts as a stabilizer so that soil isn't moving while we're watering. But what it also does is it slows down the transpiration and the evaporation of the water off of that surface, which when you slow that down, what happens is is gravity will pull all of that water to the bottom of your container and then via capillary action that extra water will start to move back up through the soil column to even out that water content and you'll start to see a more well-distributed amount of moisture through your soil column as a result of that stopping that excessive loss at the surface. So if you don't stop it, you get a really dry top, a perfectly balanced middle, and a really wet bottom. If you do stop it, you get even more moisture distribution through your soil column and that's one of the major techniques that I think nobody talks about or even a lot of professionals or instructors talk badly about top dressing or the presence of moss on your tree and I think it's an imperative aspect of proper moisture distribution to maintain that water and oxygen balance and give your tree the opportunity for that health. So as far as depth, if that's the case, I'm looking at the surface and if the surface is dry, that's an immediate indication to me that I need to be looking at a potential opportunity to water depending on what all of the other factors are that I'm considering, okay? Bishop's wondering if you could lift it, like with small trees in pots, if you could lift them up to determine how much water is in the pot by the weight. You know, I've had people tell me that. When I was in college, I subscribed to that and I found that my concept of what was heavy or light differed on the day and I put my trees through a lot of undue stress by trying to think that my consistent concept of what is heavy and light for that tree on that day with my own variables personally as well as the tree as well as what happens in our mind. And so I don't think that that's a very accurate way to measure water quantity in the container. And ultimately, I want to encourage you guys and I want to take you away from the black and white of watering. This is dry, this is wet. Because for a specific tree in its specific case with its specific state of health in that container as that species with that humidity, that wind, that heat, that intensity of sun there is a proper time to water and several proper times to not. And if we're going to do bonsai well, we've got to accept that it is not easy. Watering was the first thing Mr. Kimura showed me. I showed up, first day of my apprenticeship, no other apprentices there. Mr. Kimura walks out, doesn't even acknowledge my existence, picks up the hose, starts watering. Middle of August when I showed up for my apprenticeship, August 27th actually. End of August. So he's watering, I'm watching him water. That was my first lesson. Six years later, as I'm getting ready to come back to the United States to pursue bonsai professionally, Mr. Kimura was still out in the garden looking at the trees I was watering and making small tweaks and corrections to the way that I watered. And so that is to say, six years of a daily practice I still didn't quite have it right. I still probably lose one tree a year to over-watering at Bonsai Mirai. Because of 800 trees, it feels really good to be watering a tree. You're healthy, I know you want it, I know you want it, I know you want it. The tree didn't. I thought it did. So I'm watering. And then there are a lot of trees that if I'm not careful, I could very easily under-water. And that's where this constant focus and awareness of the tree, the container, the foliar mass, the state of growth, and the environment that you're functioning in matters. And I think we tend to treat watering as kind of that hassle like, ah, crap, I want to go to the movies, I got to water, I don't want to miss the trailers, or I got to get to work, shit, you know, water. In all actuality, water should be one of the things that we focus. When we do it, we focus more than any other time in our bonsai practice because that is the moment where we give that tree what it needs, right? So a few new ideas, I hope, for you guys. A few more ways that we break down the desire for black and white in an extremely gray and opaque way. We're going to continue to work on this together. We will continue to hammer on watering and talk about its changes and talk about its nuances over the lifespan of Mirai, right? The next 50 years that you and I are together, hopefully, right? And by the time we're done, maybe we'll be a little bit better at watering, okay? All right, so I want to jump into the process and the practice of approach grafting on junipers. And I have a juniper tree. I have a juniper here that's actually quite special to me. This tree was purchased from Andy Smith in 2005. I was already in Japan. I had been communicating with Andy about these trees before I left college for Japan. And he delivered them to my parents in Colorado while I was already gone. So this is also a testament to my parents for maintaining several trees when they had no bonsai experience and just how much they loved me. And this is one that had this crazy idea. But this was one of the trees that Andy had and I fell in love with. And for whatever reason, across the seven years I've been at Bonsai Mirai plus the time while I was in Japan and coming home very infrequently, but nevertheless coming home and trying to do work on these few trees that my parents had, I've styled this tree a total of three times. Completely wired it, restyled it, styled it, restyled it. And every time that I touch this tree, it responds very negatively to the styling process. And so one of the characteristics of this tree that you guys should be seeing is that the foliage is weeping. And this is a very rare situation that I've only run across once or twice. And this is kind of the paramount tree that I've continued to confront this problem with. And that is the weeping nature of this tree, even when treated with ideal health, ideal balance of water and oxygen, perfect fertilization. When I pick all of this foliage mass up with wire and try to make it an upright tree, as opposed to thriving and gaining more strength, which is what happens to a lot of our junipers when we pick those branches up, they start to grow upright and become more prostrate in growth. This tree actually sheds all of those branches that I pick up. The only thing that I can think about with this tree is that it doesn't have an inherently natural weeping habit. And if that's the case and I pick those up, there's a chance that that weeping habit means its vascular system in the finer branches doesn't have the ability to fight the force of gravity to raise that water column against that force of gravity. And so you see it growing down like this. And again, I just want to stress, because everybody's going to say, well, my Rocky Mountain juniper has floppy foliage. It must be weeping. No. No. Right? I've worked on well over 2,000 Rocky Mountain junipers. This is the one that I've seen do this. The only one I've seen do this. So tonight what we're going to do, and I've been waiting a long time to regain the health because the last styling lost so many branches. What we're going to do tonight is we're going to be replacing this foliage mass that seems like it has a very weak capillary action with some Kishu shimpaku juniper foliage. And we're going to be placing that strategically throughout the branch structure of this tree to try and maximize our ability to design this as a bonsai. Okay? Here we go. All right. So when we start to, and you guys are looking at the front, but I'm going to rotate this here just so you can see kind of all facets of this. And this is an absolutely stellar piece of material. This tree is amazing. I've always called it the angel's wing because this little section here looks like feathers to me. And this was cut to free it from the rock. This deadwood was cut by Andy to free it from the rock. But it used to have a piece up here that was the actual apex and I really enjoyed that. Now it's gone. That's fine. We can build that again here. But just talking about grafting theory in terms of where am I going to put this foliage mass and why. I don't know what the design of my tree is going to be because I'm going to graft in as many locations as I can to give myself in the single effort of grafting the greatest number of opportunities to have those grafts take and have the foliage mass to make design decisions on after they've taken. Right? But I do want to be looking at a few things in terms of the grafting process to make sure that my decisions are sound and I am creating the best opportunity for myself to be creating usable branches in good locations. And one of the things that's not often talked about when we approach graft is the fact that it's very, very wise to leave some portion of the structural components without a graft on them so that we have the ability to get structural movement in these pieces of the branching. Now what you see a lot of people do when they graft is they come back in and they graft as close to that junction as they possibly can. But typically we would take that approach with a veneer graft where we would actually be separating that piece of scion. We would be carving that down into a very sharp point and we would be sticking that into an incision. Approach grafting is different. We're going to be taking we're going to be taking a whip that we've been cultivating here at Mirai of Kishu foliage. We're going to be shaving off 50% of this whip. We're going to be shaving 50% off of this branch location that we're going to be attaching this whip to. And we're going to be taping those together so that they're held and they adhere together. I want this kind of space right here to be able to change the location of that so that I'm not trying to bend the structural portion at that point where I've attached that graft. And that's a major lesson that I've learned myself over grafting for scion. I've learned over seven years at Mirai that luckily you guys get to benefit from that consistent mistake and having to risk and potentially fail by having to move that graft union to get the foliar mass where we want it to go. So before we start I just kind of want to take a look at some of the positions and where we will be grafting in order to maximize this piece of material. So when I'm looking at a graft site here I'm always looking for the longest possible runs of undisturbed tissue. Now I notice I've got a very beautiful straight run of tissue right here. I don't see any deadwood in this area. I don't see any obstructions. This is a really opportune place to potentially secure a graft. I also know that I've got a beautiful straight run of branching right here just past this bend. Now it would be very tough to try and graft on this bend and the longer this run of tissue the greater the opportunity I have to mesh those cambial layers so that I get cambium to cambium and I get these two pieces of foliage mass growing together as one unified vascular system. Now I also have one singular opportunity right here to be able to graft along this run. Now this would be a significantly thicker graft which means that the take rate on a thicker graft although possible becomes a little bit more difficult than these two thinner areas and I only get one chance here as opposed to getting two chances here. Now when we talk about approach grafting once we start getting down to a very thin, very very thin branch like this it's very difficult to approach a thin branch like this because the amount of tissue we're going to have to take away from this is going to make this so structurally weak that a lot of times we'll see the branch fail as opposed to sustain itself for the graft to take. So I look at this I look at this piece right here and I look at this piece right here and I say these would be last I think on this location here my two strongest opportunities are here and here if for whatever reason either one of those fails I can always come back here and try a graft right along that big thicker piece of tissue that would be the second time around if these don't take the first opportunity. So this is this area I'm going to be applying two grafts here. Now I'm going to rotate and I'm going to show you a branch here that has a little bit of deadwood along the branch. I'm going to be taking bark and kind of pulling things apart and we always need to be identifying where the deadwood is taking place in our junipers so that we can make smart educated decisions. I had a branch that broke right here and you can see the bark has calloused right along this area but this is a piece of shari right here and I'm assuming that runs all the way down onto this branch. Now notice this dead stub right here as well. This is also telling me I probably have some deadwood along this area and I probably have quite a bit of dead here where I've got a dead stub here I've got a very weak branch here so this is probably not going to be an option. These guys are both very small this one is young and a potential option so I could look to this or I could come back to this major structural piece with a slightly thicker graft and try to hit that right here in this straight run and I think that's probably going to be my option for this location is right here. So I'm going to look to that. So now we've got three. You got a question? Yeah. I was wondering in terms of timing is this the best window of time for success? This is opportune time to be doing this right now. With junipers? Yes because now we're back into an energy positive which means that the foliage mass that young push of fresh foliage has been elongated, it's formed its cuticle it's getting back into an energy positive the other thing that we have happening right now is that living vein that over the course of spring became very easily separated from that heartwood is starting to re-solidify. So when we come in here and we do a lot of this work to shave these grafts down we're going to be shaving each one of them 50-50 to create the same diameter branch as already exists on the parent material when we do that if we've got a very flexible living vein we can very easily damage that and cause a really low level of success in approach grafting so this is opportune season as that live vein solidifies and we're back in an energy positive to stick those grafts together have the most resource moving through that both in terms of transpiration in the foliage mass and sugars and starches moving back through the phloem to get that cambial layer to divide and form and unify one singular vascular tissue And then Steve was wondering why you chose Kishu instead of Itoiagawa So for me and in North America in general when we talk about and I've got actually some Itoiagawa here I'll show you guys the direct comparison Kishu Juniper behaves so much more strong and resistant for us in North America than the Itoiagawa foliage mass Kishu is more resistant to spider mite tends to be more resistant to tip light and also tends to be more resistant to rust cedar apple rust now that's not saying that it's 100% resistant but it is to say that the finer foliage of Itoiagawa moves fewer resources and in that movement of fewer resources tends to have a higher susceptibility and even in Japan the discrimination against Kishu is pretty unfounded it's more or less kind of an accepted convention that Itoiagawa is the way that they go with grafting Kishu is a garden variety we don't appreciate that in the Japanese model so they've gone largely with Itoiagawa now their Itoiagawa are starting to suffer from more and more issues and they're seeing the need to be reconsidering their grafting stock I find Kishu to be far more durable So when I get to this back side here I've got a lot of opportunity here I've got a really wonderful, beautiful straight stretch really nice, young, flexible tissue here I've got a stretch right here I leave myself some structural size to be able to move I've got a wonderful straight stretch here I assume I have some deadwood on this side, which matters because if I come and I shave off this portion of this branch and all the living is on this side and this is all dead back here obviously that's going to be a dead branch so I've got to keep that in mind If I'm at all concerned I could come out to this location here I am starting to get fairly far out towards the tip of the branch This is a longer piece of foliage This is a big tree I think I'm still okay with that and I've got the flexibility in here to be able to compact that structure This potential area may be my best option And then as we move out to here I would like to try to get one graft out here on this section of foliage mass This feels like a very appropriate location This feels pretty big intermixed deadwood all along this branch I feel like I could find a way to graft here but why do so I'm going to sacrifice a few inches to get a really beautiful stretch of foliar mass And I think in all actuality as you guys start to graft starting at the most precarious place first is the very best way to start to graft because then you build on that to easier and easier and easier areas So the lowest and the most precarious first place to graft then we can kind of stack that foliage on top of them and the grafts don't get in the way of what we're trying to accomplish So let's start here in terms of our grafting methodology What is the diameter of the branch that you're So this is my pinky just to give you guys a little bit of proportional reference So there's my pinky So I'm saying a pencil sized diameter graft And I've got a relatively close size of graft that I can be grafting on here If you notice if I just kind of shed all of the extra flexible bark there Notice how close in proximity to diameter this is to this branch The branch is actually going to be grafted on headed this way so that we get that flow of water and sugars and starches moving in the correct direction You want that diameter to be almost identical Almost identical, right? Because when we approach graft and I'm going to show you guys this When we approach graft Lime, could you run down to the workshop in the plastic drawers over by the window There's a box of white chalk Just grab me a stick of chalk When we approach graft what you guys are going to recognize is that we've got two opportunities to be tying these pieces of foliar mass together in the vascular tissue And those two opportunities are on both sides of that heartwood where the cambial layer exists in the diameter Perfect, thanks man And so if we have the correct diameter we maximize both of those opportunities Alright So anytime that I'm grafting I'm kind of looking at Do I want to be on top Do I want to be on the bottom I need to be looking at my orientation And I'm just going to fill you guys in on the fundamental principles of grafting as we do it as opposed to giving you like a crash course on it because I think you'll learn a lot more just by seeing how I kind of go through the process of fitting and finagling and kind of getting this whole system to work Now if you notice here Notice how well those fit together just by setting them up against each other I almost duplicate this bow right here with this dip in this piece of the graft and I'm going to mark this on both of these I'm going to mark the beginning of that and I'm going to mark the end of that so that I know and then I'm going to come through and I'm going to mark the plane that has that rotation for that graft and I'm going to mark the plane that has the rotation for that graft so that I know where I'm supposed to be taking off that flat plane of foliage If you don't mark this a lot of times what will happen is you'll pull this off and you'll start rotating it as you're working on it and you'll come back and try to fit it together and that customized shape that allowed that to be such a beautiful fit won't really fit anymore and that starts to become a really big problem so I would encourage you guys to mark that Now, once I've marked that I'm going to rotate this away so that you guys can see what I'm going to be doing here I tend to prefer in the approach grafting method a really thick heavy duty box cutter and a lot of people use the small blades where you just have a little triangular blade that you replace you don't want to be using that in the approach grafting process because you're going to be breaking off segmented blades to get down to sharper and sharper blades pretty frequently through this process but the big blade the big wide blade, the big wide handle allows you to exert a lot of force when you're cutting these grafts and you're cutting through fairly established thick, mature tissue so you want to have that girth and that strength in the blade Now notice how I'm going to be holding my approach graft I always have a surface that's capable of supporting the root mass I've got my surface that I've marked here that gives me that perfect continuity with that graft I'm going to come in here and I'm going to shave off 50% of this thickness because if we come back and we think alright I've got something this big and I've got something this big when they're together they need to be the same size that means I've got to lose 50% of this and 50% of this for those two pieces to be the same diameter when I'm finished so I'm going to be cutting through 50% of that structure and tissue right there and you're going to watch how delicate this operation becomes now I've marked my threshold here and I've marked my threshold here but I want to taper this cut into that portion so that I'm not just diving into it and trying to cut out a notch in that branch otherwise when I try to tape it together those margins and those edges are going to be impairing my ability and here's the other thing I'm holding my scion here between my hands and I'm using this thumb to be the pushing force in the grafting process and what a lot of people are going to do is they're going to try to whittle as if you're whittling wood you don't have any control of the force that you're exerting on this tissue if you're whittling right you're leaving it totally up to the amount of force and you're going to hit hard and soft spots and your knife's going to stop and it's going to start and it's going to stop and it's going to start and just by doing that is a great way to cause grafting failure so watch my fingers notice how my hands are gripping the scion and then watch this thumb because this thumb is really what I'm holding and I'll just kind of slide my grip and notice how smooth notice how smooth that is now you know that you've got a really good cut on your graft when you come through and this surface is perfectly smooth and level there's no divots there's no changes there's no torn tissue you want that to be just perfectly executed the fewer times that you touch this the fewer times that you come back to cut and make corrections the higher your chance of grafting success and we want this surface to stay as flat as possible because you're going to be meshing flat to flat now a lot of times what ends up happening when we start grafting is you'll see somebody cut a little bit this way and a little bit this way and you'll create a mound in the middle of it and that'll actually when you start to talk about this this is where you've got to be real careful because now that's very flexible if we create a pooch like that then our cambial layer here and our cambial layer here don't get to touch so we at least have to have that perfectly flat so that our cambium here and our cambium here match and that's how we get a really beautiful graft union so you can see how much I've overshot my section was originally right here I've overshot it by at least an inch on both sides now because I've taken that tissue away this is extremely flexible and delicate now this is where your finesse in the grafting process matters and if I show you guys a cross section of this you can see oh okay I'm probably 50% here I'm a little bit bulkier over here see how that thickness is still a little bulky I'm going to take down a little bit more over here to ease that transition I'm going to shave a little bit more off and I should feel pretty good about where I'm at notice where my index finger is kind of underneath that graft right there see this guy here it's just at the point where I start using my knife so that I can't drive my knife into that finger but it's supporting that and then my pinky and my ring and my middle finger are holding the scion back here ever so gently so now you can see that I've really across that area where I'm going to be grafting really narrowed it down this was our original starting thickness now look at where we're at I'm going to set this off to the side and notice that I've never touched this area with my fingers that's what keeps that cambial layer from being damaged if I take this and I'm touching this or I'm rubbing this on wood it's going to fray that fresh tissue with that brand new blade that I just opened up and that will start to decrease your success rate exponentially so I'm going to take this and I'm going to set this right over here in a very safe place where it can't fall over where nothing bad is going to happen to it I'm going to come back to come back to this location that I was kind of working on right here and I'm going to get some of these branches out of the way for myself so that I have a clear run with your new box cutter I'm wondering if you clean off any oils the manufacturer may put on it no, no I'm not even worried about it the growth and the the new tissue that's going to form is not going to be you know because we have this scion on its own root system we're not going to be cutting and removing the roots from this we're going to keep it on its own root system in an approach graft the new tissue is where the success in the graft is going to take place if there is a little bit of oil it's not going to harm our cause in any way shape or form but there's also really not enough oil for it to truly matter on these I mean they do have it so they don't rust but it's very minimal so now I've got to be functioning in a little bit of a different situation here because I'm actually attacking the bottom side of this sometimes this is when it gets really precarious now I've still got to use my thumb to be guiding this operation okay and maybe sometimes I can get creative with other portions of my finger I'm going to slide across the detail camera here and I'm just going to come right to here okay and I'm going to be holding in my index my middle ring and pinky I'm going to be guiding this with my thumb of course I chose the upside down one first for you guys but this should give you a really clear detail of how I'm working through that branch you can see my blade sliding through okay and I just want to take that off really nice and clean okay so right here I've got just a little bit and it's starting to get a little bit of meat I'm just going to come back in from this side just knock that tip off so that I don't have that excess knowing that my actual graft point is going to be right here right where we had that nice beautiful bend this is where we're going to hit that graft point okay so notice that I've got a beautiful 50-50 right here gets a little bit thicker here and a little bit thicker there our graft is going to take from this point to this point you can see I have a little bit of white mark here let me see if I can take this down just a little bit more to get that perfect kind of distance in it there we go there we go nice really nice nice smooth clean cuts okay I feel really good about that I'm not even going to try to see if they fit together yet I'm going to prepare my workspace first so that I make sure that I've got everything that I need because if I put them up there together and they fit together I'm going to tape them right then and there I'm going to lock that system together and I'm going to call it good the fewer the times that I rub those surfaces together the fewer the times that I try to fit it and handle it the higher the success rate so always preparing your workspace to have what you need to be able to execute is part of the success of grafting okay now what I've got here is I've got your standard electrical tape electrical tape gives you that kind of stretch compression and flexibility that you need to push those two pieces of tissue together okay if we don't have massive compression on these two pieces the strength of the callus is going to push both sides apart and they're going to fail as grafting subjects based on that the strength of that callus rejecting the other one and pushing them apart so I just get a nice long piece here not excessively long and you'll see why and I just have these prepared right on the edge of my turntable okay I'm going to go ahead and leave my grafting knife there in case I need it and then the other thing that I want to have ready and this is something that a lot of people don't consider and again you know I hope you guys are starting to recognize that at Mirai one of the names of the game for our success is proactive preparation before we have any kind of reactive problems so I've got this container here that when I put these two together if I think that I'm going to have the wherewithal to be able to let this hang on the strength of that electrical tape and the two sliced portions of this I'm kidding myself right I'm absolutely joking myself I've got to be able to join this container to this section of the tree somehow to take the weight off of it so that I have the ability to then merge these two pieces together so I'm going to go ahead and just proactively have this piece of wire sitting here so once I get this dialed in I can just very quickly tie this to this take the pressure off of the branch and this will give me a much much greater capacity to be able to do this well okay so I've got my system I've got my electrical tape I've got my chalk in case I need to mark something I've got my very sharp box cutter I've got my piece of wire to secure this okay so being extremely careful as I feed this through the foliage mass and supporting this if I get into areas where I've got a lot of work around foliage I'm going to get this back to the side of the graft where we had originally kind of measured it for okay get this on the right side here make sure I've got this here okay and my original my original lines if you notice my chalk chalk marks you can see we're very very very close okay so before I do that now that I know where my container needs to sit I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to secure this and these are all the things you know as Mr. Kimura's apprentices you'd be so excited to learn how to graft you know that he had called you to learn how to graft you were just super jacked oh my gosh I can't believe he called me I'm going to go graft with Mr. Kimura this is ridiculously cool and he would be expecting you from the beginning to be proactively identifying how you were going to be helping and contributing to the operation these were the pieces that as a young apprentice you could foresee and prepare for and you would get that spot as his assistant the next time that he went to do something that demanded input now I just want you guys to look without doing anything except for compressing those two sections together look at how perfect that matches you see that I mean if I compress those two you virtually have an identical match cambium to cambium you've got a perfect thickness to create that same thickness of the original parent branch I'm locked in low and behold that cut was perfect I'm locked in I'm going to secure this right here okay so that first turn and this is always a little bit tricky to get the electrical tape started because it does slip on that bark this first turn is just to let the electrical tape in but you don't want to let this allow that branch to slide okay notice how I'm really holding that super strong and once you get that first turn locked in your goal now is to make sure that these spaces and that gap get taken out so watch how I pull all of this spacing out of this as I'm applying this electrical tape so I'm giving compression and I wrap compression and I wrap okay compression and I wrap and you can see look at how beautiful that stays together right there I mean we absolutely freaking nailed this nailed it for the first graft of the night first graft of the season for me I am stoked I am stoked now notice the space that exists right here it's a very fine space right here I want to take every opportunity to create as much tissue that has contact as I possibly can so I'm going to follow this through all the way to the end of the graft where I've got these two areas secured together compression and lock it in okay there we go a really really beautiful union that we've created right here it doesn't get any better than that Ryan I wonder if you could walk us through just the different types of grafting this is approach grafting and then there's also Brian on the chat mentioned thread grafting there's thread grafting there's veneer grafting bud grafting so bud grafting would be veneer grafting's appropriate terminology what are those different grafting approaches yeah I think probably the better way to approach that is going to be to attack those in the seasons that they're appropriate instead of trying to take an opportunity to really focus on the nuances of approach grafting and cover the broad spectrum of your other grafts what was the grafting we did when we did air layering so we did air layering which wasn't grafting but I thought we did some grafts on that stream maybe not no just air layers those were the air layers yep never mind so we focused on spring watering and air layering right this is specifically summer watering and approach grafting a juniper ok and this is the best season to be approach grafting your junipers which is why we're doing it right now ok so as far as thread grafting and veneer grafting you guys will see veneer grafting in the fall you'll see thread grafting next spring alright and those are the two ideal times spring and fall to be doing veneer grafting and thread grafting so when it's time I will show you trust me and then just in terms of timing are you talking about North America or what would be the area so spring fall and summer whether you're in the southern hemisphere or northern hemisphere spring fall and summer spring for threads falls for veneer and summer for approach is going to be your kind of outline for how you approach these techniques so it may be you know we're in July right now and we're approach grafting you may be in December in Australia and approach grafting in December or January right and we may be into November or December when we're veneer grafting and you guys might be in June or July for your veneer grafting in Australia right so if you guys are sitting in Australia and you're like well thanks a lot sorry you know I can only do what we can do here with success because we actually are doing this as a scope of work that gives us the opportunity to succeed David mentioned that veneer grafting is appropriate right now in Australia yeah shoot not much I can tell you okay Chris was wondering why you use electrical tape as opposed to raffia because of its ability to stick to itself and because of its ability to prevent moisture movement into the graft now if you're raffiaing a branch that you're going to be bending then you want that oxygen and water exchange that moves through the raffia because you want that branch to be able to breathe when we're grafting like this the biggest failure to grafting is going to be water getting into that system okay so the impervious nature of electrical tape right now is one of the fundamental things that increases our success rate and you will find if you try this method of grafting you will find that the ability for the electrical tape to adhere to itself is literally going to be your best friend it's going to be your very best friend because once you start trying to get all of these mechanics of this system to work it starts to get very very dexterity challenging for your dexterity there's so many moving parts to get a good graft to happen okay anywhere where this over cut so we've got this over shaving of this branch anywhere this over cut occurs I always just come back and patch that okay come back and patch it with a little bit of cut paste you don't have to it's not mandatory I feel like it does help continue to move sap through that portion of the branch that's that you are trying to maintain moisture and get that good growth through and so it's my own little kind of weird thing that makes me feel better about it probably more than the plant but also maybe has function and maybe enough that I do it okay now pay attention to what I'm doing here I'm taking a relatively thick piece of aluminum and I'm not cranking cranking on it but I'm also not going light I'm applying quite a bit of compression to this area that I've just grafted and the reason that I'm applying that compression to the area that I just grafted is beyond the electrical tape this wire does multiple things to hold that graft together as a immovable rigid structure and it also allows us watch what I'm going to do here I'm going to carry this out this grafted piece here of the new scion the quichu foliage mass I'm going to carry this out here and this is going to allow me to turn this up towards the light or at least get it out from under some of this foliage mass above it so that I can in fact start to promote the health of that as a graft get it upwards get it photosynthesizing get it out from underneath all that stuff and I'm just going to leave this tail on it I'm not concerned about beauty in this particular portion of the work I want that compression I want that direction of that photosynthetic mass the more that this new scion photosynthesizes the better okay now one thing I haven't talked about yet when I was looking at the graft locations and suggesting those to you was the fact that this branch that I chose to graft to is also extremely rich healthy and dense with foliage if you're trying to graft a branch onto something extremely weak all you're doing is you're grafting a branch with a lot of photosynthetic material onto a branch with a limited photosynthetic material and you won't get the movement of resources through both of those pieces to allow both cambial layers to grow enough to become one vascular system so we're matching similar diameter to similar diameter we're matching vigor to vigor as well so that they grow together with that synonymous strength okay first graft of the night kicking ass and taking names Wayne was wondering so in general do rocky mountain junipers and quichu grow at similar rates in a similar environment I don't think that there's really kind of a similarity in terms of the rate at which they grow that's not necessarily what I'm looking at it's not it's not nearly as important as say for example a ponderosa pine and a Japanese black pine doesn't have that kind of relationship but I do think that the success rate of grafting rocky mountain with quichu for me has been higher than grafting rocky mountain with itoi gawa now if you take something like a sierra juniper and you graft itoi gawa onto a sierra juniper sierra junipers seem to take very very well with itoi gawa and whether that's a rapidity of growth or whether that's a cellular structure or whether that's a vigor I couldn't tell you but I do have my experience with rocky mountain juniper is they do seem to do better as a graft subject for quichu than they do with itoi gawa and that's not to say you can't get itoi gawa to take I've gotten literally probably 50 itoi gawa to take on quichu junipers but I have gotten a higher success rate of quichu to take with rocky mountain and then Aaron has a question about grafting onto older parts of the tree Aaron says that they have some difficulty with this is there a physiological reason for this so the tissue is moving far less water through the older portions of the tree now maybe you're grafting in a place where there's deadwood maybe you're grafting in a place where the vigor has been lost but in general older the tissue the drier the tissue younger the tissue the more water soaked and more xylem and water movement is happening in the tissue and that can over the course of time have a significant impact okay so when I look at this I'm just going to rotate this so Ricardo can show you guys I see this branch is extremely slender and isn't really giving me a lot of vigor I've got this piece here that I feel like I just absolutely hammered and nailed that graft I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to say you know what to develop a foliage plane over in this portion of the tree one branch is going to be enough for me once that tissue branch takes over and you guys will be surprised if two grafts on this entire tree take I can make a bonsai in three years with it okay now the more that take the better but if two take I'm good to go okay so I'm going to shift my focus over to this guy and more importantly in this I'm looking at this curve right here now if I come all the way out to here one of the problems that I'm going to have is I'm starting to get an extremely long distance or a great distance from the origin of this branch and when I look at the structure of this tree if this is going to be my apex because the deadwood is far better on that side having this graft occur lower as opposed to higher is going to allow me to keep this lower than the apical region of that over there so I'm just looking for a graft that's going to work well with that curve at that thickness that's kind of what I'm focusing on right now let's see what we got here that looks that looks downright sexy now notice how I have a fork here I love the fact that I have a fork this means I get two for one twofers and bonsai are the very best thing ever because when you get a twofer it means you double up for one singular effort you get twice the payoff okay now this is going to start to become a little you're going to watch the congestion of grafting start to take place and this is where strategy in terms of our placement is going to come into doing this really really well because you guys can actually work yourself out of the ability to place grafts watch I did it all in one fail swoop and the more you start threading those things in there the more you run the risk of damaging etc in particular once you start shaving it starts to get quite complex to get these pieces together and in the right locations let's see here that feels like that has potential I like that curve don't you like that curve Ricardo curve feels good feels super sexy so if I push that in like that it's not impacting this in any way and I start to be able to pull on that that feels legit I feel like I can make that work it's going to take a little bit of work but I think we can make that happen okay now if we do that we lose the ability to graft right here I guess we can come across here and graft right here so I feel like let's do this top one first and then we can come back and do this one here and that should give us enough freedom I also have a little bit of a curiosity about this but I don't think I have a whip that small so we'll go with this we'll go with this and we'll go with this and that will put three on the back side I feel relatively good I would like one more I'm going to go ahead and take a lot of confidence in the success of that first one and say alright you feel like you're on your grafting game tonight so it's not a problem um okay so I'm going to come right up to that whole loop I'm going to come right up to that crotch right there that's going to be a little precarious I'm going to want to buffer that and then I'm going to be right on the inside there right on the inside there okay because I like that I like that curve I like what that curve gives me in terms of that continuity of shape I feel like I'm going to be able to make that work and I'm going to shift this surface over just slightly diagonal and then rotate that a little bit yeah I feel good about that okay let's see if we can make this happen alright okay so again I'm going to set up my work table I'm going to work the opposite way I'm going to work from the roots out to the tip this time just because I've got a little bit more of a handle here and I've got this junction right here that I need to be really careful of I don't want to shave this too close cut this major tip off because I want to make sure that I keep that junction and get that twofer that I pay for so I'm going to come back here I might just extend this blade a little bit to get a little freshy in there so that I've got a really good cut this is a pretty thick pretty thick and aggressive scion notice how I keep that thumb really guiding the pressure that I'm putting into this okay and I want to start to taper out because of that junction and if I get too close and I start to feel afraid of getting a little aggressive I can always swing back and have that control to get that out of there okay so you guys always have the ability to re-frame how your graft, how that cut and that incision is working that's really empowering because it's not just one one opportunity and you're done that's the beauty of approach grafting now when you veneer graft you make that cut correctly or you need to go find another scion but for approach grafting there's a lot more freedom here Chris is wondering how these scions were propagated yeah these are all air layers so you guys have seen how to air layer on the spring watering fundamentals that is exactly how I propagate all of my grafting stock so I'll go and air layer those whips the roots that I air layered from last time on that root grafted juniper are almost ready the roots are starting to form really well in those we'll be separating those in another few weeks we'll pull that back in to show you guys and Douglas is curious what soil composition the cuttings are grown in so these aren't cuttings solid akadama or a lot of people will grow them in a nursery mix so they don't have to water them as much because anytime you're cultivating say 50-100 air layers it becomes a pretty significant watering burden okay so I've got that 50% mark again I've got a little raspy in this now what you guys will start to find when you're cutting the grafts on these guys what you'll start to find is that the more you tinker the more you screw it up so as long as all is good and you do have some smoothness to it go ahead and take that as good enough because if you try to get really fine and whittle and whittle you will really mar up that cambial layer that you're trying to preserve and keep really nice and smooth okay handwork here so you've got to be very smooth and very accurate about how you enter your hands notice how I have support of this here I'm kind of in here at an odd angle to get my blade perfectly parallel and Ricardo I'll rotate so you can see that you good? a little bit more I want you guys one of the requests about covering grafting on the live stream are you sure Ricardo is going to be able to show us everything we need to see and I said that's his job that's what he does I forget what student asked me that but I felt like please you know Ricardo clearly you don't so how long will it take for these graphs to take so if we do this well fastest very fastest record scenario for Mr. Kimura was four months now never have I seen anybody else be able to do this in four months and I would never tell you guys that you can do it in four months four months not realistic Mr. Kimura did it success mixed happen saw it don't do it right we're talking calendar year calendar year now the bigger question that you guys need to be asking yourselves is how do I know how do I know when it's taken how do I know when it's done how do I know when I can separate this thing and really start kicking some ass and styling some cool trees with Kishu instead of Rocky Mountain Juniper on this you know weeping crappy foliage and you're going to know by the swelling of the tissue around the electrical tape okay so you're actually going to see that tissue of both the scion and the graph starts start to bulge around the electrical tape yeah killing me sir there we go you see how accommodating Ricardo was I said no and he said okay and then I was like actually I'll do that for you about that hand placement there we go so you'll see it bulge and then the other thing that wire that we put on that wire is really important too because the wire will start to bite in just like it would bite in anywhere else where you've wired a tree it'll bite into the graft union that's really giving you that indicator oh it's starting to swell when both pieces start to swell that means that they're producing new vascular tissue via that cambium that means it's starting to take okay now just because it starts to swell doesn't mean you're 100% successful you've got to go in and you've got to take off that electrical tape you've got to inspect it and then you're probably gonna have to rewire it with the tape off of it right because it's still healing it's not totally dialed in it's joined enough for you to fool with it but rewiring it prevents it from growing apart which it still has the opportunity to do okay alright so I'm gonna go ahead and prepare a few more pieces this one's gonna get this one's gonna get a little bit in our way as they all seem to Mr. Kimura used to do all of his approach grafts in a single day so if he had 20 client trees that needed approach grafts or he had 2 client trees that needed approach grafts they all happened on the same day because he hated to do it but it's a necessary evil of bonsai and the day that he was in the phase of it's approach graft day was the day that you buckled up put on your work pants and went back to the back to get yelled at for a solid 12 hours Greg wants to know why you use electrical tape instead of grafting tape again because of the ability for it to adhere to itself I can't stress that quality enough the fact that it can adhere to itself is such a major piece of the equation I'm gonna try this one other way of course I've already cut it which is what happens even when you try to be super smooth I feel like I just want this to be right there and it isn't gonna happen is it what about if I come right up here so now I've got a very very delicate exposed system here I've got to be very very careful be very careful I think this is gonna work this is what happens when you tease yourself into thinking that it's gonna work and then you get there and you're like actually I knew that wasn't gonna work but I still went for it and it didn't work okay so we're just gonna make it work that dang it that, that guy so let's see if we can go above this and get some of the same success cut this guy off and maybe give myself a little bit more juju to roam and what if we take this tip here this feels promising this feels promising get that junction just behind there oh I like what I see here so what's impeding my ability to move there it is yeah okay Ricardo can you zoom in right there can you guys see that junction right there I'm gonna make that junction count okay now this isn't the same length as we got on the other one and watch what I'm gonna do here I'm gonna start this wrap all the way up here okay and I'm just gonna continue to check this junction so let me secure this right here and that's not actually where the graft is gonna take place but what I'm doing is I'm just stabilizing a portion of the graft so now notice when I compress here how it joins that area now I come back in now I come back in and I can lay this right on top of that angle down secure here watch this just work this magic this is gonna be awesome thumb strength deluxe this is all thumb strength that compression compression yes if you let it go it goes away for good feel the burn boom here it is graph number two oof how many are we trying to do tonight yeah yeah he's right Kendall yes I mean was that answer wrong that makes sense there's some folks in the chat that are curious about grafting with larger branches say two inches thick or just a thicker what would be your technique for approaching thicker grafts if you're approach grafting it's the exact same same thing yeah now here's the thing that I'm not showing you guys tonight and that is an inset approach graft to an inset approach graft to a trunk or a living vein right bear in mind that I'm showing you guys an approach graft branch to branch that's different than if we were to take an approach graft and go into a living vein so like say for example say for example you guys are sitting there and I want to approach graft a branch into this living tissue right here that's an approach graft the same as this is an approach graft from the perspective of meshing the cambial layers and still having the roots attached but the methodology attaching it to the vein as opposed to branch to branch is entirely different that's going to be a stream for the future because that operation is very very advanced I want to get you guys through some of this more fundamental stuff first but in terms of just branch to branch thickness the same so thickness is the same health of the branch both are vigorous and then we're thinking about getting that 50-50 marriage so that the final product doesn't show some big ugly grafting scar that's another really big aspect to doing this and doing this well is the finished product of the graft you know we can talk about methodology all day long and the biggest mistake I see people make you guys are able to see here how much wood I'm taking off of each of these grafts if I took off any less my success or the quality of the product at the end of this 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10 years down the road would be far far worse and that was one thing that I will say I noticed about Mr. Kimura's grafts that was far superior I mean you could say approach grafting is approach grafting and that's all good Mr. Kimura's grafts were far superior because his technique was so much more detail oriented and he very rarely had those big swellings or goiters of growth on his approach grafts ok alright yeah how many do we want to do tonight what time is it oh we are cool alright cool Sujata had an interesting question Sujata is curious if you can approach graft on any tree assuming the species you are doing it with is compatible can you do it on any tree technically yes technically yes now the question becomes is the approach graft the method that gives you the best result there are a lot of trees like a thread graft on a deciduous tree for a branch is often times a lot more beautiful than an approach graft for a branch but an approach graft for a root on a deciduous tree is often times a lot more natural and beautiful than a thread graft for a root and when we go to a pine a veneer graft on a pine or just a bud graft on a pine often times gives you a lot better angle placement and origin of the branch than an approach graft on a pine so it depends on what you are trying to achieve which grafting method you use and also if you are doing an approach graft on a pine like this it would have to take place during the winter time when the sap flow is very low whereas junipers don't have as much sap this is a perfect time to be doing it heading into the heat of summer with junipers so there is nuances inside of that it depends on what you are trying to accomplish we will talk about all of those things moving forward we have got 50 years of streams coming ok so 50 years 50 years it just keeps growing ok so now I am going to switch over to the front here and I kind of had I had a little bit of a notion to potentially try to use one singular graft to satisfy two locations and the question with that was was I going to be able to do that and I think I have got that covered with this one and this is also an opportune time to show you guys how to prepare your grafts to graft because the first two that I have used were already prepared I am going to do one more set of grafts or at least one more graft for you guys just to talk about a few more nuances and then I want to come back to how you guys water these and keep these healthy now that we have performed this graft because that is something that you see these containers sitting sideways these have to continue to be watered and thrive through this process and I need to help you guys understand how that happens ok now check this out if I want to be grafting here and I want to be either grafting here or here I have got this opportunity here and look at that I have got that opportunity and I have got boom that opportunity so I have an opportunity to hit two graft locations with similar sizes on the same piece of stock that never happens actually it happens sometimes if you are just really good at what you do which we try to be to the best of our ability so I am going to go ahead and I am going to bring this over Ricardo go ahead and make sure everybody can see what we are doing here ok so I am going to make my mark here and I am going to give myself this much distance I am on the bottom here on the top there ok there is my one right there and then this guy here I am going to really try to compact that right there so I am going to go this point here this point here and I am going to go right there and I am going to go right there ok and then I have also got this wonderful area to secure right here where I can just hold this whole system together and it doesn't really impair my ability to graft down here if I am against this really really weak branch let me come back and show you that ok so when I am looking at the other grafts that I could be placing on this section right here notice that I have got this kind of really weak branch right here this would be a branch that I would never want to graft to notice that there is no growth on the whole branch there is a lot of dead stubs which means half of it is probably dead wood there is not any elongating tips on the end this is a branch I am going to save because maybe it is contributing to photosynthesis or it is contributing to transpiration that is moving water through the container but I would need something of this kind of vigor or this kind of vigor to be grafting to and that is right where I am at right now ok alright so coming back to this let's always start out with our thicker one first and we are going to cut both of these at the same time cut both of these next and then we are going to go for the whole shebang in one single go and see if we can't make it happen ok now I am going to have to support this a little bit differently because I want to make sure to not be beating up either one of these being as I am right handed I think it makes sense for me to start with this one so that I don't cut this one and bump it a bunch as I am grafting this one all part of that structure is the strategy that we need to be using and then I am going to go ahead and I am going to kick out a little bit of a newer blade notice how you can see kind of the juniper sap and the ruggedness here and that nice clean blade there kick out a little bit of that blade using that middle ring and pinky finger and using that thumb to dictate the strength that I am pushing with I am obviously over cutting always over cutting and I want to get down to that 50% mark now here is the other reason you want to get down to that 50% mark if you have two similar diameter branches and you shave off 50% of the branch in order to get to that widest point I am going to hit both of these cambial layers and Ricardo can you zoom in to that piece right there so that people can see that really bright white line at the tip of my razor can you guys see that see that white line on the exterior there right there and then you have this yellow in the interior and notice this brown little slash right there that brown slash is becoming that's got sap in it and that's now void of moving resources all of this yellow tissue is the xylem moving water the cambial layer is a one cell layer thick that exists between this white exterior layer and that yellow interior layer and then this white layer that's actually your phloem that's moving sugars and starches so if we get to the widest width of this in order to have maximum contact we've got to go down to at least 50% on this branch because say we take 30% off of this and 30% off of that we're not going to be hitting the widest point where we can have maximum vascular contact so now that that one is shaved down and I feel pretty good with that thickness for that size of a graft that's a very small graft I'm going to come back to this Mr. Kimura told me one time he and I were in the back grafting and by the end of my apprenticeship we were doing most of the grafting at his garden instead of him being back there for 10 or 12 hours it would be me with one of the younger apprentices and I got to do the yelling which was traumatic for both of us but anyways he was telling me one time we were grafting together this massive needle juniper it turned into a kokufu tree within the period of time that I was there at my apprenticeship and I think we put something like 36 grafts on it it was a nightmare total nightmare but he said Ryan if you take this technique home to the United States you will make a million dollars as a bonsai practitioner I haven't seen that million come through yet I'm still waiting fingers are still crossed on that perception of the bonsai market in the United States we've got some questions in the chat from folks who are wondering if these techniques this approach grafting if it varies from species to species or is what you're doing right now can be cross species good question for branch to branch approach grafting this is the methodology there isn't another way to branch to branch approach graft there's a lot of people that would do it less crafted there's a lot of people that would have a far lower amount of nuance to matching things up strategizing the distribution the locations you see a lot of people undercut the grafts you see a lot of people not join the grafts appropriately not really understand how that system works again I think the strength of Mr. Kimura's grafting was that the aftermath was always very beautiful the success rate was almost 100% this is on its own roots all you have to do is line up one of the two sides ultimately if you line them up both it's a no brainer and so when we start looking at that this is the methodology I don't think there's another way one of the nuances that would exist would be timing if you're doing this for pines as opposed to doing it right now because pines would have a sap flow right now it would probably shut down the grafting operation because you would make an incision that's warm outside and they would be so full of sap and it would just be sloppy and sticky and those cambial layers would be absolutely covered by sap it would be terrible and I only know because I've tried without thinking that hard about it and literally was like well I just wasted not only grafting stock but I also probably killed the branch on the pine that I was trying to graft it was really a pretty pretty unintelligent move it was one of my not proud moments of failing to think bonsai well ok so I'm going to get my tape here ready again you know this once you guys see this once you know the nuances start to be what is your strategy where does your container go how do you use your hands to hold it together etc but the methodology is the same I gotta match those as closely as I can I always prepare my grafting station come back and wire over to apply compression after it's taped together and then the final thing that I want to show you guys tonight because we're obviously not going to get through all of these final thing I want to show you guys tonight is how to keep water moving through these containers that are at these odd angles that we have now so that they continue to promote health in the grafted scions for them to take as fast as they possibly can so that's what we'll finish up with ok alright here we go Frankenstein Bonsai and I also had I also needed a little bit of wire didn't I? to hold that together so that I don't have to spend my hand space trying to worry about that in addition to Randy was wondering if you're using aluminum I'm using aluminum yeah I'm using aluminum because copper this is just to hold copper would work hard and so much in these tight spaces trying to get down copper for this aluminum is more than enough it's rigid enough to not allow that expansion and that push apart that's all that we're really looking for alright so now I got two this is freaking awesome I got two branches that are super flexible and susceptible that I'm weaving up through all of these other things and this is awesome and I don't want to get that cut site ok and I don't want to get that cut site ok and I don't want to get that cut site ok come on now ok shhh ok ok ok ok ok All right, I'm just going to do this rather loosely right here so that I don't commit myself to anything. Go around that wide spot right there. This will hold it but not necessarily bind it so that I still have a lot of flexibility. All right, that feels good. Okay, so I see this being a problem here, let me get that there. This actually came back a little bit, huh? There we go. There it is. Okay. Okay, Ricardo, so I want you to show that this one has a size discrepancy. Let me make sure this one fits right here. Yeah, that one fits right there. This one fits right here. So notice that there's a size discrepancy here, okay? So I'm going to focus on the cleanest of the two sides that I can get a union from, which is this inside curve, okay? And I just want to get that rotation correct so that that lays flat on that curve. And what you guys will see... When you graft something and you have a bit of a size discrepancy is you'll see if you line up at least one of the cambial layers that your graft will take on that side, the other side will callus. It won't take, but the tissue over time will solidify. The new tissue, the new vascular tissue that forms will solidify and you'll still have a very solid graft. Okay, now I'm dealing with this on a curve. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. So I've got to continue to make sure because there is some size discrepancy that every time that I make this wrap, I've got a real line that can be a layer. So notice how I'm holding that there and I'll come back and I'll show you guys the size discrepancy, but then I'll show you that I'm continuing to align this side. So I'm going to rotate this for you, Ricardo. I just want you to get... There we go. you see that union okay that's what i'm looking for brian's wondering if there's a minimum length of overlap that you need for the graft to take a minimum length like contact right like the like is it an inch or how long are you looking to make the cuts um the longer that you make the cuts the higher your chance of success okay but also bear in mind the longer you make the cuts the more inflexible or the longer the region of inflexibility where the graft union is going to be and that's a dangerous thing to have a real long stretch of a branch the more graft that you show here that's immobile location because that's those two different materials together when you bend something you've got uh tension tension tension placed across the top or you try to elongate you compress the bottom so so you have those tissues moving again against each other very dangerous to be bending that right so if you keep it short and really well aligned and it joins there then you risk less of a chance of of disjoining those two during the styling process after this graft takes okay and then once this graft does take off how does this go about removing the native foliage um we are gonna follow this tree's grafting process with you guys and so as that process happens bishop i'm going to be showing you that exact decision making and how we go about that and that's the best part about this stream is i get to take you guys on this on the journey with me okay so i'm just setting this tape up here this one's significant so i'm just setting this tape up here so i'm just setting this tape up significantly smaller. It does line up a lot better, but I'm also in a lot tighter area. I'm actually going to tape this back here, just to pull this back. There we go. Mr. Kamara used to always look at me whenever we would do work like this, because I do tend to grunt a lot, and he would always say, you're loud. Did he not make a noise? No, so this is the funny part. He would be really pissed off that I was loud. He'd be like, which is a loud and an annoying perspective from him. But then anytime he would do this, he had this very distinct... He had this very distinctive grunt where he would go, every time. Every time he would put force into a tree, he had this grunt. But he just wasn't aware that he had a grunt, so then it was my problem that I was grunting. And he was my master, so of course I say, I'm sorry. It's quality. Awesome. Awesome. Okay. Okay. So here we go. I'm going to wire these two guys together. And this is one where I'm going to want to boost, to the best of my ability, I'm going to want to boost this grafted stalk so that it's not sitting on top of the other stuff. So that I'm not shading out the parent foliage. I don't want to do that. I want it to continue growing vigorously as well. Because this isn't like a veneer graft where you're trying to weaken the parent foliage in order to transition. It's a sap flow. And maybe this is part of Bishop's question. You want both of these growing so aggressive and strong that they get thick together and they feed the thickening of this entire branch behind them. And that is what allows this system to take as fast as it possibly can. If one of them is growing slower than another one, then chances are your graft is not going to be successful. So I'll just wire both of these guys up just to get them their own space, okay? All right. So I've probably got three or four more grafts to put on this tree. Obviously, we don't have time to do that here tonight. It would be very normal for a grafting operation on a tree like this to take three or four hours if you had two people working on it. Doing it by myself, educating you guys, kind of working through the problems with it. In two hours, we've got one, two, three, four. Four grafts. Four grafts and a discussion on watering. I feel good about that. I feel good about our workload tonight. David wants to follow up with your mention about the placement. So will the graft area never be able to bend? Let's just say the less that we try to see if it's going to bend, the higher the opportunity for those grafts to never have any issues. Right? Because one of the... One of the fundamental things to understand about grafting is it's always a union that is compromised to some degree and that was really interesting to read or learn about that with like a veneer graft on a black pine, you know, like they put a veneer graft in the trunk of a black pine while it's in the field and that branch that was a small bud becomes a diameter this big and it's still compromised. It's still a compromised structure. When we were bending those branches, Mr. Kimura used to teach us how to identify those because you can't cut a wedge out of those. You can't really crank them from the shoulder and have that legitimately stand up. And the reason is most of the branches that exist in these trees start in the very core of the vascular system where they were just an adventitious bud that started elongating and then became a branch. So they're embedded in the ultimate backbone and spine of the tree. Right? Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. So. I was surprised that you engaged with Bch demonstrations, how is that supported up to sands today? This is just such a small moment made with the proper of the various parts of what Eric Jennings is doing. But inevitably, whenever you bend at that junction where you've got two foreign pieces of plant matter joined together, you're only functioning off of the strength of any of the vascular tissue they've produced after that junction was formed. So you may have 30 years of branch here and two years of branch there by the time that graft is taken and you start the styling. That's two layers of vascular growth, whereas the rest of the structure has 30 layers of vascular growth. And it will always be that way. So once that 30-year-old piece is 50 years old, well, then you'll have 22 layers of vascular growth on the graft and 52 layers of vascular growth on the original structure. And you just never catch up. Okay, so now I've got all of these containers kind of at diagonals and sitting so that it's going to be very difficult to get water into them. So I'm going to use, this is a tape from Japan. You guys don't need to go invest in tape from Japan. It's just what I had sitting around the workshop. Because we still had some remnants of it. And I'm going to be creating kind of a new container around the exterior low side of this old container in order to give it some ability to conduct and accumulate water over the course of, say, the next six to nine months that this is acclimating and those two pieces of tissue are joining together. So go ahead and bring me in to Ricardo. Now, the fundamental thing, the thing that I need to be aware of is this container needs to be extremely dry in order for this tape to adhere. And I'm going to want multiple layers of this tape so that I create a fairly robust rim on the edge of this. And I've got to be thinking about the angle because if I don't give myself enough edge, I may create a bottom and all of the water is just going to flow off of the other portions after that. So I want to make this a fairly, very sturdy, stable section of rim right here. And I'll always take these corners and kind of fold them in to create a nice, nice adhered union so that it's not just the sticky sides that are part of this. I create that nice fold there. I can fold some of these sticky sides over. That just gives me that really nice kind of rim to the container, if you will. It actually, really reinforces the tape in this whole process. And this stuff, when it starts to stick to itself, it's like a duct tape. It's never going to come undone to itself, okay? Make sure that's got a really good adherence there. Okay, so now when I fill this with water, I'll put on the top of this, I'll put some wet sphagnum moss right there, okay? I'll load it up with fertilizer so that I've got plenty of nutrition, right? And up to this, up to this point on this grafting subject, I don't fertilize my air layers because I don't want those air layers thickening. And I've got some Itoi igawa here that I'll pull out and show you just how slender I keep some of these Itoi igawa because I don't want this to get ultra thick. I want this to be able to accommodate the thinner branch sizes on this. Some of them will inherently thrive and get thicker without that fertilization. And those are the ones that I'll use. I'll use for bigger branches, but you want to be creating branches that are capable of accommodating all diameters and sizes. And so I definitely try to keep these starved and keep these malnourished until we do this grafting project. And then once we graft with them and we fertilize, that first application of fertilizer will dramatically change the character of this foliage, almost beyond recognition, which is another compromising aspect of growing several different varieties of juniper, is the fertilizing process. And then the fertilization, what you might think is a Kishu actually might be an Itoi igawa in a starved state until you start fertilizing. We keep them very accurately segmented. Had a little bit of a mix up tonight. I feel very comfortable. We've got Kishu on Kishu here. But we'll fertilize that with that water moss. We will tape up all of these containers to have edges that hold water. And then we're just going to be cultivating the tree, fertilizing aggressively, watering as it needs it, fertilizing aggressively on the wicks. Watering as it needs it. And I'm guessing over the course of the next six months, we'll see a swelling that we can bring this back into the studio, or maybe do a recap video to show you guys that progress next year. Hopefully we're cutting these off and styling this for a live stream next summer or next fall at some point in time. Yeah, we have any other questions. Yeah. So Greg was wondering how if you could elaborate on how you know if two trees are close enough genetically to graft. Well, I mean, technically any juniper to any juniper, right? Any pine to any pine. That is your general standard. Any maple to any maple, honestly. And I mean, if you go inside fruit trees, I mean, any malice to any malice, whether it's crabapple to apple, you know, I mean, you have such a significant diversity, which is why you can have an apple tree with like 30 varieties of apples on it if you graft it correctly. So, you know, the conversation of saying my experience is that Kishu has taken better with Rocky Mountain Juniper than with Itoiagawa is not to say that Itoiagawa and Rocky Mountain are incompatible. That's not what I'm saying at all. But there is a greater ease of grafting success from my experience where I'm at in the Pacific Northwest in my garden with my grafting technique and all the things considered. With Kishu, I have more ease of take than I do with Itoiagawa. It may be different for you where you're at with Rocky Mountain, you know, and that is for each of us to learn and experiment with. And also, I take that as a challenge. How do I improve my grafting skills with Itoiagawa? I naturally look at that and think I want to do that. I want to have the same success rate and not look at that as any sort of inferiority. It's probably a skill set that I need to evolve and develop a little bit more, which is interesting because in Japan I grafted all Itoiagawa and they never used Kishu. So there you go. Maybe we have a weaker variety or cultivar of Itoiagawa here that's been diluted via, you know, constant propagation. Who knows? But Juniper to Juniper, any Juniper species to any Juniper species, as long as you've got the similar vigor, similar diameter, and you treat that graft site correctly, shouldn't have a problem with the take. And then Sujata is wondering, what are the criteria to best have success with a graft? Uh-huh. Is it the operation, the aftercare, probably a combination of all of them? Yes. Yes. So I think, number one, right, is having a healthy tree in terms of this parent material. I've had a lot of people ask me, so when you get a tree out of the mountains and it doesn't have a lot of root, do you try to graft root onto it? No way, shape, or form. Because if there's not vascular resources moving in abundance through that tree, there's no way that a graft union is going to take, right? And so you want a really healthy parent piece of material. You need a fair amount of health even though I keep these anemic. And I don't fertilize them because I don't want them to thicken. These have a pretty significant amount of health with these spiking elongating tips. Those two pieces of health, a similar diameter for the branches that we're grafting together, and then the appropriate aftercare of water, nutrition, and that balance of water and oxygen through the summer watering process to allow these to take. I won't put this in the shade after this. Even going into the heat of summer, these grafted branches that I've shaved 50% off of, I will put this in the shade. I will put this in the sun. I will help this tree photosynthesize as aggressively as I possibly can. And I will push it to grow at its maximum capacity for that union to take. But I don't think there's any single criteria. You know, I say proactivity, having everything ready to go, having all of those chalk marks done, having a sharp blade, having your tape ready, having your wire, having that secured. All of those pieces are incremental percentages of success that you're either adding, or taking away from by not having them and compromising the potential integrity of the graft. So if you can have everything prepared, you proactively anticipate all of this, you cut that, you line it up, it sticks, you wrap it, you wire it. That's virtually 100% take rate if those cambial layers are hand-in-hand together, right? If I don't have my tape and so I put it together and I grind that surface together and then I let it go or I have to bend a little bit more. So you guys saw perfect on number one. You saw maybe, I'm going to say a 75% take rate on number two. On number three, you saw the edges not completely line up. And so I'm going to say I probably 70% take rate, right? So each time that I fall away from that ideal scenario, I lose percentages of take rate in my grafting success. And then Bishop just is looking for some clarification. So how heavily are you going to fertilize even at this time of year? Yeah, good question. So with these that have not been fertilized yet, even though we're heading into the heat, I'll give them a solid tablespoon of fertilizer per, you know, six-inch container and feel really good about that. I'll probably give the parent tree a light application knowing we're heading into heat. I won't hit this as heavily, but then moving into the fall, I'll come back with another tablespoon per container and then I'll hit this heavily after we get past that real intense heat. That's a really good question, really keen question. And then with the water, watering the summer watering in mind, how will your application of water change after this operation? Yeah, so I mean, you know, this foliage mass being grafted to this tree when that graph starts to take will accelerate the utilization of water in the container. For now, the quantity of water being utilized based on the foliar mass that's on the parent tree is still going to be the same because this isn't sharing in that vascular system quite yet. So I will be following the same concept of I've got this foliage mass on the parent tree. It's transpiring this much. It's adding this much growth. It's 90 degrees. It's 30% humidity. I see that it's still damp. Maybe I choose to leave it. I see that it's dry. I'll water it. I see that it's wet. I'm going to wait for most of the day before I come back to it. I'll still follow that same concept. But once these graphs, once that cambial layer starts to mesh and we get unification of vascular tissue in the grafting pieces that we've added to this, and I'm going to add, three or four more locations, so that effectively is going to be adding seven to eight branches of foliage to a tree that only had maybe ten branches. So I'm almost doubling its foliage density. When those start to take, you'll start to see this soil just be consistently dry, consistently dry, and you're like, goodness gracious, something is happening here. Yeah, absolutely. The vascular tissues are meshing. The water from that root system starts to support that foliage mass, and you should see that reflected in the swelling of that tissue on the exterior portion of that tape, and you should see the wire starting to dig into that tape and that vascular tissue of the scion as it emerges from that. This is all telling you, ah, the system is working, the graft is taking, and now the roots are taking on the burden of that foliar mass. Awesome. What's that? Ah, yeah. Thank you, Arthur. So just to remind you guys, Q&A Thursday, 10 a.m. I'll have students in the workshop. They always enjoy being a part of the Q&A. It's kind of fun, you know, part of the Mirai community. And then I just wanted to go back and thank you guys again for joining us tonight. I do feel like this technique is long overdue to be presented to you guys. Obviously, I always want to perform the technique perfectly, but you guys got to witness tonight three different situations in a single grafting operation where I nailed it, where I had to compensate, and where I had two differentiated sizes by the time they were shaved down. That's ultimately what this stream is about, is showing you guys how a professional accommodates those, because perfect exists maybe one in every ten. And outside of that, we're constantly adjusting our technique to accommodate to those unpredictable or less-than-ideal circumstances. And this is common grafting for us, right? You do your best, and then sometimes they perfectly line up, and sometimes you got to make some tweaks. But I think you guys got a really good exposure to theory, to technique, to approach, and to the follow-up to how we make these grafts successful. And I encourage you guys to go put this technique to work and improve some of your junipers that could use better foliage, branches in closer in order to maximize their design and quality as a bonsai, all right? Thank you guys very much. We love you. We appreciate the support more than you know, and we'll see our Tier 3 members on Thursday. If you guys aren't Tier 3 and you got questions, join that Tier 3 because the innovators are absolutely excelling, at their bonsai knowledge. We'll see everybody else Tuesday of next week. Check out the archives on Thursday, and have a great bonsai week, you guys. 
