What is up everybody? Super Tuesday. Excited for this one. We've been waiting for a long, long time to get into olives and the time has come. Bet you didn't think you were going to see one of these for a while. That's right, it's back. It's back. The chopstick is back. Anyways, got Sam on the mic this evening. Hello. Got Josh producing the stream. Hey Zeus and Eve on the detail cams. Digging into olives. We're going to do something tonight. We call this abstract design, namely because, and let's just kind of focus on what we're dealing with here. This is an olive that was utilized for fruit production in the United States from the research that we've done. And we just dug in for a very short period of time, but I'm relatively certain that this is a legitimate research that we've done. Olea europea, variety oleaster. I do believe this is oleaster. Now when we start to talk about the olive varieties of the world, the ones that are treasured, the Majorcan olives, the tiny leaf varieties, olea europea, sylvestris, sylvestris. But when we start to talk about the fruit producing varieties, and typically when we see this oleaster in its full form, in the fruit production form, they have very large leaves, a lot of photosynthetic capacity, a lot of sugar starch production, which gives us that high content. Delicious oil that comes from these olives in the production of the fruit in the Central Valley of California. Now this is a very interesting piece. And when we look at olive in general, as a species utilized for bonsai, they do not fit inside of the mold. Hence the terminology abstract design. And this applies to something that comes out of the wild that has this totally decayed, twisted, hollow, really radical, almost artistic form of the trunk. But it also applies to how we can handle the material. Coming out of more domesticated situations where they are in a fruit producing capacity, and we start to see that that material handled in a way where we can cleave apart those larger pieces of wood as they're being removed from the orchards, and really take those fragments. Because olive is such a durable variety, and it self-roots very easily, and we just need a small amount of living tissue, we're able to take those fragments free of roots, and then plant them in the soil. And we get a lot of fruit. And we get this kind of growth as a result. Now this is a very, very old olive. This is well over 100 years old. Very old fruit producing region of California that this came from. And it's exciting tonight to get to dig into this domesticated material that does have that wild abstract sort of continuity maintained across all of varieties to really see what we can do. Now in order to understand design with this variety, we're actually going to go about repotting tonight. And I just want to start the stream off by saying. I don't understand. I don't know how this is going to go. Here's what I do know about olives. When I lived in California, and we would go out to the citrus orchards where the birds would eat the fruit, sit in the citrus trees, and crap out the olive seeds, we would get these massively buttressing trunks growing up in these unmaintained citrus orchards. And we would always go in the middle of the summer, right around the end of July through the end of August. And we would dig up these olive seedlings that had these big buttressing trunks. And we would take a chainsaw. And we would chainsaw. And we would saw them off, or a sawzall. And we would sawzall them off at the ground, cut off all of the roots. We would have this stump that had been stump cut. We would take it home, clean up the edges of the cambial layer on the outside of that trunk, stick it in soil, and it would root. So when we start to think about handling olives in terms of repotting the finer root system of the tree, can we get away with the same thing at the peak of heat in the summertime? My assumption is yes. I have heard that you can. I still would say spring is the better time to repot. And all of the people that handle olives typically lean on spring to repot. But in this experimental discussion of design and digging into olives, we have a lot we can discuss at this time of year. We're going to try the repotting process, see how this goes, and use this tree as a sample experiment, as well as a design experiment, to really talk about olives and what they present to us in terms of design capacity and seasonal work. OK? So I'm going to dig in as you guys ask questions. We'll pull it out. Let's see what we can get done. We're going to try to repot it and take advantage of the very minimal amount of structural pieces that exist to set that structure for the future. Away we go. First question is from Eric, who said, is it in pure pumice? And how often does it need watering? It is in pure pumice. And this tree definitely, with this kind of growth, needs to be watered on a daily basis. OK? So it is. And most people tend to think olives don't really need a lot of water. They're very drought tolerant. But we see that. That is not necessarily the case when we start looking at trees once they've produced a fine root system. And namely, the California juniper growing in the Mojave doesn't need a lot of water, thrives off of drought. Not entirely true. Same with olive. It definitely does need and utilize a lot of water. OK? So just pulling this out, let me give you guys a rotation. I have no idea where the roots are actually going to originate from. But for a tree that was pulled out. Last year, to have this kind of root production is pretty crazy. Really, really interesting. Very strong variety and species of tree. Now, obviously, when we start pursuing design, we've got these branches growing from somewhere. And we don't know if these are coming from the trunk. We don't know if there's a single delineated trunk base. We don't know if that's following some line that's traveling up the wood. We have no idea. So I'm just going to slowly start to tease apart this piece. And explore. And see where in the world are these pieces of growth coming from? Are they even coming from the stump itself? Are they coming from some adventitious piece of the puzzle somewhere in here? Is there roots attached to it? We have no idea. I think people are just reveling in the summer repotting right now. Right. Kind of crazy. I did not anticipate. Yeah. Neither did I. Right? And I don't. So I was going to do this. And again, this is kind of like the weird thing. The weird thing with Mirai Live is we are really willing to roll the dice on the stream. I actually had anticipated having this repotted prior to the stream. And then it just didn't work out with all of the work that we've had over the past. All of the work. Huh? All of the work. All of the work. Thank you, Josh. Wow. That's great. Wow. Thank you, Josh. That is great. Couldn't have dreamed it up better myself. And so then it was like, well, you know, I mean, we do need to do this. We need to know what's happening here. So let's just see. Let's see what happens when we repot. And now all of a sudden we're repotting in the middle of August. And again, that was not the plan. Now I'm kind of like, I'm kind of seeing some different opportunities arising here. And really the goal is, much like with any kind of avant-garde piece that has some uniqueness to it, I need to know where are these roots coming from. I don't want to totally bare root this thing. But I have to have a better idea of where am I actually getting the life of the tree, where is it sustaining itself, how is this whole system working. And unfortunately, it looks to me like it's sustaining itself from several different areas that are existing inside here. If we can kind of unify the origination of these roots into one singular area, that would be really ideal. And if it had some sort of promising contrast of live and dead, that would be even better. But what it looks like we're getting is we're kind of getting root production from all of the living pieces. That are existing, I'm just going to take that one off, that are kind of existing down here in that bottom living piece that was planted into that container. So let's see what we can kind of conceptualize and get away with in terms of creative utilization of this material. Sarah asked what Mariah has been working on. And I was like, so many, so many things. What hasn't Mariah been working on I think is probably a better, a better question to ask. We have been pretty much going super deep. We're trying to create our apical creation, sort of like a pillar fundamental of design video right now. We're restyling Big Blue. We just recently started juniper work in a very heavy abundant way. We had number one in the studio. If you guys have been following our Instagram stories, number one has made several appearances on there being freshly pruned and wired and the dead wood being freshly worked as well as the live veins. So a lot of juniper heavy, juniper centric kind of scopes of work that we've been dealing with. But man, yeah, this time of year for us really a monster in terms of what we're able to get away with and the kind of juniper work in particular that we're working with on a daily basis. Big, big junipers getting kind of cleaned up and styled at Mariah right now. Okay. So I'm just kind of pulling out some of these pieces that are in these deep hollows. And deep recessions in the middle of this trunk. And you guys have seen me sort of tease and explore before. Again, I didn't plan on doing this in the middle of August. But here we are. And it is kind of exciting. Leonard asks, are all those sprigs connected or can they be relocated to more advantageous locations? In terms of these pieces right here? I think so. So it looks like they're coming off of the actual woody structure that exists that was planted more or less as a gigantic cup. And they're kind of cutting into the Anderson flat that they exist in. And we're going to really kind of find out today what kind of tolerance does an olive have to particularly one that's been sort of whacked and hacked like this. What does it have? What kind of tolerance does it have to root reduction after it's shown recovery? What kind of tolerance does it have to summer repotting where I know that I can get away with a flat cut? Is there a spray bottle back there? Probably not, huh? OK. OK, so what kind of tolerance does it have and how far can we push? So Jesus, to the right of the sink, one, two drawers over, there should be a spray bottle in there. And then what can we do to maximize the quality and caliber of design? And this is the kind of material that I really revel in playing with because it's the kind of material that's accessible to all of us. It's not like these pieces don't exist. There are several collectors in California that are absolutely going to the orchards as they're tearing them out. Obviously, the olive oil industry, not nearly as prominent as it used to be. You have a lot of olive orchards being replaced by walnuts or, excuse me, almonds. So you've got a changing over of the guard of the kind of crop system in California. And that in itself has opened up a lot of opportunity for beautiful bonsai stock to become readily available. OK. Kim has an olive forest clump that's on a big, flat root pad. And she's wondering how she can get the water to permeate into the center of the pot. The root pad's about 10 by 14, about two or one inches of soil to the edge. She repotted in spring, but she's worried about it getting water all the way to the bottom. Right, right, underneath that big trunk. Yeah. Yeah, that can be a really, really big issue. And that's actually interesting. So what you want to do, Kim, is you want to heavily water that. And you want to tilt one of those. One side up, while you're still applying water, careful to not wash off that soil. And use that angle of the pot tilted as you're applying water to make sure it runs down that container at that angle underneath that root base. Do that maybe every couple weeks, maybe once a month, a thorough saturation of the soil at an angle. As it's inclined and you're watering, you get that running across the bottom of the pot. And this is how we handle plate root maples, satsuki azaleas that have those big bases. And we need to get that sheen hydrated. This is also how you can handle an olive. And let me just continue to work here and see if I can free this up. Because I think we do have something rather interesting. No? OK. I think we did break our last spray bottle the other day. So it makes sense that it's no longer in there. OK, and I want to play here for a little bit. Right? So every time that we start to see something like this, let me just show you kind of where we're at here. I've got a really nice, beautiful, solid mass of roots down here. I don't exactly know where are those roots feeding. I don't know where are these roots feeding. I don't totally know. But we know that. We do have roots in this area around the strongest structural pieces of the tree. We've got some roots down here that are clearly feeding these. And we have a very, very interesting trunk that's starting to make itself known. Underneath this soil. So when we start to look at this, we start to get to be creative. Now, I'm going to rotate this around so that we can just kind of see it at the angle that it's currently sitting at. And one of the things about this, right? And there's probably, we probably have six or seven of these at Mirai right now. OK? We have a very, very beautiful deadwood section here that exists on the front of the tree. OK, and we can see that. The problem with the deadwood section is it is very flat and very two-dimensional. Not sure how I feel about that. So one of the things that I was hoping to tease out in this whole process is can we somehow pull more three-dimensionality into this piece so that we can maybe even generate some interest via what we uncover here and start to find an olive that has some of that really interesting movement. Now, if I just tilt this olive up like so and I start to conceptualize really leaning on these roots that exist down here in the lower part of the trunk. All of a sudden, we start to see something that actually has quite a bit of interest, quite a bit of unique characteristic. We get this arcing sort of hook of deadwood coming over. We can kind of land on or lean on these two points of contact. And we start to see something that definitely has some merit and some interest as a bonsai specimen. And this is kind of where I think we probably want to be going or moving in terms of the design direction. Seeing that we have these roots down here. Seeing that we've got. We've got the ability potentially to remove the roots that exist up higher and maybe even tease some of these down into the containerized situation below. I think we can strategically thin, knowing we can get away with strictly cutting off these roots. It doesn't mean we can be so cavalier as to just assume it's going to survive. But I think we do have a scenario here where we can really start to reduce and limit. And I think this is the direction that I'm going to go. Let's give it a try. Experimental in all actuality. But before we do that, let's just kind of dive into the design just a little bit more, right? Now we talked about in terms of this initial front being very, very two-dimensional here. Very, very flat, okay? So we have two different directions we can go. We can start to maintain some of that deadwood by looking off to this side. Or we can maintain some of that deadwood by looking off to this side. And we want to be thinking baseline and features much like any other tree, even in abstract design. Now, we know some of the value of that tree. But I think the key thing about that in abstract design is maybe flirting with some of those, I would say fundamentally accepted principles of design. The base has got to be solid enough to hold that shape. The line has to have as many angles and movements. We can fudge with that in abstract design. Having that geometry present, having the real drama of that piece present, having some of that really far degree of asymmetry present, starts to take the place of some of those more fundamentally understood and accepted concepts of design. And as a result, as we continue to kind of work our way around, we're starting to see something over in here, okay? And let me give you guys that. Something over in here where we've got a lot more dimension and contour to the trunk that exists over here. We're starting to see some of those deadwood pieces, but definitely a lot more of the movement of that woody tissue on this side. And I think we might actually be seeing a moment at Mirai, rare as they are, where we're going to move away from the dramatic deadwood and potentially take advantage of the grains and the living tissue as that real merit of design and potential for the tree. So let me just reduce these roots. I'll open it up to questions from you guys, and we can rock on from there. So you are ready for questions right now? I'm ready for questions now, yeah. It was unclear, sorry. Yeah, yeah, yeah, I know. I just kept going. It's all good. We just have one from Brandon who has a few olives he started from seed a few years ago. He has them in pretty large growing pots, and he wants to get trunk thickening, but they seem to grow tall and slimy. Should he just let a few grow as sacrificial branches to aid in thickening, or would planting in the ground for a few years be a better option? So if you're in a climate that is warm enough to facilitate olives growing in the ground, the ground is always going to give you the best possible growth. But understand this about olives. Olives grow with multiple leaders growing up in these big, elongated kind of pieces of growth. And because of those multiple leaders, you get the buttressing trunk. So the buttressing trunk is a product of. The basal growth nature of olives. And when we start to cut an olive, they naturally sprout back to the nearest tissue to the level surface of the ground or even from the roots that exist underneath in a profuse production of growth. So you want that basal growth. You want the elongation of that basal growth. This is how you get trunk thickening, and this is how you get the buttress in the trunk that olives are known for. But to facilitate that, you've got to let those long, skinny guys go, and you've got to let multiple pieces go to get that expansion of the base that you're really looking for that kind of quantifies and gives olives their aesthetic value. Kim said she didn't think that this repotting would be something to do in the peak heat season. How does this work? Right, right. So again, and I want to be very, very clear about this. I don't know that this is going to work, Kim. I have no idea whether or not this is going to work. I think it will. And I think it will from the perspective that olives are traditionally and very commonly collected during the peak heat of the season. They can be stump cut. They can be stump cut at this time of the year free of roots, and they can survive because of their mechanism and metabolism in the high heat. And Mediterranean varieties in general do tend to perform fairly well in the heat in terms of having their roots manipulated and recovering from that operation. Now, again, I'm not promoting this work as like, hey, everybody, go handle your olives in the middle of the summer. It's not what I'm saying. This is very much experimental, abstract design. This piece of material can't be created until it's repotted. And we wanted to see, because it's been a consistent question on the Q&As. It's been a consistent question that exists in my mind. What happens if we repot olive in the middle of summer? Does it help? Does it hurt? Does it work? Does it fail? I have no idea. So why not take a piece that, although interesting, this piece is interesting, it's not exceptional by any means compared to the other pieces that exist out there that we have available. This is definitely the lesser of all of the pieces that we have to work with. This is the one that I definitely want to experiment on if I'm going to try and fail and see what happens. But also inside of this, how do we take advantage of that very geometric form that exists inside of olives and use that in abstract design to come up with considerations for the style of that tree? And that has to be considered when we start handling olives because they are very, very unique in the way that they grow. Daniel wants to know if there are any other species that can be collected with that flat-cut method. So there are actually quite a few species that can be collected using that flat-cut methodology to differing degrees of success. And I would say olive is by far and away your most common and the one that we see being utilized and treated in that way with, I would say, the greatest number and quantity of successful recipes and sort of cases of success. But I've also had this same experience with tamarisk, which is a very commonly known Mediterranean, very invasive, noxious weed in a lot of areas. Tamarisk can be flat-cut with success. I've seen some redwoods be flat-cut with success. I've seen certain varieties of Mediterranean oak be flat-cut with success. Although I would not promote collecting redwood by stump cutting, I would not promote collecting oak by stump cutting, I have seen it work, and these are Mediterranean varieties, at least Mediterranean in nature, that when we start to see that mechanism from a very strong tree in the ground that builds up this energy, and then we come back in and start to handle that tree, that stored energy and that flat-cut reduction and correct handling of the roots, balance of water and oxygen, etc., has had the propensity to be successful. Leonard wants to know how you can remove all those roots without risk to the foliage. There is a high amount of risk in what I am doing here, so let's all just understand that I definitely, this is very, very experimental. Now here's the other question that I would ask. How do we know that we can't unless we try it, right? Now I'm going to execute superior repotting technique tonight to try and make sure that I can take advantage of everything this tree has produced and to take advantage of the roots that are remaining on this piece, hopefully having success. But I cannot guarantee that this thing is going to thrive and survive after this. It's my best guess that it will. I don't ever want to roll the dice on the life of a tree, but this being a discarded piece of material that sort of serendipitously took root and we were able to take advantage of, it does allow us to feel a little less guilty about experimenting and utilizing this as a vehicle, teaching tool, as well as sort of a collaborative effort between the Mirai Live community and us to be able to really test the limits and push the envelope of olives and their design. Okay? Please, please, please understand I'm not saying go do this. This is very much a work in progress that we're kind of undertaking tonight. Okay? Now, having reduced the root mass here, saving, I've got some very dense pockets of established soil down here. I've got very, very beautiful established roots down in this area. I am starting to see the potential for a front to occur where I can take advantage of that deadwood and now I can see all of these contours. Jesus, can you see that? There's something really special that's kind of happening right there and let me see. Let me just grab. Okay, let me see if I can kind of support my fancy. Okay, there's something kind of interesting that's happening right here. I'm looking for that piece, but let me come back to Eve. And Eve, let's see what happens here. Let's just kind of play for a minute with this and what we can do. Okay, so I could bring this slightly forward. Okay, I like that. There's some interest there. There's some real quality right there. Just to the offset, sort of looking at the deadwood, seeing the contour of the living tissue here, I see some potential there. Okay, let me go ahead and prop back up here. I want to be real respectful of the roots that I've kept. Okay, this doesn't look nearly as interesting as I thought it would now that we have all of that gone. These roots are definitively going to continue to feed what exists on this piece. All of this living tissue here is all working together. I have a strong feeling that these are going to be just fine from this repot, but I definitely have lost kind of my passion for that potential front on the tree. So let's keep kind of looking at what we have here because we see where the structural elements originate, where they emerge. Notice how fleshy these are because they were below the soil. We're going to need to be real careful now that we've exposed those from sunburn, make sure that we protect those in a shady environment, maybe even potentially shade those with a cloth or something over the rest of the summer and even into the fall and use the wintertime to harden that up. Okay, there's something that exists in here as well. Okay, we see sort of this angle. We talked about this angle being a potential opportunity and option. There definitely is something of value that exists inside here. And so I think we have two real options. I think we can come this way and start to really lean on some of this character that exists in through here. And I am finding this to be incredibly attractive. Very abstract. I love the face. I love the contour of the face. I love the deadwood and the torn apart, kind of broken apart piece. I love seeing this very round contrast to that two-dimensional shape. And then thinking about how that foyer mass can engage, potentially even foyer mass engaging over here maybe or staying where it's at and existing over here and really kind of moving out. We could come high with it. We could build a canopy right up in here, push some growth out into here and create a larger canopy to reduce the visual mass of that big chunk. We could keep it small. We could compress the apex. We could push out in that direction, compress the apex or push out in this direction. And really, really start to magnify the scope and scale of that trunk. A lot of different options here. People are really, really pumped about this right now. They like this one? The chat likes this front. Ah, yeah. Okay, cool. So let me see if I can just grab a few different container options really quick. I don't know. This stone monkey oval here kind of... Huh? Okay, okay. Just better that way? Sometimes it's just better. What are you going to do? Obviously. Well, the studio was clean. Well, yeah. We'll clean it tomorrow. Okay. Yeah. All right. Now, this has some interesting potential. Might be a little bit big. I'm curious what the crew thinks about this. Let me see if I can just prop this so that I can let go. Okay, that has some interest to it. But the straight wall is almost like we almost lose something of quality in there. And I want to be respectful of trying to maintain that abstract quality. Now, I also brought up a Horst Heinzelrider that definitely has, I think, some ruggedness in terms of the glaze color, et cetera. It's a little bit smaller. I really like the red color of the stone monkey, but I think the size is maybe not quite right. So in the Heinzelrider, it feels like we're trying to shoe it in to kind of maybe too small of a container. Let me see. I got one more idea down here. This tree is pretty rugged. It is pretty darn rugged. And not only do I have a J-cross, I kind of have what I would consider to be a very incredibly creative J-cross, which if we're going to go with a creative tree, and it might be too literal, like one-to-one, which is always the risk, right? When you go abstract with abstract, you like cancel out the abstract, and it's just nothing. I like it. It blends into the darkness of the container, the darkness of the olive. That's really where I saw the red of the stone monkey potentially working really well. Now, let's take – I just wanted to try a round because we haven't really ventured down this route quite yet and just sort of see what is a Georgian. This is really – it worked out well. This is really where sometimes just a real earthy, caramel or lighter brown-colored container, slight reddish hue can start to really pick up some of the merits. Green leaves, beautiful, right? Shape, size, feels appropriate, starts to really max out some of the characteristics of the tree. It's a little bit docile, kind of attractive though. I think we should look at the red one again. You want to look at the stone monkey again? Yes. Lots of folks in the chat like the stone monkey. Not a lot of love for the J-Cross in this scenario. Yeah, it didn't work. It didn't – and that's the only one that I have that's close to the right size. So that's not a J-Cross issue. Yeah, I'm a fan of this. Boom Time Mirai needs more J-Cross. This looks good. You guys like that, huh? Yeah. The red. The red. Yeah. Super green foyer mass, and now you've got this beautiful red clay body. And I mean, it is very stunning. It's very, very, very, very stunning. Is that what we should do? That's what I think. We got a lot of people saying the red one in the chat. Red one? All right, let's do – Some people, eh, but – Here's what I think. First time, experimental, we're on the right track. Now, what would I want to see in terms of abstract design when we're focusing on this funky of an olive? I want a little more. What we're doing here, we saw if we go too far in the abstract direction, and this is – I didn't plan on talking about this, but this is literally a perfect dialogue to be having about abstract design with trees that sit outside of the convention of shape, okay? We see with the Jonathan Cross, when you have that kind of abstract, really wild organic form in the container and you put a wild organic form into that organic form, the organic form in the organic form, it's too much organic form. There's, like, no organization. It's a little too crazy, and you lose what's unique about that really special tree, okay? So, when we put it into the stone monkey, you have a very straight-walled, very simple oval, and this is beautiful. The simplicity with the wildness of the olive merges together absolutely spectacular in the way that it's shaped and formed. Okay? But, but, if I really wanted to sort of close that gap, to not go so abstract and so simple, a little bit more ornateness, a flared-out rim, a little bit of a delicate sort of band in the midsection, something interesting in terms of texture happening in the feet, some degree of elevation to pick it up, any of these things would change the feeling of the container. To add that little something that meshes with the organic but has a little bit more detail, right now, we're sort of talking about those opposite polarities. Super abstract, extreme visual interest, really, really simple, really clean, really, really subdued. And that, that can be a beautiful aesthetic in itself to maximize abstract design. I think this is our best option, and I think this is what we're going to go with. So, I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to prepare this. We'll get it into the container. We'll see if we feel comfortable after the repot, going ahead and setting some of that structure and determining how this tree is going to look. But let's first get it secured into the container itself, okay? So, we're good? We feel good? Everybody feels good? I think we're good. A couple of people think it's too big, but... We'll take it. We'll take it as a first step. Let's see what happens, okay? All right, out you go. Okay, and I'm just going to be really, really careful with these roots that I have. And again, I want you guys to know that this whole piece right here is a very dense mass of roots. The living tissue crawls up into these living pieces that we have. I don't know how that works. I don't know how this piece up here will fare, but all of this stuff is all very, very tight and compact. As long as I don't abuse that section, I shouldn't have an issue with the viability of those roots. Again, a lot of the success is going to hinge on how the tree responds to this time of year, but we can do our very, very best to try and sort of mesh all aspects of it and give it that chance of survival. Mike wants to know, are there other species which we might encounter more frequently which you feel like the handling would be similar to olive, or is olive unique? Man, I feel like broad-leafed evergreens that exist in the Mediterranean regions of the world. I think there are some some Eliagnus that could probably be handled relatively aggressively. I think that there are some camellias that could be handled with maybe a little bit more of an aggressive hand. And when you start to think about I don't know how many people have tried to collect manzanita in the middle of the summer. I don't know if anybody's ever tried it. I know you can try to collect them in the early spring or the fall, and there's a lot of failure. I don't know if it would behave any different being relatively Mediterranean in its behavior. Again, I don't know, just speaking hypothetically. I wonder if there aren't some species that are very sensitive root-wise at a majority of the times of the year that increase their ability to be handled. And potentially even heavily reduced during the summer season. But we talk about madrone. Again, some of the Quercus varieties have shown success. So I don't know. When we look at olive, here's what I do know. Nature never just creates one single tree that behaves a singular way. It doesn't exist. Now if you start to say, well the coastal redwood it's 400 feet tall, man. It's like, okay, cool. But the coastal dug fir, the Pacific dug fir was actually taller. So you can shoot that one down. And you could talk about the mass of the giant sequoias. And then you could go and you could start to look at some of the baobabs. So again, you could say, well the bristlecone pine, 5,000 years old. Okay, well there's like three or four species of pines that are knocking at the door of the bristlecone in terms of oldest tree in the world. So I'm guessing there's something that will behave exactly like an olive will, almost exactly like an olive will. Kim wants to know if you would put this on a heat mat after this. No, because a heat mat, in order for the heat mat to work, a heat mat has to have cool air temperatures and warm root zone temperatures. And so if we've got warm root zone temperatures and warm air temperature, then a heat mat definitively will not work in terms of inducing, a greater amount of root growth. So I wouldn't worry about a heat mat. It won't give you any degree of effectiveness. But what we will want to do is give it some really wonderful protection from intense sun. Obviously, we've got not only the root mass that's been impacted, but these trunks. And Eve, if you can just show sort of the fleshy nature of these that are below the surface. Unlignified in their growth, definitely susceptible. We want to be very, very careful with these. We want to be very careful with that. Okay. Let me just get my tie-downs here. Simple 2-2 with a counter block, and we should be good to go. And again, this is really where we pull in some of those techniques and concepts that we obtained during the winter repotting season. Nothing changes. A little bit out of season. I almost feel like we repotted so much this last year that I haven't actually gotten rusty in terms of the application of repotting. But we're going to know really soon if that's true or not. Michael asked if these are similar to bougainvillea at all. I would say bougainvillea probably has definitely the ability. Now, interesting about bougainvillea, when we talk about... And Juan Andrade brought this up when he was working on the bougainvillea front. He was working on the bougainvillea from Mariah Live. The fact that a lot of the air-layered or flat-cut bougainvillea rot out in the center. And that is not typically something that you see happen with olive. Olive wood is extremely rot-resistant, extremely durable, extremely hard, to the degree that carving them or manipulating this dead wood is a total nightmare. But I think that bougainvillea does have some of that sort of strength that exists inside of the tissue around that space where that tree is growing. And so it definitely has that ability to endure the flat-cut. Okay. Get my screws together here just so I'm all ready. All right. And I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to go straight in here. Let me put down an aeration layer. Now, this is something interesting. And people that handle broadleaf evergreens typically tend to go with a mixture of pumice lava and akadama. I'm going to go with solid akadama here. And I'm going to do so because I know that my broadleaf evergreen, although not as rapidly growing as a deciduous piece of material, is definitely more rapidly growing, more transpirational, more water-movement-based than a coniferous piece of material. And as a result of that, I'm not going to need for the root situation in this container to last that six- to eight-year kind of benchmark that we have set for our conifers, which means I can get away with a more highly nutrient-available, richer growth environment with the akadama. And as the roots scale that akadama, I'm not going to suffer from having chosen to pursue that kind of a scenario in the container. So in doing this with my evergreen oaks with the Eliagnus, the broadleaf evergreens that we utilize, I've had tremendous, and I do say, and I will emphasize, tremendous success with solid akadama. And so I still, to this day, believe that solid akadama, with its scalability, is the best possible consideration for broadleaf evergreens as a soil component, and that's really why I'm going to use it and continue using it as I am right now. Okay, now, I've got to support this piece, and I've got these beautiful shelves that I have existing underneath this. I'm also going to use these areas to potentially secure the tree, too. So I just want to kind of triage as best I can. Make a mark there. Ah! Come on. Okay, you stay. Don't go anywhere. Okay, now, I'm going to go straight up to this region, and I'm going to try to get as sharp in terms of my wedge. I'm going to try to get as sharp of a piece of contact as I possibly can straight up into that tissue, and what that allows me to do is that allows me to come into that with my tie-down wires, and usually I can bridge this gap with our sphagnum moss, but that gives me a really beautiful space to hide that block, definitely secures the tree, and if I secure here, and again I come back and I tie down strong to this lower corner here, I've got two great regions to be able to anchor the tree really, really well. So let's go ahead and place our first one here. I'm going to have to support ever so gently. Definitely the impact driver is not the tool of choice for that, but with everybody who wanted to see a vibrating table, that's about as close as you're going to get. Bringing it back. Just, just, I just thought I would, just thought I would pay homage to the conversation that died. I mean, you've probably restarted it now. I didn't restart it because they know, they know that that's not, that's not going to fly. I hope so. Ravi wants to know if you would consider substituting lava for diatomaceous earth to add a component that contributes to nutrition. You know, I think there's opportunity there and it just hinges on does diatomaceous earth actually hold up in the same way that lava does. And I, and I don't, I don't know if it does or not. I've heard mixed results. There are bonsai cultures in the world that lean heavily on diatomaceous earth. And I've heard mixed reviews about the longevity. The longevity of it. Okay, let me go ahead and cut that guy off. Okay. And let me come back to this one here. I'm going to go ahead and snip these. Go ahead and anchor this right here. Okay. Feels pretty good. Cut that off because this is going to be driven straight into the root mass. Okay. All right. So, should be. Yeah. Feels pretty good, right? If we can pick the tree up and the pot stays then we know we've done a good job. Very, very easy. Now, my third point of contact was achieved right here. And that's what really gave me sort of that steadfast connection with the actual container and allowed me to get away with that. All right. Now let's go back to the concepts in the repotting process. And these come from just sort of that notion that we really want to be layering these exposed roots that we have on the backside of this. Okay. This is not new to you guys. You've seen this before. I'm going to kind of rock it through some of this so that we can actually get to the part where we get to look at the structure. And I'm going to pull out these pieces along the bottom. Now, I've left a little bit of tissue so that they can grow. But really what I'm trying to push for and what I want, you can see the roots even coming off of. You see this, Jesus? Okay. You can see the roots coming off of this. I'm going to really value these roots. I'm going to lay these in. Let me go ahead and grab my chopstick. Okay. And I'm going to go ahead and try to, as best I can, tease these apart to layer these back into the container now, having separated all of that sort of root mass. And just getting that back into the container in a way that allows me to preserve the roots, try and keep this section of the root mass together not doing a whole lot of damage, not planning on doing a whole lot of work. Still quite a bit of soil in here, but I also don't want to mat these roots together. Okay. And just very, very ever so gently taking the roots that we have left, okay, and creating a really, really nice grouping here that we can now expand into the rest of the container. Okay. And for anybody again who's collected olives before, you know that this is a copious quantity of roots that we still have left on that. I feel very good about this. I'll fill up the rest of it. I'll do a really, really delicate detailed chopstick. And then let's come back and let's talk about the potential design of this. I don't know if we'll design it tonight, but already, just sort of what we've come to, very, very powerful in its form, I think, and the character and the uniqueness of the tree. Kim wants to know if you can do a piece of bark over the screw. I'll probably use some sphagnum. And that's right at that soil line where I probably will have soil mounted up. I mean, we'll see by the time we're done here where we end up. But I'm assuming it's going to be actually be covered pretty well. Now, notice that I'm using, again, my fingers to tease in the soil into those big spots that exist, those big holes. We talked about this with the Taxus where I was really kind of working on that. Now that we start to see that base covered up, now look at what we're getting. Ooh. Ooh-da-da. Right? Interesting. Interesting contrast to the simple container. Interesting discussion of abstract design with a piece of material. This is definitely not going to look like a standard bonsai when it's finished. And that's okay. That's kind of why we got into this. And I feel like in terms of our opportunities in bonsai, I feel like this is where olives allow us to be extremely free and creative. And when we're done, let's go through some of the design options again and really talk about what's possible. Okay? Brett wants to know what size Akadama you're using. So I'm using 1 16th to 1 quarter. I'm kind of using my steadfast, my steadfast size particle striation that I generally do tend to utilize. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to, again, same concepts for repotting. Notice I'm giving that downward pressure, making sure to work those exposed roots into the actual physical container. Same things that I applied during the entire spring repotting season. Just executing those now when I'm sweating a lot more and it's a lot hotter in the studio and I'm working on a species that I do believe can tolerate this kind of work. Okay? So still following those steadfast principles. I've got to find those air spaces. I've got to really fill those regions to make sure I give that balance of water and oxygen to those pieces. And I want to be very careful because this is in those roots. I want to be careful to come back and fill those pieces and make sure that I don't leave that spongy air pocket existing inside of that root structure. Olives, man. Olives. Olives. I never thought I'd see the day. You know, when these came up and Randy brought these up, I was like, oh, thank you. You've just opened sort of a new door. And honestly, he got these and they were, let's just say they were in very, very rough shape. Like they were in rough, rough shape. And they didn't grow for maybe the first six months that he had them. So to even think about that, for six months these things didn't produce a single, a single sprig of growth. And now to look at how vigorous they are and how many roots they produced. The fact that this was the only one that had roots growing out of the bottom of the Anderson Flat. And again, it was also the one that was kind of like, you know, of all the ones out there, if we're gonna sacrifice one to experiment's sake, this is the one. Which I think has, has like two different meanings to it. It's like, wow, if that's the one you're experimenting with and willing to sacrifice, the other ones must be amazing. Because this is not a slouch for an olive. This is a pretty, pretty piece of material here. But beyond that, when you start to look at it, it's like, if this is the only one that has this kind of root mass and you see that it's still relatively underdeveloped and a little bit fragile, we definitely need to give the other ones more time. Okay? So time is gonna be, time is gonna be very, very important. And you can see how delicate those fleshy roots are. They do, they do have quite a bit of delicacy to them. If you handle them incorrectly, they do break apart. And I'm not gonna go too hard on these roots. I'm gonna be very, very gentle. I'm not gonna chopstick them to death. I'm gonna even chopstick them less than I was chopsticking, say like the Taxus. Okay? Just enough to make sure that I've got the major air pockets teased out of it. From that point forward, I'm gonna go ahead and just call it good. Okay. Feels good. All right. Let me see what I got here. Oh, Troy. Let me double you. Very, very nice. Okay. We'll have to do some sphagnum treatment to those open spaces. I'm gonna go ahead and just fill those with the broom for the time being. And again, this is one of those things that really perturbs people right now. They say, man, aren't those roots, aren't they, if they're dry, they're dead. These roots that are dry or the roots that are in the soil, absolutely alive. Absolutely alive. These pieces on the back, these pieces on the back, can you kind of zoom into these here? Okay. These pieces on the back, absolutely alive. Even though the exterior is a little bit dry and parched, if we just open this up, we would see very, very viable living tissue that exists inside of here. You don't have to be so spastic. This isn't out in the sun. They're not being dehydrated, right? So we're not, I'm not worried about harming the roots anymore. What we've done, very sustainable. We've given it every chance of surviving this experiment. I have a lot of confidence. I'm going to share the results with you guys, but I'm also going to go ahead and carry on with the rest of the stream before I go and water this and talk about the potential design opportunities that now present themselves. Okay? So don't worry. It's totally okay. I won't let this tree unnecessarily die just to discuss design with you guys. Andrew asks if you wanted to do mostly Akadama for the root scaling but wanted just a little bit more oxygen, could you add 1 16th inch lava so it holds up a bunch of space? Ooh. So I would actually say quarter inch lava. I would add quarter inch lava. If you were going to add one or the other, I would add quarter. Or add the whole variety, 1 16th to quarter inch lava but add it at a, you know, 25% Akadama, 75%. That would be the way to add an amendment. All of the sizes and add them in their proportion, right? So one scoop of lava, three scoops of Akadama. Something like that I think would work. If you're going to go that far, you're going to have to put some pumice in it. Okay. So let's take a look at this now because we have several different design decisions to be made. And I think that we'll hold off on design today. I didn't know it was going to happen. I didn't know if we had this solid root mass and we were able to do it real effortlessly, I thought we'll design it. This is a little bit more involved so I'm going to say let's conceptualize. Let's dream about the future and really think how we can utilize this. This is really where we start to talk about. Okay. On the backside here, we have this piece here. We'll see. We'll see what happens with this. We'll see if it can close the gap. On Quercus, on some of the oaks that we work with, you've seen a lot of broadleaf, evergreen oaks. This piece, if we had the roots down here, no problem. It would absolutely survive. With an olive, do I roll the dice and think it'll survive? I do. I do. I do see the question of do we compress, not even necessarily desire or aspire to use this, compress the canopy right here, really low, bring it kind of forward so we have this canopy growing into this region, compress that canopy, push out in this direction. Do we compress that canopy here and push out a branch to the right side and really engage that open space of that olive trunk on the right side? This is one option. Okay. And this would be another option that magnifies the girth of the trunk in terms of that abstract design to the utmost degree. The more we close down that height and expand that width, the bigger that trunk looks, the more powerful it looks and the more abstract it looks. But, but, if we do get this to survive and we can use this up in here, a canopy right up around the movement that exists inside of this deadwood, potentially a branch coming here or maybe that canopy being here and a wonderful tension forming the trunk or a wonderful tension filled design returning back on that trunk, I could see that being extremely spectacular. And I think that when you have a very low squat trunk like this, if you want to maximize the interpretation of movement that exists in this trunk, the more that you elevate that foyer mass and use the foyer mass to really move your eye through the design, the greater you take advantage of that abstract nature. So many of us try to compress every single tree. We end up compressing the interest out of the tree. And I think the pivotal thing for this piece is to have foyer mass up here or potentially even moving this piece so we get a canopy out here and we start to draw that asymmetry out, take advantage of that abstract nature and really use the foliage mass to move us through the design. Ready for some questions? I'm ready. So Eric wants to know if you still have top dressing stashed from spring or did you have to make some new stuff? And then I asked if Troy was going to have to do that tomorrow. So Troy said we don't have any top dressing and I was like, it's okay, we'll make some. Specifically for this tree we'll make some. We don't have any stashed. We used like, we were at, we were literally like using toothpicks by the end of spring. Like bamboo was gone, steel wire was gone, top dressing was gone, soil was gone. Like we emptied the tank this year spring at Mirai. Biggest repotting season we've ever had. It was nuts. But yeah, we're going to have to construct something for this tree. Marcia wants to know if you'll make any kind of structure to promote and support the roots and growth at the top. So I will definitely be treating these pockets and regions with the wet sphagnum and okadama combined. And I may even need to tie that or secure that system together across the back here just to hold that wet sphagnum in place, help those roots that potentially could get down to the soil line, get down to the soil line. I could have kept more back here but I don't think that's going to work. So we're going to have to create that dependency and the goal for this was how far can we push an olive if we choose to remove those? Will these remain viable? This is the question that we have. This is the experiment that we've undertaken and I do believe that we will see that be positive in terms of our ability to get success. Okay? A couple more questions. Okay. If you're going to talk about olives, these questions were about flat cuts. Uh-huh. Talk to me about flat cuts in olives and then we'll call it good. All right. Paul wants to know if crepe myrtle would respond to flat cutting. Possibly. Possibly. I can see crepe myrtle being really, really powerful from that perspective. I don't know 100% but I have a feeling that there's a high likelihood you could get success with crepe myrtle. Yeah. That's another one. That's a great thought. And then Andrew wants to know about prunus being a flat cut. Are there any species allowed to dig that look like this but the roots are too big to keep? I think that with prunus and deciduous trees, you only need a small amount of fine root from a really stocked up field-grown piece or piece in the native landscape. So to sever those thicker roots, leave a little bit of a junction where they exist before you sever them and hope to get some fine roots right on the base of that thicker root, I think that's an acceptable way to go about the collection of prunus and cross your fingers and hope it works. There was a long-time mentor in bonsai to me when I was in California. His name is Scott Chadd. He has lotus bonsai up near Placerville, California where I used to spend a lot of time doing bonsai. And his famous quote to me, and this is probably, he probably doesn't own this, right? And some of you may have a questionable feeling about this. Kill it or make it a bonsai was what he used to tell me. And when we would collect oak or when we would take big nursery stock and reduce it down, you always want to reduce when you collect out of the field, when you reduce big nursery stock down, you want to reduce it down to the root system that you ultimately want to cultivate because that's when it has the most stored energy and the ability to respond and that is the size of the root system that you're going to be building on. You can't come back and really reduce it heavily again. So really make that comprehensive decision and commitment to the best of your ability and then provide the best aftercare. And that has really been fruitful for me as a bonsai practitioner. Not saying I have 100% success, but it has helped me create bonsai root systems with the material that I had access to that I could utilize and didn't walk myself into corners where I couldn't fix it later. A couple more. Leonard wants to know if you could cut any of those sprigs and whole graft to the front. If I could cut any of these and graft? Yeah. I think he means thread graft. So I would have to, if I tried to, you know, thread graft through here, right, then this is naturally going to thicken over the course of time. It would eventually choke itself out because this is all deadwood, right? So there's no living tissue I couldn't cut and scion graft to it. The only place that I have living tissue is literally right around, you can see the line where this was ripped out of the ground and the living tissue being in the root system right here. This is the only place that I have living tissue in the production of roots. This is really the only place I could get foliage. So we're going to be building the structure of this around that deadwood. We're going to be wiring it to sort of wrap around and create that tree-like form. Interestingly enough, very, very common, not only in North America but also in Japan, Europe as well, to utilize olive and have to utilize olive in this fashion to maximize it as a bonsai. Very standard approach and we will make it look beautiful. And again, utilizing a little bit of a higher concept for the design to draw your eye through with the movement of the foliage mass and really maximize that abstract nature of the design, I think this is the direction that I wanted to take and I think Vern wanted to know if there was a flat cut on this tree. So this was not flat cut and this is what's interesting. This was actually torn out of the ground and because those olive stumps when they're clearing a big orchard are so rock hard, they'll actually use the compression of the hydraulics in the bucket to shatter the trunks and pull them out in sections. So this wasn't even, didn't even have the courtesy of having been cleanly cut to get that beautiful cambial layer. It was literally flat cut in the middle and then we had it was literally ripped off of a chunk of a much larger olive and thrown into a pile and that olive took root, right? That piece took root and that tells you how durable olives are which again is why I felt comfortable experimenting and I know that the summertime is a great time to have success. We will see. We will see how this goes. We will know more about the durability of olive and I really hope it's successful so that we can potentially look to design this in that abstract concept we've developed. That's all the questions we have. Very cool. Very cool. So let's come back to just the understanding of olives and the development process for olives, okay? Now we have all of these very singular kind of grayish rubbery branches and we start to say, okay, well, what do we do? What do we do with these now, right? Number one, like any tree that we utilize, once this tree has recovered from this operation, we want to be wiring out the structure with these very soft supple branches. Second, we want to be shedding those primary lines, putting the movement into it that we want, laying it out and leaving all of those long to grow, elongate, thicken and really generate energy, rebuild that root mass. This would be step number one. Step number two, when we start to get that length, when we start to get that thickening in the branches that we want, we come back in and we can shorten that branch to the location that we want it to be in terms of its length, right? We don't go back behind it and then build the branches back out to where we want it. We shorten it to the length that we want and with that reduction, we will see the stimulation of interior growth. Now, much like we talked about on the Quercus, the gold cup, broadleaf evergreen oak, if we have the leaves, when we do that cutback, we get the stimulation of more pieces of ramification pushing from that tree. The same goes for olive. If we reduce this very large photosynthetic surface area by 66%, two-thirds of the leaves, when we decide to prune this back, it will produce multiple pieces of ramification from the axis of those leaves just like Quercus will dependably do as a broadleaf evergreen. And this is really when we move into the creation of secondary branching with that first cutback of the primary structure that we've built or with the increase of tertiary ramification after we've built that secondary scaffolding. So we wire the lines in, we grow it out. It gets to where we want it. We cut it. Those secondary branches push. We lay out our scaffolding. They get to the length we want. We cut them. And now we start that building of tertiary. This is the process of building an olive much like any of our broadleaf evergreen species. And hopefully, if everything goes well, you guys will get to take that journey with us on this piece of material. That's all we got. Yeah? All we got? Well, you never know what's going to happen when you roll the dice. Tonight we repotted in the middle of August. I hope it goes well, but it was certainly fun to think about this abstractly and understanding following the process of this piece as it recovers, hopefully, from this operation. Something that we will share with you guys, success or fail, we will share the final product of this with you and let you know how it goes. Anyways, thank you guys for the support. Great to tap into a really wonderful species that does open the opportunity and the door for us to have some summer exposure to a multitude of techniques. I think we'll see these olives evolve very quickly at Mirai and we'll be here answering some of your questions with the knowledge that we developed from this experimental process. Have a great rest of your week. We'll see you on Thursday 10 a.m. for the live Q&A and if we don't see you then we'll catch you next week on Tuesday. Thanks guys. 
