what's going on everybody wednesday wednesday mini stream if you missed the super tuesday stream last night elm yatsubusa elm all the nuances of yatsubusa elm that sheen established deciduous root model it was a good one now tokutake pots they're up on the website we used one of his beautiful wares last night uh and you know the thing that i didn't discuss that i wish i had was how to handle rough bark um but you can see it just in the way that i handle that tree touch points locations etc anyways lots to be gained from that check it out once it's in the library uh eve is on the chat today josh is producing the stream from afar and jesus my commando in arms is in the studio what what um in the spirit of repotting and a precursor to repotting as well as a finality to the repotting season and the beginning of the necessity for us to be doing pruning and hinching foyer management how do we manage our tools what is commonly practiced as a tool management process for all of our bonsai necessities this is a very important subject matter because when we start to talk about tools tools empower us to make really beautiful things happen in the aesthetic shift and manipulation of the root system as well as the foyer mass and the quality of those cuts and the ability for your tool to cut is what enables us to create a cut with our tivology available to that tree also very cool segue is not in the cl78 like you mentioned cowl'sевfee staff too we don't stepped up for your 5d but weden ctr illing we could not manage our problem with that as any of you own a cowl6 this really enables your tool to create the cleanest possible wound or entry site on that on that tree the cleaner it is the faster it heals the better it compartmentalizes and therefore keeping our tools in good shape is just a really nice way to show our trees a little bit of courtesy as well as to enhance what's going to be the product of all of our time and attention that we pay to those trees okay so i'm going to break this up into three general sections all uany and perfect 365 Đây là? First of all, we're going to talk about tool cleaning. Tool cleaning is something that we engage with at Mirai periodically. If I'm just being honest with you, I don't overly manage my tools. I invest in very nice tools. Very nice tools are a beautiful blend of hard metal as well as hard metal that has the ability to be sharpened and have the softness to really achieve a fine edge. When we talk stainless steel, the management of stainless steel is entirely different. The sharpening of stainless steel is a very hard metal, very challenging to do on our own. I do like to use a non-stainless steel tool for my own personal preference, but there is no rule. If you like stainless steel, if it makes management and the lack of necessity to clean and rust very, very easy and accessible for you, go for it. But the sharpening process is a little bit more involved than what we're going to be utilizing in these hard Japanese steel. Okay. We see... Do you sell Joshua Roth tools? I believe in Joshua Roth tools. I've tried every tool on the market. I love the quality of Joshua Roth. I've had them since I was very young. I use them in Japan in addition to Kikua. I have Masakuni. And I still go back to Joshua Roth. Now, this is a very common thing that happens. And we're going to start with shears. We're going to work through root cutters. And we're going to finish with concave cutters today. We will come back to do spherical. But what you see happening here, very common thing that happens with our shears when we're doing decandling, when we're working pines, junipers, spruce, heavy sap. You notice that sap accumulation. Sap accumulation not only on the cutting edge, but also on the flat edge. There you see that flat edge. Sap accumulation. Okay. Now, sap accumulation, when we talk about tool maintenance, a lot of times we think, I have to sharpen my tool because it's not cutting as well. And sometimes it's simply the removal of sap, which forms a hardened surface that spreads or separates our cutting edges, just by removing that sap as a general maintenance practice. When we see it accumulate and start to take on that black coloration, which says there's enough of it and it's been combined with dirt that will eventually dull our blade. If we just notice that at that moment in time, the best thing we can do is clean and maintain our tools. We are heads and tails above where we would be in terms of cutting capacity. Okay. Now, we could utilize some sort of heavy-duty solvent on this. But I don't think that heavy-duty solvents are, one, necessary and, two, very effective. When you just look at the eraser block. Okay. The eraser block is something that's available at BonsaiTonight.com. Jonas carries these. Okay. It's a very fine grit block, very soft and malleable. You see the corners are rounded from a lot of years of use. All right. And this just has a slight abrasive on it that allows us, if we use it in the plane of the surface that we're cleaning, allows us to just get rid of that sap that's accumulating on our blades. Now, here's the problem. With any abrasive that we apply to a tool, if we apply it against the edge of that blade, that cutting surface, we are going to immediately dull that cutting surface and potentially damage it beyond repair. Okay. So, if we don't trust ourselves in that process, the other thing we can do with a cleaning block is we can set it right on the edge of the table. We can, much in the same fashion as we would sharpen, just place that surface right there. And we can go ahead and maintain that surface flatness while we go ahead and we remove all of that excess sap. And you see that sap. You see the sheen forming on that metal. I'm not trying to sharpen with that. I'm not trying to cut this. But I'm not trying to dull that edge either. I'm just getting rid of that sap that exists on that surface without doing any damage to the cutting edge. And we would know if we were starting to touch the cutting edge onto that block because we would see debris accumulate on the top of that block. Okay. So, when we look, we want to get through all of that sap and we want to make sure that we clean that up really nice. Now, the tip is always going to be the hardest part. Okay. You notice on the tip there you see where I've cleaned a majority of the edge. There's still some black. I'm going to go back to that cutting area. I'm going to come back with just the corner of my block here. Okay. And I'm going to stay away from that cutting edge. But I'm just going to give this a little bit of love and a little bit of attention all the way out to the tip of my tool. This is where the soft, malleable nature of the cleaning block and its ability to form those rounded edges. And you can even take a razor blade, one that you don't hope to or aspire to maintain a really sharp edge on. And you can just go ahead. And you can round off one of the edges of your cleaning block. Okay. Very, very effective towards having the capacity to clean these flat surfaces without touching the cutting edge and dulling the cutting edge of your tool. Okay. So, I'm just continuing to work. You notice that I have that really clumpy piece taken off. Okay. All right. And I want to get down until I have just a beautiful sheen. Okay. So, I'm going to come back to the flat edge. I'm going to take off that raised sap area. And I'm getting really, really nice. Okay. And this kind of maintenance on your tools, very, very common and necessary maintenance to take that sap off of that flat area. Now, you see that metal is totally clean of all of that sap. All right. Same thing applies to the angled bevel of your cutting surface. Because we cut through, the tissue slides along that cutting surface, we get sap accumulation. I'm just going to go ahead and maintain that cutting surface. All right. And I'm just going to go ahead and let me get out here where I have some space. I'm just going to go ahead and I'm going to try to get as much of that sap. As much of that sap off as I possibly can just by sliding it on that flat side. Okay. Now, it's not as accurate as the sharpening process. But again, we talked about we don't want, we don't want to damage the blade in this. Okay. We'll come back and we'll do the detail work. This is the bulk work of just cleaning off the sap that exists on that cutting side. Okay. And this kind of routine maintenance and cleaning of your shears to get that sap off is very, very functional and effective. We don't have to get out the sharpener. We don't have to get out the sharpening stones. We don't have to do anything other than just remove all of that gunk. Now, I'm stopping because I'm going to show you how to sharpen. And the sharpening process can also remove a lot of that debris that accumulates in addition to honing your edge. Okay. But if we're just talking about general tool maintenance, when we get accumulation of that sap and debris, the eraser, the tool eraser, one of the best tools that we can have to clean up our tools. And of course. If we spent the time to clean off all of that sap, we find that the edges sharpen. We're not going to be needing the water stone or the oil stone. Then we come back and we just take an oil rag and we wipe down those joints and junctions. Nice wet oil rag. Okay. We use the rag that we oil our bone side pots for. Okay. We wipe down the handles. We wipe down all of those nooks and crannies. We might put a little bit of a drop of olive oil or what some people utilize, machine oil inside of that little hinge there to keep that functional. But just wiping down periodically with an oil rag after we clean them is a really good practice to buffer that metal, give it a little bit of a protective coating and help it from rusting. Okay. Now, if we have rust on our tools, we can use a rust removal, again, solvent, or we can use the eraser block on our tool. The eraser block will take off the black outer coating that exists on this metal. You'll notice that the blades are shiny. Okay. So we have that metal blade there, shiny. And then you see this black. That's a coating that protects your tool. The eraser block will take that coating right off of your tool. So if we like that, we can definitely use a rust removal solvent as opposed to the tool. I prefer the tool. I prefer to avoid those solvents because, again, we do have to come back oil. It is a little bit hard on the hands, et cetera. Okay. So for general maintenance, just what do I do on a daily basis, whether we're talking about a root cutter that accumulates sap on the edge of the tool, right? A root cutter oftentimes you see accumulates that sap specifically if we're working with pines as well as on the inside of that mouth. You can start to see some accumulation of debris forming here. We can use the eraser tool and then oil, right? If we have rust on the handles, we can use the eraser block or we can use a greater rust-removing solvent. Okay. When we talk about concave cutters, the same thing. And concave cutters, because these are really digging into tissue. You do see and you'll notice how heavily coated that outer surface is. Now, when I'm dealing with my root cutters and my concave cutters, I really do like to keep the blades shut as I'm working on this. Okay. So when you start to think about this from the side, I like to keep the blades shut so that I don't even have to be as accurate as I do with my shears. I can just come over the top of this and I can get rid of all of that debris. Okay. And you'll notice these are very, very heavily coated in sap. These should all be this silver color. This is the black sap accumulation from all of the work that we've been doing. Okay. Coming back in and just getting rid of that and saving yourself the trauma of having to worry about those edges. Keep those edges together as we get rid of all of that debris. And you want to take that down until that is shiny metal again. Right. And you start to see it. You see the black reducing. You see some metal areas popping out where we've cleaned it up. There is a thick layer of debris there. Okay. And then once I get rid of all of that and I get down to that shiny blade, I come back in and I take that oil rag. Okay. And I rub it down again. Always just a general aspect. Perform this on our tools maybe three or four times a year as an aspect of maintenance, as an aspect of keeping our tools nice and sharp and capable of cutting. Okay. And again, when our tool stops cutting, sometimes it's simply the fact that the tool is dirty that has decreased its cutting capacity. All right. General maintenance. That's what it takes. Okay. So that's what we'll talk about in general maintenance, and then we're going to move to sharpening. Whenever we start to or whenever we prune a tree that we think might have a viral issue, we have a tree that we know has a definitive fungal issue, or we're dealing with any sort of abnormal or irregular growth that we have concerns about, after we finish pruning that specific piece that has those issues, submerging your tool in a shallow Tupperware container filled with rubbing alcohol for a few hours is the way that we go about sterilizing our tools. You could also use bleach. Some people talk about heat or flame treating their tools. I would avoid flames because it can cause the metal to become quite brittle on the very thin, soft metal, and the cutting edge, if we overheat it, and that edge heats up very quickly, chips very easily, and it kind of destroys our tools. So I stick to rubbing alcohol. I try to avoid bleach, but it is also an option and a standard of the horticultural community, nursery industry, etc. But a few hours, two, three hours, submerged in that alcohol should be all that it takes to destroy any pathogens that are existing on your cutting surfaces. Once we take it out, we dry the tool off, and then we have to oil it again. Clean it up if needed, oil it again. That is how we maintain our tools on a consistent basis. Okay, let's get into the sharpening process, because I feel like sharpening is really where we start to define and set the quality of the tool's capacity to cut cleanly. Now, obviously, there's a multitude of stones that we can utilize in the sharpening process. I'm going to be showing you how to use a wet stone today, just because I find the wet stone to be a little bit more accessible when we talk about finding a stone that we can utilize. And this here is actually a ceramic block. I believe this is a 1500 grit and a 2500 grit. And when we're sharpening our tools, we have to recognize that we do want a stair-step of grits. Now, if you know anything about the grit of a sharpening stone, the very, very coarse sharpening stones that we might utilize for bigger, larger cutting tools, like an axe or some of these larger, more aggressive, and I'd say less refined tools, might be in the 600, 800 grit realm of coarseness. When we're dealing with bonsai tools and the sharp, really refined and soft metal edges of our bonsai tools, we are functioning in that 1200, 1500 grit. That's the coarsest that we're going to be utilizing. Unless we have a lot of dings in our blade where we don't have a true cutting edge and we need to truly manipulate that metal, which I almost would suggest you shop out to somebody who's an expert in that sharpening process. But if you have that, you might go to a coarser stone. For general sharpening problems and maintenance, I tend to stick in this realm of the grit as my coarsest stone. Now, when we're sharpening, we always want to be starting with the coarsest grit first. And when we talk about the sharpening process, we have to understand that our tools have a bevel, right? And most of our tools have a singular bevel in bonsai, where one side is angled and another side is flat, okay? So the flat side is very easy to take care of, but unfortunately, the flat side cannot sharpen this tool. The flat side is where we remove the burr, which is the metal that we move from sharpening the bevel, okay? So the diagonal side along the cutting shear, the bevel, when we come to sharpening, the way that we hold our shears, we open our shears here, I hold the rivet, I have the handle in this hand, and I have control here, okay? I go ahead, and I'm going to roll around for you, Jesus, just so that you can see this a little bit easier. And let me move my water. Notice I have water. Okay, now, I'm going to place that bevel, and you see how I have that handle on my shear here, right? Where my hands are located. I'm going to place that bevel. Now, when I start to sharpen, I'm going to rock on that bevel, and I'm going to find where that bevel locks into the stone, okay? Because if I'm not finding that bevel, it means I'm going to be rounding that surface, and if I round that surface, I cannot get as sharp of an edge. I have to keep the bevel flat. Utmost priority in the sharpening process or we are going to destroy our tools. And this is the number one mistake that people make in tool maintenance, is they round the edges of their cutting surface, okay? So I'm looking for that bevel, and I'm locking in that bevel. All right? Now, when I'm using a sharpening stone, I never have my blade perpendicular to the edge of the stone. I always have a diagonal on my blade. So if my stone is here, then my blade is going to be here, right? I never want to be perfectly perpendicular here. I always have an angle, okay? I find my bevel, I place my two fingers with even force and distribution on the top of that blade, and I make a nice clean stroke, okay? When I return, I take that pressure off of the blade, okay? And this takes a little bit of time to really develop the rhythm to be able to sharpen. If you are just learning to pick that tool up, find your bevel again, and make that stroke totally acceptable, once you start to develop a much more comfortable capacity to be able to move that metal and maintain that bevel, what you're going to start to find is that this is far more efficient but you cannot rock the tool or else you'll dig that blade into the stone and immediately destroy your work, okay? But for tool sharpeners that are very, very proficient, to be able to utilize this is an extremely functional and extremely rapid process towards sharpening. Now there's another nuance as we gain more proficiency. Again, in the beginning, we put our blade on the surface, we lock that bevel, and we're pushing. Now watch how I push in terms of my body, okay? I'm not pushing with my arms, okay? Because that is where I start to form this rock and I round the surface of my tool. This is one of the most important things I learned in sharpening prior to going to Japan, something that Mr. Kimura replicated and duplicated. Okay, my back, my shoulders, my arms are locked, okay? And I move everything with my hips, okay? And it looks a little bit weird, but that's okay. We're doing this in the quiet of our own workshop, okay? Even pressure angled on my stone, boom. Okay, boom, right? And in using my hips, my arms, my angle, my pressure, nothing changes, okay? And this is what allows us. Now come in close, Josh. This is what allows us. Watch my hands, okay? No rock on my hands whatsoever. This is exactly what allows me. And if I get a little bit off, I stop, I lock in my flat bevel, and I start again. Okay? Now we know that we're moving metal. And Jesus, I don't know if you can focus on this, but there's an accumulation. There's an accumulation of metal that starts to form a cloud. You can kind of see this gray cloud that's forming on my stone with the water. If I splash it, I can clean it all off. Okay, that's the slurry. That's actually the slurry. And that slurry is very effective in the sharpening process to allow that to accumulate, kind of enriches the sharpening process. I don't have a problem rubbing it away. We'll get more slurry in. This is my coarse stone. But as we get into the finer stones, you want that slurry to accumulate. It hones your blade, and it aids in the polishing and the mirror finish that we're looking for in a really fine sharpened blade, okay? Now what we see when we look at the blade, go ahead and come in tight here, Josh. Okay, notice that that black sap has been removed on this coarse stone. Now I would never want to use a finer grit to take away that sap. But if I'm sharpening, and I'm starting with my coarsest grit, I can use the coarsest grit to get rid of that sap. And generally when we're sharpening, if we're doing so once or twice a year, it's a big sharpening process. We're going to start with that 12 or 1500, and we're going to work our way down to a 3, 4, 5,000 grit stone over 3 or 4 stone step down, okay? But you notice that I'm removing that sap. Now it is tough. It is very tough. You see there's some of it that's a little bit shinier. You notice that midsection. It's a little bit grayer. These are all of the surfaces of the metal and where they're contacting the stone, okay? And that's giving us an indication of where to apply that pressure. Wherever I see areas not contacting the stone, I need to be a little bit more aggressive, right? And clearly I'm seeing a lot of contact along the top of this tool, a little bit less contact along the blade. I'm being a little bit hesitant to really commit to that blade because I'm worried, you know, right? Just getting the rhythm of sharpening. You know, a couple times a year, you really got to find that rhythm, okay? But you can see the metal change in terms of its clarity, shine, and its cloudiness where the debris accumulates, okay? I'm going to come back. I'm going to place that blade. I'm going to find my bevel, and I'm just going to go through on this one single blade the sharpening process to take you start to finish on it, okay? Again, really working with the hips, finding that bevel, okay? Working it back and forth, and I'm just checking. Now this is, now we've started to find, go ahead and come in close. Now we've started to find good contact, okay? I saw that contact. I made the adjustment. I'm going to clean off that metal. Look at that. Look at that. We got rid of all of that debris. Now there still is just a slight, and let me wipe it off on my pants, just a slight amount of cloudiness or fogginess that exists on the inside. You can kind of see that right on the middle. You see the blade is shiny. You see the upper portions are shiny. I probably need three or four more passes, but I'm getting down to a very flat surface. This is exactly what I want. So I'm going to go ahead. I'm going to lock in. I'm going to go diagonal, and let's just see if we can get down, okay? And if we start to stick a little bit, a little bit more water, keep that stone nice and moist, okay? Let's see what we got here. Oh, I like that. That feels quite nice. Yeah, there we go. Now we're starting to really get into, now you notice the homogenous shine across that blade, right? And you see that the light catches it. I've got the shine. Now I've got a nice flat blade, okay? It's at this point. Once I flatten that blade, I lay this flat, okay? And again, this is where we say the flat side of the blade is not the portion that gets sharpened. It's where we remove the burr that forms because this shine is created by the stone removing metal, and that's what forms the slurry. So when it moves that metal, that metal accumulates on this blade right here. I always set this on the stone. Make sure my handle is off of the stone here. Make sure I'm not destroying this blade. Make sure I'm nice and flat, and I drag away from the blade, okay? And what ends up happening is we don't think our scissors are very sharp. We feel that, and it's kind of rounded on that bevel, and then you come back and you take that burr off, and you say, wow, okay, now we've got some cutting edge that's been reformed, all right? That's step one. That basically just got our blade back to zero. It is not a sharp cutting blade yet. Yes, it could cut you. It could be good enough to be pruning our bonsai, finer ramification, twigs, candles. No, it's not going to cut very efficiently. Flip your stone over. If it's a ceramic stone, most of the time they have dual grits. If it's not, you're going to need two or three stones, right? Now I'm moving to the 2,500 grit, and maybe it's 3,000. I think it's 1,500, 3,000, and then I move to a 4,500 grit, okay? Now on this one, same blade. Now I go back to the same process, okay? And I'm again going to reform my posture, my bevel, lock your bevel in. And this one being a finer grit, my tool slides so much more effectively, okay? And every few strokes, just lock in. Make sure that you're comfortable with your position. Make sure you find that bevel and form that slurry, okay? And don't get in a hurry, because when you get in a hurry, you start to round that blade, okay? But we're getting a nice cloudy slurry. And these finer stones, once we get into these grits, slurry help us hone our blade, and it helps us polish that surface, okay? Now I like to mix up my pressure points here. Keep your body really nice. Notice that that handle, this handle's not wobbling back and forth. It's locked in, right? And I've got that beautiful straight polish and movement. Now when I flip this over, because we're dealing with a much, much finer stone, look at what we start to accomplish here. Okay, this is where we start to get that mirror shine, right? And even though we're still in a moderate grit of stone, you're seeing some of those mirror areas where they're kind of grayer, that's actually that mirror. You see that streak right there between those, right? Here there's some cloud, there's some cloud, and that's just beautiful polished metal, okay? That's what we want across the whole blade. We want to see that beautiful polished metal, okay? Now once we get to that beautiful polished metal, then we come back, and we take the burr off again, right? Just pulling away from the blade, cleaning it up, everything flat, pulling away from the blade to take the burr off, okay? Two, three strokes, and now all of a sudden we start to see a cutting blade that's really taking on some sharpness, right? And we know that a cutting blade is sharp. If you're comfortable running your finger along that blade, you should see it shave just a little bit of skin. I'm not quite there yet, but it's starting to get really nice and sharp. Some people do it on their fingernail. That will dull the blade. There's a nice sort of grazing of that, and you can tell when it catches with a minimal amount of pressure, if it catches the skin, and you're able to just shave a slight little bit off, that's a sharp stone. I'm not there yet. I'm just starting to feel it catching, so that means I need to go one level deeper, all right? Now this next level, because I don't have one of these as a water stone, I'm just going to go ahead and show you on an oil stone, but this is a very, very, very fine grit stone. It's incredibly fine grit. This is a natural stone. It's not a ceramic stone, and the difference between natural and ceramic, honestly, a lot of people believe and abide by the natural stones. There's very few natural stones left that are of the kind of fine grit. Arkansas water stones are some of the most famous in North America. There's a few famous rivers in Japan that produce some very impressive sharpening stones. Not a lot of the natural stones left that are of that really high caliber and quality, okay? But if you have the ability to do a natural one, really, really nice thing, okay? So this is an oil stone, which allows us to kind of show how the oil works. I like to just take oil and give it a nice, nice coating, okay? With the water stone, we have to submerge the water stones, particularly if it's ceramic in water, for several hours to allow the stone to hydrate, and then we keep it wet as we're moving. Okay, with an oil stone, just a nice coating. The coarser the grit of an oil stone, the more oil it needs to lubricate the process, okay? This one being very, very fine, it doesn't need a whole lot of oil, just a nice, smooth surface, okay? Be sure that the tips of your scissors, when we're dealing with small, when we're dealing with small stones, tip of your scissor doesn't and shouldn't graze against the bottom of the table so that we don't destroy that cutting edge, okay? Again, angle, and this is a small stone, so watch how I do this up close here. Small stone, I increase the angle of my shear, okay? Small stone, I increase the angle of my shear. As long as I'm not going straight up to the stone, I'm sharpening, a sharpening process, okay? Find my bevel, and again, much, much, and now it slides on this like glass because it's such a small, such a fine grit, okay? Still moving my hips, right? Don't ever move back to your arms no matter how small the stone is. Still moving my hips and maintaining pressure. Find the bevel, okay? Changing that angle just to be able to get the tip of the shear, and I see the slurry accumulating, nice black slurry. Just in front of my scissors, that is helping. I'll move it a little bit, there you go. There's the slurry, okay? That's the metal being removed from the shear, okay? Come back once I feel like I've gotten a nice, really nice, beautiful blade edge, and because this is so narrow, I'm gonna drag diagonally to remove that burr. Notice that, drag away diagonally. Drag away diagonally, okay? And what ends up happening is we start to really, really polish, and you can see what's happening. We're just getting finer and finer and finer, polishing of that surface, getting sharper and sharper and sharper, and right along the blade at the very bottom, you see that streak of really beautiful, nice, and now it's starting to cut. Now it's starting to shave skin, okay? So a nice step-down process to the sharpening that allows us to really reset a blade to be able to go about making it decently capable of cutting and then to really hone that blade. And if we skip that intermediate step and we go from coarse to fine, your blade will not cut at all. You cannot skip the step-down effect towards that really fine grid of stone, all right? Again, when I'm finished, any time I clean my tool with the eraser, any time I sharpen my tool, I dry it off, all of the water, I come back with my oil rag, and I just give my tool a nice rub down, nice, clean oiling on those fresh layers of freshly exposed metal. It gives it a protective layer that allows it or prevents it from rusting, right? And we see that tool really starting to shine and regain some of that surface area. That's, you know, and that's it. I have sped through this process, but I've given you the high points of how to sharpen. I would spend, you know, about ten more minutes probably on each stone, really doing this well if I wanted to make these ready for decandling season. And that's something that we do periodically, right? Sometimes a year, maybe we sharpen prior to the repotting season, prior to the decandling season. Those generally are my two moments, okay? All right, so you're saying, cool, shears, that's great. We love shears. What about concave cutters? What about root cutters? What about knob cutters, okay? Now, we are going to dive back into the spherical sharpening process of knob cutters and rounded concave cutters, right? We're still waiting on our spherical stones to arrive. In Japan, I have not acquired a set here. Usually, I destroy my knob cutters or my spherical concaves prior to needing to sharpen them. I've now had the same set because we're using Joshua Roth, I believe, in their tools. I've had the same set for a while, and I'm going to sharpen them and really, really bring those tools back into their glory, okay? So we'll come back to the rounded and the sphericals, but I wanted to show you how we go about the process with our concave and our root cutters, all right? Now, Troy built me... Troy built me a really beautiful jig, and you just need this jig to be able to hold this, and you need free space underneath this, okay? Because here's the thing. When we start to talk about our root cutters and our concave cutters, just like the scissor, we have to find the bevel, but the bevel is actually on the underside of this tool, okay? The top of this, this is the flat location where burr forms. This bottom side, that's where our bevel is, and that bevel is the most important thing that we find. Yeah, notice that angle, that transitions, and you see it's flat right there, and you notice it's flat right here. That surface is flat. You have your arc here, and then boom, right at that transition point, that is the transition to your cutting surface right there, okay? So now when we get into the sharpening of these, we have to have the capacity in terms of this tool. We have to have the overhang, and let me just space this stone out just a little bit. There we go, okay? We have to have the capacity to be able to find that bevel, right? Open that tool up, find that bevel, and again, same concepts apply. So watch what I'm going to do here. I'm going to find, I'm going to find that bevel, right? Just finding that bevel. I'm looking for that flat, boom, it locks in right there. That's where the bevel is, okay? I'm going to go ahead, I'm going to give it just a slight. I never want to run parallel. I want a slight angle here, okay? Finding that bevel, slight angle, and I'm going to draw that blade down the stone, okay? I'm going to look for my bevel. I'm going to find that bevel, okay? Making sure this blade down here is out of the way. Lock in that bevel, draw down the stone, okay? Lock in that bevel, draw down the stone. Okay, now this takes a little bit of doing because your bevel is a far smaller surface area and the tool is so big, okay? But just draw down that stone. Now, if you really want to maximize the speed of this, right? You can be here and function inside of this short gesture right here where you lock in that bevel, you hold that bevel, okay? That is absolutely possible. This finger is the driving force of this. This hand right here should have a reference touch to the stone so that you hold that bevel and we avoid the rocking process, okay? Very, very clean, effortless, easy way to go about finding that bevel. And again, when we start to look at the inside of that cutting edge, again, let me find the light. There it is, okay? You're seeing where I'm hitting that cutting edge right there. This allows me to adjust. Notice that shine right on the edge. Notice the black center, right? And you see that shine on the other side. So you can see my tool is not necessarily completely true, but I'm hitting a very nice, clean plane there that is contacting the blade. I want to get that black center as well. Let's see if we can work towards that and find that bevel that gives us the best possible manipulation of that, okay? Again, I'm going to lock in. I'm going to find my reference right here. Boom, right on the stone. Okay. Let's see what we got here. Oh, blade. Blade, blade, blade. Getting much better. Getting much cleaner. Yeah, I like that. Okay, blade's starting to experience some nice sharpening. There we go. Okay, ooh, there it is. It's tough with the light. We're starting to get it, okay? Let's come back. I'm going to lock in one more time, and then we're going to remove the burr, okay? All right, I'm going to lock in here. Again, finger up on the stone. Boom, that contact point. There it is. Okay. Right, and you can see the slurry accumulate on the stone. It really starts to function and form a beautiful, beautiful kind of reference to how well we've been sharpening, all right? Now, here's the next step. Burr removal here. I'm going to come onto this. Flat side. I've got to find that flat side. I've got to find where that rolls. You see that space under the blade? And I just close that down. Drag. Okay, and you saw that space open up. I don't want to let that open up. Let me go two fingers. Drag. Drag, okay? And when we do that, what we start to experience is we start to experience that cutting edge forming. And we start to graze our fingers along that, and we start to feel that catching, right? That catch is what tells us we're having a productive impact on the quality of that sharpening of our blade. And if we just look in the light, we should see those two edges coming together very, very clearly. Very seamlessly. Now, when I compare the blade that I've just sharpened to the blade on the other side, night and day difference, okay? So, we're looking at this process of finding that bevel on the underside of the tool, of giving yourself that reference point right here. Boom, okay? We find that bevel space locked in. We give ourselves that reference point, slight diagonal, and we're just working that blade. Working that blade, okay? This is how we sharpen our root cutters, okay? We come back. We lock in here. We find that, and we drag, okay? Very, very easy when you get into it. But it is far more nuanced, and the gesture is much smaller to be able to hone that blade. We step down coarse, medium, and fine. The finer one obviously becomes very challenging as a small piece. We may want a larger stone. I probably would never take my root cutters, which tend to be a deadwood tool. A root pruning tool from a structural perspective. I don't generally tend to take them down to that finer grit that we utilize on our shears designed for branch tips, twigs, or decandling, buds, etc., right? I generally keep these at the intermediate. So, I would use the bottom portion of the whetstone. I wouldn't go any finer than that, okay? That's your root cutters, and again, after we sharpen our root cutters, we come back with our oil rag. We give these a nice touch over all of the metal, a good rub down, wipe off the water, so that we have that protective area covered over our tool, okay? All right, concave cutters, let's do it. Right now, concave cutters, again, we talked about removing all of that gunk. And there's a lot of gunk on there. I wiped them down with oil just to illustrate the point, which is why they're shiny. But you saw where I was cutting through that sap right there and really getting through that accumulation, okay? Again, when we talk concave cutter, bevel of the concave cutter is on the inside here. And let me just catch the light with that. Hold on in tight for me, Josh. Okay, and you can see that silver. Let me just find it right here. Can you see that silver? There it is. There's the silver right there, okay? Right on that edge, that's my bevel. Now, this is a small bevel, super small bevel. Give me a bigger bevel, okay? Not much we can do about it, and the thing with concaves is we have to be very, very careful because we cannot let this blade, this blade on the bottom touch the stone, okay? Right? So again, we're going to find that lock-in point. Find your bevel. Find that bevel. It's all the way down here. I was up too high. It's all the way down here. That's a beautiful lock right there, okay? And again, I'm going to be pulling away, relieving that pressure, okay? Find that point on the stone. Really gripping here, and I'm really trying to give myself as many references as I possibly can for the sharpening process, okay? Because I want that bevel, I want that bevel to stay, okay? Now, the advantage with the concaves is we can find that bevel, and we can find that angle where that blade contacts that stone, and we can drag this all the way down the stone, much like we did with the scissor, because we have a different makeup here. When we talk about that diagonal, elongated piece of metal right there, different makeup, which means it's closer to a shear than it is the root cutters, which are perfectly, right? The root cutters are perfectly perpendicular to the stone. That diagonal helps us, because now we come back in and we lock that into the stone, okay? We find that blade contact, and we can go ahead, give ourselves that finger contact. We can lock our shoulders in, and just move our hips, okay? Okay? So after, you know, six or seven strokes, let's come back and let's see what we're doing here. Let's see where our contact point is, and let's just take a look. And what you'll see is you're seeing, you're seeing that bevel right there. Notice how expanded that silver is. We've gotten the gunk off on the core stone, and we're really starting to see where we're having an impact on that blade. You see a few of those nicks on the blade right there, right? The nicks on the blade. Those are things that this coarse grit stone probably is not going to remove. We would have to go to a coarser stone. I'm okay with some imperfections. Again, a bigger, cruder tool when we start to talk about the scheme of things, and when we prune really refined stuff with our concave, we always clean it up with a razor blade. But we do want to try and get this to be as sharp as possible so that initial clean is very, very effortless in terms of the labor that it takes to accomplish that. Okay? So I'm going to come back onto this stone. I'm going to go ahead, I'm going to find my bevel on the inside of my concave cutter, lock in that bevel, and drag down the stone. Okay? Hips. Hips. Okay? Now, when we come back, we've got a massive burr, right? And when we talk about a burr, when I go and I touch this blade, the burr accumulates in an upward direction. So I'm not feeling the edge on the tool right here. That feels quite round. When I go like this, the burr, that edge that's accumulated is facing upwards. That's where I feel the cutting edge. And if I run my finger across the top, there's a little catch point right there. There's a little catch point. It's very sharp. I would never run my finger along the top of that burr. It would cut it. Okay? So I take that off, and that's what makes that edge move to the very edge of my tool. So again, I find that flat. Okay? Always, always giving yourself a good reference. Find that flat. That flat area. Okay? And this is what I like to do because this has so much movement and mobility. I like to find the point where my blade has no space between the stone, and I just pull with my thumb. Okay? Another technique to be able to maintain on that spherical or that rounded side. I find where my blade has contact with the stone, and I pull with the thumb. Okay? And what that does is it strips that burr off, and now, holy jeez, that's the sharpest these tools have been in a very, very long time. And that's a very minimal amount of effort to be able to get to that point, but it's shaving my skin just with the coarse grit. So we'll continue to work on these blades and bring these tools back to a really high level of sharpening. And a really high level of cleanliness twice a year as a general aspect of tool maintenance. Okay? Then we wipe it down with oil. And now we've gone through kind of that major big exercise of how do we sharpen our shear, right? And to what degree do we sharpen our shear? How far down the grits, right? How to use a water versus an oil stone. How do we sharpen our concave, right? In terms of that rounded outer layer. How do we sharpen our root cutters in terms of really getting that flat surface dialed in, making sure that we maintain and remove all of that metal that we're reducing via the sharpening stone. Okay? Three big tools in our arsenal, okay? We've talked about how we clean the metal. We've talked about oiling as a general maintenance. We've talked about disinfection. And we've talked about the sharpening process. And again, you know, this is, we have to understand that Boneside tools only have so much cutting metal on them, over the course of time. And if we sharpen our tools obsessively, right, we can really whittle down on the amount of soft metal that we can hone and refine, sandwiched between harder metal and our tools. So don't over sharpen. Don't become too obsessive, right? It is definitely something that we need to be performing as an aspect of our practice. It is something we need to have aware of, and taking care of our tools is a gesture towards a higher quality of Boneside execution, and practice. But in the ultimate concept of Boneside as a practice, we should recognize that our tools only periodically need to be sharpened, but do need to more routinely be maintained, have the debris and sap removed from the blades, and be oiled so that we preserve them, maintain them rust free, and have the capacity to perpetuate their life and the quality work that we can do on the tree with them. Okay? I hope that helps give you some guidance and some clarity. We will do the spherical sharpening once we get the spherical stones at Mirai. Until then, you have plenty of work to do to get some maintenance done, get your tools ready for the spring, get them honed and sharpened and refined, and ready to rock out to raise your Boneside game. Have a great rest of your day. We'll see you tomorrow on the live Q&A, 3 p.m. Pacific Daylight Time. Love you guys. Thanks for the support. Subtitles by the Amara.org community 
