What's going on guys? In the Mirai Studios today getting ready to perform a big piece of work on this juniper and it opened up the opportunity to be able to discuss a very major technique you guys need to have in your bag to be able to triage a situation where you either have a tree in the container that's loose and moving or you're getting ready to perform a piece of work on a tree that could be applying leverage to a less than stable trunk so that you set that foundation and allow yourself to perform that work in a safe and sustainable matter for the tree. Now first let's just start off with the fundamental concept. When we're dealing with bonsai if a tree is moving wobbling or loose in its container it is dying okay and we say it's dying because what roots need to be able to grow inside of this containerized environment is stability and the more that this upper canopy and the physical weight of the tree is rocking the more opportunity there is for those roots to be shifted and the more that this upper canopy and the physical weight of the tree is rocking the more opportunity there is for those roots to be shaped shifting and being prevented from growing. Now most of us think oh this is moving it's breaking the roots. No that's not true. The opposite actually it has roots those roots aren't being broken but because of the mobility new roots are not able to form. Okay now this is a tree that I've had for almost four years at Mirai. I did a demonstration on this tree in Sacramento for a GSBF convention in 2013 or 2014 one of those two and when I did the demonstration the tree was loose in the container. I had concerns about it. I brought it back to Mirai and over the course of the next year everything that was styled on that tree died because of that mobility in the trees inability to produce new roots. We waited until we achieved a higher level of health, repotted it this spring and now it's ready to be reworked with a gain stability. However I know that there's a weakness in this and I'm going to tie this down proactively to be able to ensure security so that I can maximize the work and not worry about compromising the health of the tree. But I want you guys to again understand this is a stopgap situation and a stopgap technique to be able to triage a tree that's been bumped loose is wobbly in the container because something happened. Maybe it went awry repotting, post repotting, maybe you dropped it, maybe you bumped it, maybe a bird landed on it. Whatever happened this is how we stabilize a tree in the container to be able to encourage new root growth until we can go back and we can sustainably fix and reconcile that situation. Now here are the points I want to focus on. Today first of all what do we use to tie this tree into the container and secure it? What are the strategies in terms of the points that we need to hit? And what are some other ways if wire alone does not give us stability that we can actually gain that sort of security and stability of the tree into the container? Okay I'm going to start with point one in terms of what we use. Okay as with anything wire-related whether it's repotting or whether it's securing this tree into the container because of the container, we're going to be focusing on using galvanized steel wire. Galvanized steel is a very effective wire to be using because it does not stretch. Whenever we use copper or whenever we use aluminum, we have a high degree of flexibility in that. It stretches, it elongates, and so any time that we've got a tree that we're trying to stabilize, whether we're tying it in during repotting or we're trying to stabilize it to the container because it's loose, we're going to be using a wire that does not stretch. We're going to be using a wire that does not stretch. Okay now one of the biggest misnomers about this technique is we take a piece of wire, we go around the container, we tie it and that should stabilize it and this is absolutely incorrect. We have to have the ability beyond our own physical force to tighten and secure that tree into the container. So instead of going one time around this tree, we're going to go two times around this tree and before I do it correctly I want to show you exactly how you don't go about tying a tree into the container when it's lying down and you're not going to be able to Defense the other wire. Okay. Now you're not going to be able to do that. This is a process that the wire is so it's lost stability. OK, so I've done a very rough first attempt at tying this tree into the container to regain stability. And we can see that there's a little bit of stability in this container, but I've actually done every single piece of this tie down incorrectly to show you guys all of the points that you need to be aware of to execute this technique properly. First and foremost, utilizing one wire in order to be able to secure this tree into the container means that we're expecting ourselves and the wire to be capable of adding the force to this holding point that's going to prevent the tree from moving. We need to have actually another wrap of wire around this so that we can further tension those wires by twisting them together. If we're not using two wraps of wire around this stabilizing point to be able to tension them, then we've already started off on the wrong foot. This is point number one. Point number two, notice how I've tightened and secured the wire in the middle of this run of wire to try and get tension on these two pieces, exerting that downward force. If we're tightening the wire in this way, there's no way that we're going to get the maximum downward force applied to the trunk of this tree to be able to stabilize it. The location that we should be tying that wire is right on the corner of the container so that we have a definitive edge where our two wires meet, intersect each other at 45 degree angles, and we can exert the maximum force and have this point as that reference for that location of tie down. Number three, notice that my wire comes across the container at a diagonal line here. This is a very easy situation for me to slide this wire and completely loosen the holding capacity that I have. Notice now there's no tension on the wire whatsoever. These are three important points that we need to know, how to not be tying the tree in so that we can take that step forward to be able to do this correctly. I'm going to give you a fourth point to consider as you're talking about or thinking about how you best secure this tree into the container to maximize its downward application of force and really hold its position in the container. And that is the location that the wire should be approaching and the location that the wire should be anchored to. When I look at the sort of step points or the points where I have the ability to anchor, the higher up on the trunk of the tree, I'm able to exert a downward force, the greater the application of force that's going to stabilize this tree into the container. This is the application of leverage as it exists in physics. If I'm using this lowest point, I'm actually exerting the least amount of force on the trunk of this tree to hold it down in the container. The second step would be a far greater improvement to the holding capacity, and this third step is going to maximize my ability to secure the tree. All right. Now, there's another thing that we've got to consider in this, too, and that is what exists underneath that holding point, and if we exert pressure on those areas, do we pull the tree in a direction that could potentially further compromise its stability? I notice on this middle section, if I walk into this middle section, I'm pushing straight down over the physical weight and the distribution of the base of this tree. That is a direct downward pressure and probably gives us a significant hold. If I move over to this left side and I get higher up, I've got more leverage, but I'm also pulling that force downwards in an area where I don't have any stability on the tree. We've got to be taking all of these factors into consideration and starting to figure out which one is going to be most effective. This middle section, extremely effective. Lower section, not effective at all. Higher section, in order to achieve success, I would have to create a support that hits it, set a point on this tree, pull against that support, and give it the best possible chance of stability. For the scope of work I'm going to be doing and for the sake of stability in this tree, I'm going to choose this highest point, and I'm going to create that leverage point that I can pull against to give it the best possible holding capacity. Let me show you and walk you through the steps of how we go about accomplishing that to be able to make sure that this tree does not move when we work it. Step one, we're going to create a length of wire that allows us to wrap around this point that gives us the greatest amount of leverage, and we identified to be the very best stabilizing point. We're going to give ourselves a length of wire that allows us to go twice around the tree to the container. So I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to elongate. Now instead of trying to wrap this around the tree twice, I'm going to take my two cut-ins. I'm going to join them together. Instead of trying to wrap this around twice, I'm going to join my two cut-ins. I'm going to straighten this piece of wire out. And I'm going to create a really nice crease right here at the tip of this wire. Notice how I've got that really nice junction there. This is actually going to be my working end to be fissuring and sort of threading this through the underside of the container. That way I'm not dealing with two wires, I'm effectively dealing with one. Now, notice that both pieces of wire give me a little bit of slack and a little bit of slop to be able to adjust the length of wire and their location where they exist on this container. The last thing that I want to do is have a wire that's too short and I end up tying it in the wrong area. The other thing that I want to avoid is I want to avoid that flexibility of this wire moving on the container. One of the major reasons that I'm going to be choosing this outer area to be pulling down on. One of the major reasons for the leverage that I can exert is I can also line it up with the foot of the container so that my wire can't slide on the rounded edges of this ovular shape. This kind of stability and insurance of security where your wire can't move is a big part of achieving long-term stability in this tie-down method. I'm going to make sure that both pieces of wire, both ends, are secure against that foot and I'm going to create a nice strong fold up. And a nice strong fold down. A nice strong fold up so that the bottom of that wire is in firm contact and I create a corner on the bottom of the container. I'm going to take out all of the slack I possibly can. I'm going to pull out all of that slack and I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to maintain that tension on that all the way down and just simply loop those pieces of wire together. Now I've got two wraps. I've got them at a point on the container where it cannot slide and loosen after I tighten it. The next step is going to be to stabilize this area of the trunk so that I can pull against it and maximize that holding power of this tie-down method. I'm going to rotate around to this back side. Now you can see in the plane that I'm showing to you guys in the camera that if I tighten this, it's going to be pulling back at that direct angle straight towards you guys. That means that I've got to be bracing in that exact direction back up against this tree. So I'm going to pull at that angle and have it lock in and create immobility in the trunk. Now I've got a piece of 2x4 here and my 2x4 is going to be the prop mechanism that I use. Now here we get into another one of these situations where we see people typically sort of take the shortcut or fail in achieving that stability. If I try to use this 2x4 propped against this angle of the trunk right here, notice how there's nowhere for that 2x4 to catch. I'll pull the tree into the 2x4. I'll pull the tree into the 2x4. I'll pull the tree into the 2x4. The 2x4 will continue to slip up and I'll lose any stability that would be achieved. So when I'm pulling in this direction and I'm getting this angle, I've got to be looking for a point where my 2x4 can hit and have a definitive catch and a definitive stopping point so that when I exert that force, the 2x4 is working in opposition of that force. We get a force up with the 2x4, a force down with the wire, and we mitigate any movement that that tree can have. This gin is an extremely strong. Very beautiful potential area to be anchoring my 2x4. I have another really strong piece here if I really needed to use it, and the last resort would be to anchor it against the live vein, straight up from the container to the live vein, and I would need to pad the 2x4. Because we've got this gin in the perfect position and in that perfect line of pull, I'm going to be anchoring to this gin. I've got a really nice 2x4 here that I'm going to be cutting custom to this area. I'm going to set it right here. I'm going to set it right here. I'm going to set it right on the rim of the container, and I'm going to measure just up underneath, just up underneath where that gin exists, trying to make sure that I don't cut the 2x4 too short and create any distance or any space that's going to give me slop in that tie down. I want to oversize this potentially as opposed to undersizing it. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to cut this clean with a saw, and we'll come back, insert it, and show you guys how we lock this in. All right. A nice square cut to be able to create this. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to cut this clean with a saw, and we'll come back, insert it, and show you guys how we lock this in. All right. A nice square cut to be able to create this. Now, I've got the right extension of this gin. You guys probably know where I'm going to cut this out, because I'm just going to show you guys how we mitigating that surface that this gin is going to rest against to be able to give us that resistance in that upward force. So that we mitigate that movement. Now I'm just going to test to see if I've got the right length and the right kind of tension. Now I've got a little piece of the gin here I want to be careful of, which is going to give a ever so slight up. Upward boost. Okay, right. Nice on that container. Right. Nice. Nice. really nice and stable. Notice how that fits perfectly, and I want this piece to be straight. I want it to be dead straight and plumb so that I don't have this on an angle. I want to use a wide surface so that it can't rock. And the one thing that I really want to avoid is cutting any kind of angle or having any kind of slant to the surface that's gonna be contacting that point where we're providing that stability. That way it's not sliding, it's not tilting, it's not moving, and it gives us that solid anchor that we're looking to achieve, okay? Now we're set up, we're at the farthest point to apply maximum leverage. We've got two wraps of our wire around the trunk so that we can further tension these once we tighten these. We've established that point where our wires are gonna be coming together at 45 degree angles to both bear the same force, and we've located them right against the foot of the container so on this rounded contour we're not gonna be sliding and the wire's not gonna loosen itself and lose that stability of the hold over the course of time. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm gonna tension this so that we really create that first lockdown and then we'll go ahead and we'll tie these together to make sure that we've gotten the most effective application of downward pressure on the tree. Now when we start to apply pressure to the wire and we start to apply this pull, we've gotta be very aware with our peripheral vision or just in terms of our thought process, is the tree moving or being pulled in directions that we don't want it to be pulled. I'm gonna go ahead and I'm actually gonna support the tree right here as I take the force and apply it to that wire to make sure that I'm not moving that tree in any direction. Now that I've taken up the slack, I can go ahead and cleanly tighten that wire, making sure to not over-tighten so that those wires come together at a beautiful 45, I never want that, I never want that, I never want that. want to wrap one around the other, that beautiful 45, and now they're both bearing the same tension, okay? Now what you'll notice, because we've got two wires, is one is going to be loose and one is going to be extremely taut. This is exactly why we do it, because we've got slop in this that would exist if we were just using a singular wire. Now we can come back and we can eliminate that slop and truly apply that downward force. You will see how rigid this tree becomes in the container as a result of this approach. Now if you have scrap wire sitting around, using a heavy gauge of copper or aluminum is a great tensioning tool, because there's no texture on it. Like a screw would have threads or maybe a nail would have a head on it. This has nothing, so we can tension with this big thick copper wire. It allows us to apply leverage without bending, since it's a heavy gauge, and we can pull it out in either direction to be able to remove it from the system once we've achieved that tension, okay? Okay. I'm going to insert this right in the center. I don't want to insert it down low. I don't want to insert it up high, because I want to ensure I have the maximum distance on both sides of this twist. Notice how this divides the twist in half. I want the maximum distance here to here and here to here to be able to take out all of that slack and really lock that tree down. I'm going to apply just a few twists to this one, and then I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to rotate this around, and I'm going to apply a few twists to this side to make sure that I don't overly tighten one area and pull the tree in that direction. Okay, and now you can start to see, even in the slack that exists up here in the upper wire, you can start to see how it's pulling out all of the slack. Notice how it's gathering those two wires, and it's really exerting a strong amount of force. It's getting harder and harder to twist. This is exactly what we want, okay? I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to tighten that one. Notice how the copper just falls out. That's perfect so that it doesn't stay in the system and get stuck in the system and get in our way, and I'm going to come back and I'm going to further tension this front side, the first side that I started with. Okay, now we can see that we have a tremendous amount of tension on this wire. Our block is perfectly in line. Let me show you that. Our block is perfectly in line so that we're pulling directly down at the highest point of leverage. Notice that our wire is holding firm. There's no stress because they've both intersected each other out of 45. To finish this off, I just want to create a cut because this is protruding from a point on the container that could potentially catch our hands when we're carrying this tree. I'm going to fold both of these back, and I'm going to cut those so that that frontward-facing piece is a nice rounded piece of steel and not a sharp cut end. Avoid damage to your hands. Avoid catching on your clothing. Avoid the potential to further have incident with this tree. Now that we've locked it in, this tree is stable. It's protected. It can produce roots as a result of that stability, but more importantly, on a tree that we're going to work, that we have any suspicion about instability, it's now completely locked in, completely secure, and capable of being worked on without fear. I hope this gives you guys some backbone concepts to be able to utilize in triaging this situation and further protecting your trees when you get ready to do significant bone size work. This is a major piece that you should have in your toolbox to be able to reconcile the situation, secure trees, work them through that process when they become unstable, or protect them during the styling system so that we're able to achieve the highest possible result. Good luck, happy bone sighing, and we'll see you guys on the other side. . . . . . . . 
