what's going on everybody yeah Saturday Mirai lecture series and today we're digging into anatomy now I do we were talking about this when we were coming up with the subject matter for this lecture because I recognize that like probably all of us are a little scarred by biology classes and you know some sort of like scholastic notion of of learning and now where it's like bone science like oh my gosh we're going back to it but you know these are very important aspects of bone side to understand the vernacular and understand where things are physiologically happening in the tree in the branch in the root in the cellular structure of the vascular tissue in the needle in the leaf etc and I think that there is a slight you know shortcoming in terms of our ability to connect these pieces of vernacular to understand exactly what we're talking about and exactly what's transpiring within the hierarchy and physiological structure of the tree so it felt appropriate on every level to just dive into this broad brushstroke and again you know one of the things about Mirai that I think is valuable for bone side practitioners is if you sat down and you looked at a textbook about vascular structure, you're going to be overwhelmed by all of the minutiae, right? And it's very dry, it's very tough to get through. Reading it is almost impossible unless you are just completely fascinated or on significant quantities of Adderall. And so recognizing that we've got to be aware of the broad concepts, aware of the general functionality, and that that for our endeavor is the information that we need to be able to translate and understand our actions in bonsai and the response of the tree, that is where we wanted to focus our efforts today. I got Ira on the mic. Morning. Got Jesus producing the lecture series. Away we go. Okay, so bonsai anatomy, we're going to break this down into several sections and we're going to first start with the structure of the tree. We're going to then move to the cross section of the vascular bundle and we're going to finish at the leaf mass. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to remove these diagrams and we're going to go through the process of a bud developing into a candle or an elongating piece of immature growth, achieving that hardening off that maturity and the physiological change in the vascular structure that occurs. But let's first just dig into the tree, okay? And there's multiple little pieces of information that we apply or utilize when we start to summarize the structure of the tree, just like we did with the size of the tree. We actually go now ahead and get that cut off quite significantly at some point between tiger, plantain and pine, talking about their active growth,OK? We also refer to this consistently at idiot as our primary primary line in design, OK? That trunk line that is one of our non negotiables in terms of the piece of the tree that we put the greatest amount of leverage on to be carrying and guiding all of our concepts of design and it just so happens that it's the central backbone of every it just so happens that it's the central backbone of every single piece of vascular physiology and so understanding that vernacular is of utmost importance now from this trunk we get our primary roots which are our structural roots that tend to form when we see primary roots we call this little magical kind of skirt around the base of the tree we call this the nabari in terms of japanese terms we call this first piece of rise here the tachi agari okay and we start to recognize that these terms in japanese that are thrown around with a little bit of misconception of what exactly is happening here coincide directly to the same physiological terms that we're utilizing through the latin or the english dissection of the vascular and the physiological structure of the tree okay now I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to transition from my primary roots to my secondary roots and I'm going to change up the color here now my secondary roots these are where my primary root branches right and where my primary root branches there's different ways that our primary root can exist our primary root can exist as a continuation of the primary root just like we can have a continuation of our trunk line and we can have secondary roots that come off the trunk line off of that primary root where we see that entire thing continuing to function and then we eventually see that primary root branch all the way maybe down the road of where it originally existed okay or that primary root can branch into two distinctly smaller smaller diameter transition of taper roots and we would call that that secondary root formation or that division of that primary into our secondary roots so understand you know when you move into a broadleaf deciduous canopy the upper portion of the tree is generally a reflection of the lower portion of the tree and we have that primary line of the trunk branch into at times especially in say a broom style tree equal tree tree smaller pieces of secondary or excuse me equal smaller pieces of primary ramification you would say your trunk line stops at that point where that trunk branches into those smaller diameter primary branches right but we have designs where the trunk line continues all the way up to the apex of the tree particularly in the coniferous form where I'm continuing to say define the line the branch which you're going to use as a base to tip which branch is going to become the continuation of your trunk line the continuation and transition of taper holding the greatest hierarchy the highest structural element all of these things playing on that primary line and in the design of the tree selecting a primary branch to carry and continue that primary line and that primary branch becoming the continuation of that primary line no longer as a continuation of the primary line so we start to change that terminology to meet the necessities of giving proportion scale and structure to the tree that we are designing okay excuse me so in both of these situations the secondary root mass or the secondary root structure is coming off of our primary structure that exists on the tree and we see that bifurcate and change in differing ways depending on where that transition occurs the scale of that transition the continuation of the primary line or the division of the primary line into smaller hierarchical sizes diameters and vascular structures now once we get through into the secondary roots we're going to very quickly start ramifying into our tertiary rootlets which is the secondary roots that we're going to see where we see the secondaries bifurcate we also see tertiaries branching off of our secondary and you say can a tertiary branch off of your primary structure absolutely not does not mean even if it's a small tiny root hair that's small tiny root hair coming off of your primary root structure is a secondary root it's an immature secondary root but because of the hierarchy of primary to what we have to transition to secondary before we get to tertiary we recognize that tertiaries have to come off of secondaries secondaries have to come off of primaries okay and as we go down this sort of path of bifurcation we start to see several different levels of these tertiary rootlets into sub tertiary levels we get tertiaries coming off of these areas here and this is ultimately when we start to talk about our tertiary root structure this is where we really start to see water conductivity taking place in our tertiary roots we have to understand that the more that we bifurcate the smaller the diameter the roots and the more that those roots proliferate in quantity the surface area of the root mass as it gets smaller and smaller as the roots scale gets smaller and smaller the surface area of the root gets bigger and bigger on an exponential level okay we could connect that to the sense of akadama where the one single particle if you break it into two has not just double the surface area but triple the surface area so when we see a large root bifurcate into two secondaries we see two secondaries bifurcate into four tertiaries and we see those four tertiaries bifurcate into eight sixteen thirty two sixty four 128 etc that ramping up of number of rootlets in the smaller and smaller size of the rootlet let's the surface area of those roots exponentially increases and it's at the tip of this root and i'm going to blow this up here for a minute okay we have this root tip here and the root tip this is really where we start to see water conductivity along the length of the root but specifically in the root tip where we see water a nutrient conductivity taking place at the greatest efficiency the most seamless movement of water in and out of the trees root mass okay and there's a little tiny magical area at the tip of this root that we've referred to a lot in recent discussions of biology and of the nutrient discussion where we call this the root this is the root rhizosphere rhizosphere okay and this is a zone at the tip of the root where the root plus the biology has the ability to manipulate pH has the inability to manipulate nutrient content has the ability to manipulate toxicity to be able to buffer all of the bad stuff and create a moment where the plant can just simply interact with the things that it needs to take in that resource this is a magical magical zone in the root rhizosphere okay because that is where amidst all of the stressors all the stressors are closed completely really just because of the promise it's ing its own that person got stuck at that moment in time in their http or you all of the toxicities, all of the bad stuff that's taking place inside of the soil system, the plant still has the ability to survive in that root rhizosphere, in that small little space at the very tip of the root where it says, listen, everything along these other areas of my surface where I'm absorbing nutrients and water and taking them in, I don't have as much control. Things might be really dire. We might even see a lot of that root mass be starting to show signs of stress, discoloration that move from white to caramel to maybe even brown or black, which would suggest that the root is actually in a process of either lignifying to wall off its absorptive capacity of toxicity or maybe even moving into a state of root death. Yet that root tip is bright white and it's got that magical force field that allows it to continue to conduct just the resources that the tree needs virtually. Avoid of the toxicity, independent of the salt content without the effects of pH to be able to survive, right? And you recognize that if you wean your tree down to just the root tips to be able to absorb, you're losing all of that absorptive capacity of all of that lateral surface area and your tree is really at the tail end of being able to stay alive in that current horticultural condition. And yet we see this in bonsai very consistently. If they're inappropriately fertilized, if we have a tremendous amount or amassing of toxicity, salt content, metal content, et cetera, the pH of our water is absolutely super alkaline, super acidic, and the root is saying, listen, I only have one magic spot. I can barely conduct enough to keep this tree alive, but I can continue to do so for a period of time hoping that the conditions can change to facilitate a greater amount of nutrient and water and resource uptake. Because we alter the state of that containerized environment and make it more favorable for that plant to be able to conduct resources in a greater copious quantity that facilitates the kind of health that allows us to cultivate our tree, okay? So we move from this root tip. Now, there's a lot more vascular physiological study of the root tip. There's a cap, there's a mucous membrane. It lubricates the soil as it moves. Roots are moving towards the sound of water and actually driven by the sound waves of water, not the physical movement. There's moisture of water. There's so much that happens right here that we could dig into and get lost in for the next several hours. I don't want to go there. I do want to introduce you to it. I don't want to go there. I want to focus on that rhizosphere as that moment of magic where we have an almost impenetrable force field of goodness that allows the tree to survive. The root tip as that soft, fleshy, continually growing, seeking, gravitating towards the sound waves of water as the guidepost for the direction that those roots go. The tertiary water-absorbative, nutrient-absorbative roots that are bifurcating from our secondaries, that are bifurcating from our primary roots that exist originating from the base of our tree, which we call the nabari, which stems from the tachi agari, the first 30% of that trunk rising out of the soil. Now, roots have the same quality as our primary branching in that where that root originates from the primary line of our trunk, and this is central to our tree, and so you see, if we had this root set up long ago in the germination of the seedling, the establishment of the vascular tissue, and the creation of the foliar mass, we understand that there is a collar on each of those primary roots, just like there is a collar on each of our primary branches, okay? Now, that collar is the location where we see codit happen, C-O-D-I-T. This stands for compartmentalization of decay in trees. compartmentalization of decay in trees, the caudate capacity at the collar or the shoulder, right? Same thing, collar slash shoulder. This is where the tree has the ability, should damage occur, should breakage occur, should toxicity occur to a degree where the tissue is no longer capable of surviving or contributing to the greater vascular system of the tree, the tree has the ability at that collar with meristematic cells, cells that have the capacity to divide, to create a wall or a barrier from the deterioration that is happening in this primary root or in this primary branch from continuing into the primary trunk line of our tree. It stops it right there. And we recognize and we understand the value of the shoulder or the collar because we are trying to, through the cultivation of bonsai, when we remove the collar, when we remove primary roots, when we remove primary branches, we're cutting those back to make an initial sort of transition, reduction of water flow, reduction of water flow, but we leave a stub. We see from that stub adventitious growth emerge that allows us to minimally conduct water and in that rapid transition of all of this water being moved through that, shifting to these small pieces of water or these small shoots, the tree says, uh-oh, I see a massive change in the water flow moving through this vascular tissue. And all of a sudden, the tree starts allocating more and more resources to that collar to start to create that effect of walling off what it is interpreting as a declining system of water conductivity. The shoulder swells. We see the pronounced establishment of the shoulder or collar around that, that entire primary piece of vascular tissue. And when we see that established, we come back at the appropriate time of the year and we make that severance of that primary piece of root or branch to be able to transition out of that line in the design of our tree without causing any sort of dieback up the trunk or down the trunk as a result of the appropriate handling and the slow adjustment of water flow moving through those primary pieces. So recognize, that that collar is a big part of primary roots in the same way that that collar is a big part of our primary branching is an important aspect of answering the question that so many people have, which is, when I'm repotting, can I cut this root off? I've got roots emerging from the trunk that are big. Can I cut them off? When can I cut them off? How do I cut them off? And the answer is, if you have major functioning vascular pieces of tissue, you have to slowly adjust the water flow and build up the collar or the compartmentalization capacity of that junction, of that primary root to the primary trunk line before you can fully sever that piece. That starts to guide your process as you repot or as you start to reduce the branching structure to get to the ideal lines to be able to handle it responsibly without causing permanent damage to the structure of your tree. Okay? So this is our root system. And we say, listen, inside of the rooting system, we consistently talk about striking the balance of water and oxygen that creates an environment where these fine fleshy roots have the capacity to survive. Okay? The balance of water and oxygen is not creating a space where that primary root can continue to survive. It's lignified. Lignification, woody tissue, has formed which prevents it from being an absorptive piece of tissue and transitions it to being a conductive highway for the absorptive pieces of tissue, the fine tertiary root mass that exists in the soil system. In order for this root to continue growing with any sort of vigor, we have to have the balance of water and oxygen, H2O and O2, present in this area where cellular division is not present. And yes, the root rhizosphere can overcome too saturated of a soil condition, but we're saying, listen, just the root tip alone conducting resources is a tree on the brink of survival, not thriving. It's on the brink of survival. It's the entirety of that tissue and the proliferation of those tips to expand the surface area that allows our tree to thrive. In order to do this, we need the oxygen to be fueling respiration or the breathing of the root mass that allows sugars and starches to be transitioned into usable forms of energy that fuel cellular division that allows for this node, this adventitious root bud to start to elongate into a soft, fleshy root primordia. That oxygen is absolutely paramount for that cellular division to occur and for that root to continue to thrive in the soil space. And when we start to talk about the balance of water, water and oxygen, we're talking about a 7 to 10% content of O2 to facilitate healthy root growth. Okay, that's not that much compared to the quantity of water, but we also recognize in the bonsai containerized environment where we have this shallow container and a limited gravity column that water tends to stick around inside of the containerized environment and that is what makes the cultivation, of bonsai a horticultural anomaly. Nursery containers are deep, gravity's acting on them, right? The in-ground environment, we have the entire depth of the soil column pulling and moving water through that upper surface where most of our plants exist. But when we put that tree into the shallow confined environment of a bonsai container, we really do have a scenario where too much water sticks around to be able to establish a balance that facilitates enough oxygen for root growth to occur and that is where we use the aggregate. We use the aggregate soils that we use and that is also where our horticultural application of water and nutrition is so paramount to the success of the cultivation of our trees. Now, let's move up into the primary trunk line here, okay? Because we've dissected the primary, secondary, and tertiary branches. When we get up into this area of the tree, we have the exact same structure. Again, the upper canopy is going to mirror that lower portion, the root mass of our tree, in terms of structure and we have the same kinds of considerations acting on this portion. Now, we may have a continuation of one of these branches as the primary trunk line that's continuing all the way up potentially to some form of apical region where it does begin to bifurcate and we say, hey, listen, this is a primary branch, this is a primary branch, and this is a primary branch, but if one of those primary branches is prominently thicker, takes on the transition of taper from the larger trunk line as it begins to bifurcate through our primary structure, we can continue to consider this not a primary branch. Once we define this as the upper apex of the tree, the primary branch becomes the continuation of the primary trunk line. And that primary trunk line starts to become a primary branch when we start to see it bifurcate into its secondaries, or when we start to see secondaries begin to emerge from that, where we start to recognize, okay, now, all of a sudden, we're transitioning the hierarchy. We have to be careful here, though, because at some point where we turn this primary branch line into the primary trunk line, we still have this notion that these secondaries that would be occurring off of a primary branch, when we redefine the branch as a trunk, now become primary branches coming off of the primary trunk. And we see that transition of primary to secondary, or trunk to primary branching, occur when we see that bifurcation. Does that make sense? And so now, all of a sudden, that hierarchy starts to look like this. Now my secondaries start to bifurcate here. This is where we get into actual apical formation. Now our secondaries bifurcate here. This is when we get into the hierarchy of structure. And so in the initial bonsai design phase, where we start to say, OK, I have all of these branches. I have all of these branches, one, two, and three. These are all branches. If one of those becomes the continuation of the trunk line because of your design concept, because you wire it up, it's a thicker hierarchical branch that we want to continue extending the length of the trunk to create a taller tree, higher tree, add movement to the trunk line, et cetera, then what was a secondary suddenly turns to a primary branch based on your decision to use a branch as the continuation of the trunk line. And if it stays a branch, then we recognize that these pieces that would be primary, if the branch is a trunk, when we turn it back into a branch, these become secondary and these become tertiary pieces. And you see the fluidity of understanding how we describe these occurrences in bonsai design. So we've got these secondary and what we call secondary scaffolding branches, scaffolding branches. Because they hold the scaffolding of our ramification, very, very important. So those are our secondary scaffolding branches. These are our primary. Primary, structural branches, OK? Anything coming off of the continuation of the trunk, this is also primary structural branch. This is a primary structural branch, because we redefine this as our trunk, OK? Now, from that primary structural branch, we get the secondary bifurcation. And from secondary bifurcation, we get tertiary. And when we start to talk about this, tertiary ramification. And again, the tertiary ramification occurs in any number of subsets of tertiary ramification. And we can start to see anywhere where tertiary branching comes off of the secondary as an expansion of that subset to ultimately create and hold the foliar mass of our tree. Now, when a tree is very, very young, and we think about this in terms of a seedling, the initial foliar mass that comes on the seedling of a tree when that seed germinates, the cotyledons, the primordial foliar mass that begins photosynthesis, those are coming off of your primary structure, that central stem. That central stem, over the course of two years, produces its first set of branching. That is still, when you look at that first set of branching, primary branching holding your foliar mass. But as of the third year of a seedling's maturation, into this more advanced structure of a tree, we start seeing foliar mass existing on secondary, fourth year foliar mass existing on tertiary. And now the hierarchy four years into the germination of a seedling is set up, and that hierarchy continues to exist for the duration of that tree's structure over the course of time. The only thing that alters it in the bonsai form, when we start to prune back, transition hormonal hierarchy, and make aesthetic adjustments for the pursuit of representation of nature and miniature, we can turn a branch into the continuation of a trunk line, we can reduce a trunk line to a set of branches, and that is where we can alter primary and secondary functionality within the hierarchy of our tree's ramification over all of those stages. Okay, so there's some malleability there, but we see this kind of diagram bifurcation creating this sort of extent of the foliar mass of our tree. And this is how we really build out a tree over the course of time. So when you start to say, what stage of development is my tree in? Is it in a primary stage of development where we do have secondary and tertiary branches present, but our focus is on building, defining, and shaping the primary pieces of our tree? We're forming the root mass, we're building, expanding the trunk, we're healing wounds, we're elongating and we're thickening the primary branching or the primary root mass. That is a primary stage of development. When we achieve 60 to 70% of our primary thickening, elongation, healing or reestablishment of root mass, we probably make decisions to transition the energy from the tip to the interior via the pruning model. And the response to that is a bifurcation which is our first foray. That's our first step into secondary scaffolding building, both in the roots as well as in the foliar mass of the tree. Now we're elongating, now we're thickening now we're healing that cut site and building our secondary scaffolding the more secondary scaffolding branches that start to occur off of our primary the more we have the capacity to utilize each of those as an independent pad that gives us the ability to create scale and proportion in our trees design and upon that secondary scaffolding when we achieve the length when we achieve the thickness 60 60 to 70 of the length thickness healing we cut that tip we get tertiary bifurcation and this is when we enter the refinement phase when we are expanding refining and defining our tertiary levels stages of development primary structural secondary scaffolding tertiary ramification to allow our tree to move through the hierarchical structure of its anatomy and build it from the interior to the exterior aesthetically over the course of time okay the vascular anatomy of a tree the physiological structure of the tree has to dovetail with the aesthetic endeavor of bonsai in order for all of this to make sense and this is what makes this art form so unique okay now let's just say i'm going to take a cross section of this right here okay i'm going to take this cross section right here and i'm going to blow it up and i want to talk to you a little bit about what we're going to be talking about in the next couple of weeks about the actual pieces that are conducting the resources that exist inside of this central stem if you will okay now first and foremost in the very beginning the vascular structure of a seedling is called the cortex the central area where water moves the cortex the cortex is a primordial tissue you don't need to know much about the cortex unless you want to dig deep into the seedling form okay but the cortex ultimately becomes the central portion that ultimately is walled off and becomes a dead piece of tissue where toxicities where resin and tannic content transport abundant amounts of things the plant doesn't want and they solidify it inside of those resin pieces to form what we consider and have come to know very consistently as the heartwood of the tree okay the heartwood of the tree now this heartwood in the center of the tree this is non-water conductive this is non-living tissue and if you look at the heartwood of a tree right the heartwood of a conifer is the superpower of a conifer because it's where toxicity can be stored which is very very advantageous to store toxicity means that you can take it out of the vascular flow of resources that's disrupting your metabolic activity and potentially compromising the health of your tree in broadleaf deciduous trees the core inevitably will deteriorate over the course of time and for some of our coniferous species we see the same thing happen in our species that tend to hollow from the interior out taxis is a primary species that we see this sierra juniper as an alpine species lacks that really solid longevity in the heartwood and we see it deteriorate from the interior out but when we look at say for example an oak tree we look at an elm tree we look at an olive tree what causes that hollowing is that heartwood not having the same tannic content to resist rot and deterioration as some of our coniferous species like our arid juniper species like our redwood species like our cypress species and as a result that heartwoodastiario is 쿊. CHRISTOPHER SA. CR. ED. ANDREA properties and the purchase and distribution of alpine bonsai last years has granted heartwood starts to deteriorate over the course of time with biology acting on it, bacteria that is naturally existing and piggybacking into the tree on all of that water intake. And we see that deteriorate, which then causes the loss of that central backbone of structure. Now, around that, around that heartwood, we have the most abundant vascular tissue in the tree. And the most abundant vascular tissue of the tree totally makes sense why it's the most abundant, because we see that most abundant vascular tissue as the xylem, okay? And the xylem in the center of that tree is where we see H2O or water transport occur, okay? If we did not have that much water as the abundant vascular tissue moving the resource that cools the tree, that binds heat and moves that heat up to the very tip of the leaf of the tree, as well. As well as transports resources, as well as becomes the hydrogen and oxygen utilized in photosynthesis to create glucose or the sugar that is the food that fuels the generation of the energy that allows the cellular division through respiration to create the roots, to create the vascular tissue in the trunk and the branching, and to give rise to more leaf mass and strength at the tip, then we would not have a functioning living organism, okay? So the xylem is in the center of the tree. So here's a really big, important piece of xylem's knowledge. When you wire a bonsai, if a branch dies within seven days of that tree being wired, it means you damaged the water conductivity of the branch, you damaged the xylem, okay? If that branch dies a month, two months, three months, four months, five months later, it means you damaged the tissue outside of the xylem, which is either the cambium, or the phloem. Let's dig into the cambium or the phloem, okay? Between the xylem and the phloem, there is a single cell layer thick piece of meristematic tissue. Meristematic meaning it has the ability to cellularly divide. This is the cambium or the cambial layer, okay? And this is where cell division occurs that gives rise to more xylem, or cellular division that occurs that gives rise to more phloem. Okay, so when we talk about the vascular productive part of the year, or over the course of fall as daylight length is decreasing, as temperature is decreasing, we are talking about vascular productivity in terms of the cambial layer giving rise to an expansion of xylem cells on the inside of the cambial layer, and an expansion of phloem cells on the exterior portion of the cambial layer. Okay, and here's the funky thing. Okay, and here's the funky thing. If that cambial layer is a single cell layer thick, which it is a single cell layer thick, and you have a cell here, and let me just draw this, you have a cell here, and that cell divides through meiosis, okay? And all of a sudden we have two cells here. One of these two cells has got to continue to be the cambial cell that maintains its meristematic capacity to divide, because you cannot break this single chain of cells that exist throughout, because you cannot break this single chain of cells that exist throughout, because you cannot break this single chain of cells that exist throughout, because you cannot break this single chain of cells that exist throughout, because you cannot break this single chain of cells that exist throughout, because you cannot break this single chain of cells that exist throughout, because you cannot break this single chain of cells that exist throughout, because you cannot break this single chain of cells that exist throughout, because you cannot break this single chain of cells that exist throughout, because you cannot break this single chain of cells that exist throughout, because you cannot break this single chain of cells that exist throughout, because you cannot break this single chain of cells that exist throughout, because you cannot break this single chain of cells that exist throughout, because you cannot break this single chain of cells that exist throughout, because you cannot break this single chain of cells that exist throughout, because you cannot break this single chain of cells that exist throughout, roots, all the way down into the secondary, all the way down into the tertiary. And that cambial layer is all the way up to that root tip where we have a massive amount of those cambial meristematic tissues at the tip of that root. So it's a continual extension all the way throughout all of this. You cannot get rid of that single cell. So when we see division occur, one of these cells is going to move to the inside to become xylem. One of these cells is going to stay as the cambial division. The next division, one of these cells is going to stay as the cambium. One of these cells is going to move in to become a phloem, to differentiate and become a phloem on the outside of that. And when you start to look at the quantity of xylem or water conductivity versus the minimal amount of phloem or sugar starch conductivity, you're going to see that the cambial division conductivity, more of the cells are dividing and differentiating as xylem cells on the interior of the plant than are creating phloem cells on the exterior of the cambial layer of that vascular bundle. And that is where we see that tremendous amount of lopsided distribution that builds the ability for the plant to move the kind of water that it needs. So we see this as phloem, p-h-l-o-e-m, and this is sugar, starch, transport that occurs inside of the phloem, okay? And this is delivering all of the sugars and starches created through photosynthesis down into the trunk line, down into the primary, secondary, tertiary roots, out into the tips of the branches. And in a continuum over the course of the year, when we're in a full year, production phase up here in the canopy of the tree, any photosynthesis that occurs with that first flush of foliar mass generally tends to stay out in the tips of the branches or in the upper canopy of the tree. Slowly over the course of time, as that sugar-starch distribution throughout the tree becomes evened out with water concentration, now we start to see the sugars and starches gravitating freely throughout the entire system. And this is where we see that slight amount of lopsided distribution that builds the entire system. And this is where we see that vascular growth that occurs in the late spring, early summer at the point of hardening off in the growth ring of the cross-section of a tree, which would be the lighter and smaller half of a single growth ring, right? The lighter portion of that growth ring. And as we continue to function through the rest of the year, and the daylight length starts to decrease and temperature starts to decrease, and we hit that fall transition where daylight length, night, daylight length, dark period are the same. That's the fall equinox. This is when we, boom, have that transition where now instead of the sugars and starches existing in the upper canopy of the tree, they start concentrating and moving down into your structure of your secondary, structure of your primary, structure of your trunk. And most importantly, this is when we see your sugars and starches really start to concentrate down in your primary, secondary, and tertiary mass to create the vascular tissue that is going to conduct the water for the foyer mass produced next year okay and this is a very important thing to understand the fall equinox the transition of their being more dark than light temperature decreasing changes the trees movement from foyer to vascular that is really when we start to see the production of root mass that is going to be able to hydrate your growth next year and that is where we say in the fall your balance of water and oxygen has got to be struck to be able to create a situation in the bonsai container that is favorable for that root growth to occur all the sugars and starches in the physiological system is set up but you are not entitled to that root growth you get that root growth with appropriate horticultural care to build the system and the strength of your tree next year okay so we've got our heartwood which is a dead piece of tissue not conducting water and your heartwood is constantly expanding as a tree gets older and older you've got your xylem which is moving the water as well as nutrition that hydrates that cools and that provides the hydrogen and oxygen for metabolism you've got your single cell of cambium that gives rise to more of your xylem gives rise to a smaller amount of phloem and you've got your phloem that supports the sugars and starches as a product of photosynthesis those sugars and starches giving rise to through the process of respiration usable forms of energy that feed the cellular division and continue to drive this cyclical and hopefully continually expanding system okay if you paired this physiological understanding with the energy system that we've talked about from the spring and the expenditure of stored energy to the point of hardening off where the tree starts to increase or regain its energy to the point of the transition at the fall equinox where then our energy accumulation creating the vascular tissue to support growth next year storing the sugars and starches to generate the growth next year you would start to understand how all of these systems intermesh and how we can manipulate these systems to elicit different responses within our tree depending on let's go back to the stage of development or the pieces that we're focusing our evolution expansion and aesthetic development or improvement on right you are moving energy throughout the tree okay let's get to the leaf mass here and then we're going to put this all together okay now when we start to look at the needle or the leaf there's a few things that are very important to understand in terms of the Anatomy okay first and foremost we can see leaves coming off of secondary branches when our tree is underdeveloped in terms of its structural hierarchy as a bonsai but more importantly by the time we build all of these hierarchical systems we typically see our leaves emerging off of our tertiary level of ramification now you could call this the stem you could also call this a branch you could also call this a twig you could also call this your tertiary ramification okay this can have several different names for the actual Woody structure holding your leaf okay you have in the crotch of a leaf uh an adventitious auxiliary auxiliary bud this is a bud that exists should this leaf be lost during the growing season this is a bud that exists should we partially defoliate and prune this is a bud that exists to generate the leaf mass next year should nothing happen to the leaf over the course of the year a tree is always set up no credit cards exist tree always has to give itself something to fall back on in terms of growth and the potential or the presence of that auxiliary bud in our broadleaf model has to be there for all implications and potential factors that are going to act on this tree okay now this is our leaf this is a very simple leaf structure okay and through our leaf we have a few different pieces that we need to understand okay we've got this central vein central vein we've got the petiole that holds it the petiole that holds it onto the branch we've got our central vein that conducts the water through the leaf we've got our lateral veining that allows that water and those resources to make it to the cellular structure okay and if you look at this through light you'll see all this intricate sort of veining that connects the whole leaf here when water comes through this stem transporting through the xylem right we have to understand that the xylem moving through the core of this is what's moving water into this leaf that then starts to move along these complex system to continue hydrating every single cell that exists inside of that leaf tissue okay if those cells do not stay hydrated they cannot photosynthesize right so that water is of amount importance now that cell staying hydrated and photosynthesizing produces sugars so we also have to understand that there is a phloem component here that's moving sugars and starches back into this external portion of the system that allows that to now move along the cambial layer that's causing cellular division be transported to different tips that are needing that nutrition and energy to continue growing and those tips that are going to take on the priority of that sugar starch transport are going to be the tips that have the greatest amount of oxen the hormone that is drawing resources to it suppressing growth around it and utilizing those resources to become a bigger tree every tree aspires to be a big tree so the leaf structure in itself is a very important system to understand because all of the pieces that we're talking about are in play on a continuum inside of the leaf structure now if you flip this over this is the top of the leaf the top of the leaf is where sunlight is designed to touch if we go to the bottom of the leaf what we have is we have the same vascular structure even more present in terms of its protrusion from the leaf there's an indentation here there's a sort of skeleton of the leaf veining system on the underside but the most important thing about the underside of the leaf is going to be all of these little organized pores that we call stomata stomata they exist on the underside of the leaf and stomata is where gaseous exchange takes place okay now gaseous exchange means and I'm just going to blow a stomata up to this and then I'm going to draw the guard cells that keep the stomata open okay right now the stomata being where gaseous exchange takes place this is where carbon dioxide CO2 goes into the leaf and starts to be the present for the supply of Carbon that will be broken up in photosynthesis and contribute to the formation of sugar okay this is also where water H2O transpires or exits the leaf via wind via Sun the evaporation on that surface now we've talked about the fact that the chain of water from the surface of that leaf runs all the way down the xylem all the way down the primary secondary and into the tertiary root and in fact that chain runs down and right out the tip of that root into the soil system when one water molecule evaporates it pulls the next molecule into the surface of that stomatal opening putting tension on that chain that pulls the water column up the treat and that tension on that chain exists all the way down into the root tip where one molecules inside the root one molecules outside of the root and they're still bound by the cohesion of water molecule to water molecule across that cellular membrane right and so when that water molecule leaves this water molecule enters and pulls to the edge of the root tip the molecule behind it. All of that is happening through the stomatal openings on the underside of your broad leaves or the stomatal openings along the ridges of your needle structure of your coniferous foliar mass. And so when we start to see this, okay, so that's where all of a sudden we have carbon dioxide moving in. We've got H2O moving out. This is how we cool the plant. This is how the plant has the carbon to create the sugar that feeds itself. And when a plant becomes short on water, these guard cells that hold the stomatal openings open start to lose their turgidity and they actually, boom, close up so that the stomatal opening shuts. Now this is DEFCON 5 as far as survival of a tree. When your guard cells lose the water concentration that holds the stomatal opening open, they actually close up. And so when a plant becomes short on water, these guard cells that hold the stomatal openings open start to lose their turgidity and they actually open for gaseous exchange and closes. Heat accumulation inside of the tree is going to ramp up exponentially. Carbon dioxide can no longer get in. So photosynthesis completely shuts down. This is a point where the tree is saying, I am at my absolute point of survival or death. I got to shut things down and hope everything works out because I can't keep trying to cool myself. I don't have the water coming into the soil mass. There's too much resistance. The soil is holding the water because there's not enough water. I can't, no matter how much tension, I can't move anymore. Tension is becoming super severe. I can't get that heat out. I can't get the, oh, shut her down, boom, right? It's like Fukushima. It's like close down the reactors, shut it down, shut it down. And it's like, it's going to overheat. Oh my God, get out. The system's going to blow. That's what's happening when all of a sudden our stomata shut down, okay? What a connection. What a connection of function. What a connection of function. What a connection of function. What a connection of functionality inside of this complex system of the tree. And what a beautiful merging of our understanding of the aesthetic development, the aesthetic enhancement, the aesthetic alteration of our primary, secondary, tertiary, and how we start to recognize the phases of development, what parts that we're building, and how those parts play into the greater vascular system, the movement of water and resources, the creation of sugars and starches all the way through the leaf mass or the needle mass. This starts to become something that is so incredibly interesting when you dig into it, but we don't have to go so far, okay? I'm going to do one more vascular structure for you that I think behooves all of us to understand. And then I'm going to say that we've done enough to be able to speak the same language when we talk bonsai. Okay. All right. So because this xylem and this water transport and the creation of this heartwood is such a big strategy inside of bonsai, I want to dissect this by diagramming the formation or the structure of a xylem sieve tube element, okay? So when this cell divides through meiosis or mitosis and elongates and then differentiates as a xylem cell and through that cellular division, most are going to become xylem. Some are going to become phloem. One has to stay as the cambium in every cellular division. Okay, the differentiation and the formation of that cell creates what they call a sieve tube element, excuse me, the differentiation of that cell, not a sieve tube element. There's the sieve tube elements part of this. Okay, the differentiation creates what we call a tracheid. Okay, now the tracheid is a xylem cell that has a porosity that exists in a multitude of levels. It has this plate on the top called a sieve tube plate that has all of these little interstellar. It's like our faucet, right, in the sink of our bathroom, okay? Catching debris, toxicity, and having the ability to moderate what flows through that xylem tube, okay? Now, the water is adhering. Water molecules are adhering to the wall of your xylem or the wall of your tracheid here, okay? And that transpiration out of that stomata is placing tension on this chain, molecule to molecule. So, when you talk about the cohesion tension theory of water movement in trees, you're saying, listen, transpiration causes that to evaporate, which the molecule to molecule cohesion, the molecule movement causing tension, but also the molecule of water being cohesively bound to the wall of that xylem cell is one of the bigger things that we're talking about. And so, you're saying, well, how tall can a tree get in terms of its physiological capacity? The limitation to the height of the tree, if we just take away environmental factors of water supply, elevation, temperature, et cetera, is limited by a plant's ability to move that water against the force of gravity. And so, you're saying, well, how tall can a tree get in terms of its physiological capacity? As well as against the force of friction, of the cohesion of the water molecule to the wall of the xylem cell, okay? And when you start to think about this, really tall trees, you know, take a redwood, take a dog fir, two tallest trees in the world, obviously have to have a lower quantity of friction for that water molecule being bound to the wall of the xylem than trees that are a much shorter maximum. So, you're saying, well, how tall can a tree get in terms of its physiological capacity? And that's why we're talking abouttin' about trees that are in maximum height in their capacity. Now, these are trees that, through that lack of friction, have to move a lot of water to hydrate the foliar mass. The foliar mass of a tree is its greatest expenditure of resources and its largest liability to keep it hydrated and photosynthesizing. A tree is always weighing out. Do I keep pumping resources to that portion of the tree? Is it producing more energy than it's utilizing, et cetera? But in these very major, water-moving, super tall trees, the friction here is the one that's here is very very low and when that friction is low embolisms breakages in this tube to tube connection of xylem where oxygen gets in and causes this chain to collapse all of a sudden boom that water chain starts to break and hopefully at these sieve plates we can stop or compartmentalize the embolism and allow the water to now move to the next cell in line through lateral transport and continue its progression these are your lateral pores that allow that kind of mobility to take place now these lateral pores do more than just allow a broken down xylem cell to have the capacity to continue to conduct water around that damaged area where an embolism or damage took place because we have this constant supply of residues constant supply of um of tannins that exist inside of the vascular structure in pitch pores and are constantly being moved through the vascular system that when we have some sort of say for example a tremendous amount of aluminum piggybacking on that water or a tremendous amount of manganese piggybacking on that water molecule right and the tree is saying i need the water so i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to allow this this this you know molecule content the molecular content to move through the vascular system and i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to go ahead and i'm going to put this into my system and we have all of these sort of uh you know protective pieces of content inside of the tree that protective piece of content grabs that toxicity and it moves that toxicity across these lateral pores and guess where it deposits that toxicity it deposits that toxicity in the heartwood here and it encases it in that resin so that it cannot function in the metabolic system of the tree and cause a reduction or a poisoning of the system that would otherwise debilitate or shut down vascular transport thus we see the heartwood continuing to expand but inside of the heartwood continuing to expand when we move that toxicity via that resin content through these lateral pores guess what happens we lose lateral pore mobility of those areas and the older and older a tree gets the less and less lateral lateral mobility of water that tree has the capacity to facilitate and if you want to extrapolate this into a common bonsai phenomenon that we see a lot talk about the vein specific transport capacity of junipers a root to a branch connected by one single vein well when a juniper is young a juniper is just like a broadleaf tree or just like a pine it has the ability to move resources laterally as well as vertically it has the ability to move resources laterally as well as vertically but over the course of time existing in a high toxicity environment of the dry arid regions of the world where juniper can out compete other species growing in the same environment a juniper has the ability through its resin to move that toxicity into the heartwood and what we see when we take a cross-section of a juniper is that the heartwood is actually the largest component of an old juniper inside of its vascular system water transports number two but far more minimal but then our other water necessitating species and sometimes our water conductivity is equivalent to our sugar starch conductivity in some of our most arid species that grow on earth because of that capacity to compartmentalize toxicity and bind it inside of that dead cellular structure in the core of the tree now that also makes it rot resistant makes it disease resistant and makes it resistant to insect consumption which is what creates the very stable backbone of a lot of the species that we tend to see as these big massive trees or more importantly the long-lived trees of the world but that xylem tracheid structure so very important on a physiological level to understand so that we can extrapolate what is happening how does age change the behavior of our trees why does it does an older tree demand that we be more accurate in our bonsai technique, more sensitive and proactive in our horticulture to make sure it has the strength to be able to endure the application of techniques that we're applying because we've lost a lot of that malleability of the vascular structure through the mechanisms that exist that are extrapolated through that physiological assessment of that central core and the trickle-down effect of that evolving system over the course of time. Very, very important stuff to understand if you're handling older and older trees through the endeavor of bonsai. We've got a few queued up here. Zane's got a question to ask if you could comment on how the xylem and or phloem respond when you're air layering. Okay, okay, so the air layering component of things, all right, so let's just come back to this and let's say I'm going to go ahead and when I air layer, I'm going to cut through the phloem, through the cambium, and the most important is to get through the cambium. I'm going to cut right up to the xylem, okay, so I'm going to take away the cambium and I'm going to take away the phloem, okay, and let me just go ahead and do this, okay, so when we're air layering, we still have water conductivity hydrating the foyer mass that we've got, but the sugar starch supply that would be feeding the rest of the tree coming down through our phloem is no longer being delivered to the greater sort of energy system of the tree, which again, every fall when we pass the equinox, there's a reason that you see trees shed weak branches in the fall because that's when the, think about fall as the first season of growth because it's everything that grows in the fall feeds what happens next spring, okay, so the tree's looking at all of its photosynthetic parts and it's saying you're using a lot of water, you're my greatest liability, foyer mass the greatest liability, greatest expenditure of energy, you're using a lot of water, I'm not getting the sugar starch return that I need from you, I'm not getting the productivity, I'm going to compartmentalize you, you're gone, right, because the tree is an objective system, it doesn't care what it looks like, it wants to be photosynthetically efficient, there are photosynthetically efficient structures depending on the hormone content that drive the continually expanding structure, cytokinin or auxin, okay, so we recognize, listen, when I cut this cambium but more importantly when I cut that phloem supply when I air layer, I have 90 days before the plant sheds that piece, I have 90 days before it sheds that piece to strike the balance of water and oxygen that allows new roots to grow in the medium that I've created around that air layered area, okay, and so we say all right, my sugars and starches are coming down to the bottom of this, my sugars and starches with nowhere to go begin to accumulate in this area and I've got this open and exposed cambial layer right there that the sugars and starches are starting to amass around stimulating cellular division, the fuel for cellular division is right there and as long as we have this system air layered section right in the middle of our setup and we've got our moss in here and we're saying listen the sugars and starches are there the exposed cambial layer is there get root growth i'm not entitled to root growth unless i have the oxygen remember this unless i have the oxygen present to allow the sugars and starches that are here to be turned through the process of respiration into energy that actually fuels the cellular division that is the moment where we have everything present and in play and if it's too wet and we don't have enough oxygen we never get root production in an air layer but if we do allow that to dry out we do allow the oxygen into the system which allows the sugars and starches to be turned to atp and that atp is what's causing meiosis to occur and the meiosis causes the cellular division and one of those becomes a new root cell and another becomes a new root cell and another becomes a new root cell we get the emergence of roots into this system that if we continue to strike the balance of water and oxygen which in a air layer is constantly changing the moment that roots emerge because now we cannot let those roots completely dehydrate but there's not enough to use a lot of the water so we're letting it dry out tremendously we see the moss dry out we rehydrate it we see it dry out a little faster the moment new roots emerge and so we're trying to play that game of making sure there's oxygen striking the balance of water and oxygen not keeping it too wet not letting it completely become bone dry but it's happening much faster it's telling us that roots are there and that we're feeding that continual necessity for hydration that's continuing now these roots are what are feeding that xylem uptake that's supporting with that native but that's slowly being compartmentalized because the tree's saying i'm not getting paid back by the sugars and starches and the cutoff to that is 90 days three months that a tree will maintain a non-productive piece of growth before it completely walls it off the water conductivity is walled off that's when we can separate and our roots should be maintained mature enough to sustain that piece that's how the air layering model occurs danielle is up next if my trees all species are still putting on new foliage especially since it's cooled off a little bit here in southern california cooled from the summer temps and slightly slower summer growth are they considered in their vascular growth stage because of the time of year still or have they not quite transitioned to that phase yet no uh and this that's a really really good question because as black and white as i've just made it understand that's a broad brush stroke if you want to go deep into this what you would understand and discover is that trees can be doing all of these things at once they can be producing four-year growth in the fall while they're also in peak vascular productivity and that's exactly what's happening in fact this year we're seeing larch producing new growth in october i've never seen that before in my life at mariah i have no idea what it means for winter hardiness or resource allocation etc but it is it just is i can't stop it can't change it i'm just observing it you know i've got spruces producing a second flush right now in october and that you know it's never happened before it's not across the whole tree but a few little tips you know people talk about ponderosa pine producing another little short spurt of growth or japanese white pine another short spurt of growth in those warm extended fall seasons it doesn't mean that your tree is not accumulating vascular resources it just means that the tree is doing multiple things at once and if you just want to take a run at it you can have a look at the data that's coming through i'm going to show you some of that data to really stop it but really take a look at the data that's coming to the table so there's a lot of data out there so let's take a look at the data that everyone has so again these are all pieces of research that we're doing now in the case that i just showed you they're all very short-term studies and i'm thanks to jack we're going to start today with a large view of the gradient effect of this angi ópera in june we're going to be talking about this issue of the gradient effect of the gradient effect so let me just jump in here xylem cells conducting water that's moving down into the root system of the plant. So some roots and some vascular bundles are transporting it up, while other vascular bundles are transporting it down. And some are transporting it up, while others are transporting it down, and they're creating concentrations of water in different compartments of the tree based on necessity, physiology, and a lot of things that we don't understand yet because it's such a complex system, right? So when we start to think about this, we can loosen the reins on the exactitude of this information. This is broad brushstroke. And recognize that all of this is happening on a continuum, right? Tree goes into dormancy. It's still transpiring. It's still photosynthesizing through the bark, even if it has no leaf mass. There's so many things happening on a continuum. Tree is totally frozen. It's still metabolizing and growing. There are any number of a multitude of things happening on a continuum because of the complexity of the plant. And so, when we start to think about this, we can loosen the reins on the plant system. Grace is up next. What creates the distinction between trees that can move resources laterally and those that can't, like junipers? How twisty can the water link between root and leaf become before it breaks down in different species? Yeah, I mean, so what determines that behavior? I'm assuming the friction along that tracheid is far more important also. We have to understand that a plant is an electrical system. There are a series of electrical gradients that are happening inside of a plant. There are friction components. There are physiological components. There are so many different mineral pieces that are acting on this, metabolic pieces that are acting on this, responses to small changes in temperature, daylight length, et cetera, hormonal content. And then, you know, these are the things that we're continuing to learn. The fact that we're able to do this, the fact that we're able to do this, that roots grow towards sound waves, not the effective presence of moisture. That sound is changing the behavior of plants on a continuum as a physiological response to, you know, what were they talking about? Acacia in Africa. When a giraffe is chewing on an acacia plant, the acacia in the surrounding environment change their leaf physiology so that the content of the leaf is less attractive or less tasty to avoid being eaten, right? Now, that could be a pheromone release that's sensed, or it could be the sound waves from the actual chewing action that cause the acacia to change. There's a big, long study about the memory of a plant. And a plant, a certain species of plant, I believe it's albezia, albezia or some compound leaf plant, where when you drop it, it's like, oh, it's like, oh, it's like, oh, it's like, oh, it's like, oh, it's like, oh, it's like, oh, it's like, oh, it's like, oh, it's like, oh, it's like, oh, it's like, it is, you know, if you drop it or it experiences impact, the leaves close. And so a scientist did a study on dropping these plants every day, seeing how long it would take for the leaves to open up, seeing how many days in a row they had to perform the same activity before the plant would stop closing its leaves in response. And then they started recognizing that the plant would proactively do certain things when certain people entered the room at the plant associated through whatever connective device possible. And again, you can find this on the internet if you just Google plant response to being dropped, I would say would probably be your best Google. It's shocking. It's shocking the intelligence of these plants that were being tested. And I think the memory was like 30, 35, 40 days that the plant remembered through whatever concept of memory. So it's like, when we try to say, OK, well, what's the limit to lateral movement? Well, in a juniper, the limit is very minimal because they go vein specific within the first 20 years of life, right? A pine lateral movement continues almost indefinitely, which is why we can wedge cut a 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 800-year-old pine. And so you have these polarities of this behavior, and it's just like, wow, OK, we have a lot to learn. And that's why you should definitely consider the analysis and the analysis to see what your plants are capable of. So that's why we're looking at this. The next question is from David. David is up next. Given the stomata are on the bottom side of the leaves, when we apply a foliar feed, should we spray the bottom of the leaf? Or is there a way that allows the plant to get the feed in some other way? Great question. You've got to be spraying the top of the leaf. You have to be spraying the bottom of the leaf. that anybody was able to tell me until we started working with apical because with the apical wrecks, we get drenches and we have foyer follow-ups. To just spray the foyer mass with a light mist of this nutrition is to do virtually nothing for the plant. You've got to be tapping into all of the pores and micropores that exist. And we have to recognize there's transpiration and photosynthesis happening along this branch. There are pores that are letting water out that are taking carbon dioxide in. And if we're not thinking about all of that in the foyer application, we're missing entry opportunities to adjust the nutrition of our plant. That's a really good question and you're onto something. And absolutely, we need to spray the underside of the leaves, the top of the leaves, the branching and the trunk of the tree to do an adequate foyer application. Sylvia is up next. You've mentioned in other lectures that we need to let our trees dry out more in the fall. How dry is dry before you water? So, when in doubt, in the fall, let it dry out. That's your theme. In the spring, when in doubt, water, okay? And when we say how dry is dry in the fall, depends on the species in terms of where they sit on the balance of water and oxygen. Because we would never let a broadleaf tree dry out to be bone dry in the same way we would a pine, right? And we would never let a spruce dry out to the same degree that we would a juniper. So, we're letting our species dry out to the degree that we can accommodate their watering needs when they hit that point that they need that water. And that depends on when are you going to be home? How many, you know, how literal can you actually get to that drying out process? But in the fall, for me, I'm letting trees dry out pretty extensively before I'm watering. And just to give you an idea, and this is, you know, a dangerous game to play because you can't see what I'm seeing when I describe this situation, but we've had 80 degree weather for the past three days. And there are some trees in the garden that I haven't watered for three days. Now that doesn't mean they're sitting bone dry and I'm like, you dry out more. That's not what's happening. They're not using as much water. Nighttime temperatures are cooler. Plants stocked with resources. It's in vascular productivity. The angle of the sun in the Pacific Northwest is not as intense. The heat of the sun is not as prolonged. The day length is not as significant. And so, we're able to, and it's necessary, it's necessitating of our watering application to adjust to when that soil mass is dry, I water. And if it is not, then I'm gonna leave it, right? If it's damp, I'm gonna leave it. Now in the summertime, if it was damp, with longer daylight length, more wind, more intense sun, different angle to things, I know if I leave it right now, it's gonna dry out in 30 minutes and I'm gonna have to come right back and I'm not gonna be able to do so, so I'm gonna water right now. In the fall, I know it's gonna be two to three hours or maybe longer for a damp tree to actually get dry. I'm happy to leave it. And that is the discipline of watering in the fall. Grace is up next. What does the vascular structure look like within callus tissue? Does callus transport water and or sugars? The vascular structure inside of callus is like a, is like, it's like a, it's like a, like a confluence of currents, right? It's just all this craziness and just like all of this excited energy. Can callus conduct water? Yes, through the porosity of the tissue, just like a trunk can conduct water. If you wrapped a trunk in moisture, it can actually keep the leaves hydrated, even if it's disconnected from the root. Now it won't last for forever, but it can do it, okay? Callus can continue to hydrate an air layer that you separate without roots for a short period of time. We need the roots to give us the longevity. We need that vascular structure to have somewhere for the plant to go. If it doesn't have it and you're leaning on callus, callus can't sustain a tree for forever, but it certainly can conduct moisture and it certainly can help a tree stay hydrated for a short period of time. But without roots, without the establishment of that continuum of xylem, of phloem, of cambium, of root tip, of bifurcation, of primary, of secondary, of tertiary, you lack the hierarchy to be able to build a tree, to build upon everything that's necessary to create the entire system of a tree. And that is where, when we have callus, to rewound the callus, to stimulate it with a cellularly motivating hormone that helps us break through the inability to create roots from that callus is the methodology that we need to apply. But we also need to take a really significant look at our balance of water and oxygen. Are you creating the environment where new roots can emerge? That's a question that you always have to be asking yourself. Treebird Steve has a question for clarification. So when a lateral pore is used for moving toxins inward, that pore somehow loses the capacity to do the same thing or loses part of that capacity? Yes. Yes. I don't know. I mean, who knows? Who can actually measure how much oxygen, how much resin or tannic content can be moved through a pore before it's rendered useless? But think about it like an artery in a human being, okay? Because we're functioning on tree time now when we talk about the loss of lateral mobility, okay? You eat bacon, mayonnaise, and butter for every single meal. The accumulation slowly as these coagulating agents, they're moving through your very small tubes in your body that transport your vascular resources, they accumulate debris. And then debris accumulates debris, and debris accumulates debris upon debris upon debris, and you get to an increasing and exponential pace at which your arteries get clogged, okay? A tree is the same. If it's put under the same toxicity on a continuum, which again, where you see the most rapid loss of lateral mobility is in your high desert variety, it's in your high desert varieties of juniper, because they are experiencing a tremendous amount of metal and salt toxicity as a result of that arid environment where they're growing. Now they can survive there without the next door neighbor knocking on their door and bothering them. They can't be out-compete by other species that can grow more rapidly because of the toxicity. So that's why they exist in those spaces. It's also why they have the deadwood. It's also why they're super susceptible to insects. It's also why a lot of the other stressors that create the dramatic shape of junipers exist to give us the aesthetic that we get out of junipers. But we just recognize that there isn't like some finite, like, well, every time a toxic element moves through a lateral pore in your tracheid vessel of your xylem, that pore is gone. No, it accumulates a little bit more of that debris or that buildup, and over the course of time, those pores, those pores are going to be gone. They're going to be gone. They're going to be gone. They're going to be gone. Those pores are then clogged, and lateral transport cannot happen, right? And we see that happen at different rates, depending on how much toxicity is consistently moving laterally into the heartwood. But we see junipers create heartwood after 20 years. OK, that's an immediate. You get a nursery stock juniper. You won't see heartwood until that tree is literally 15 to 20 years old. That's the first time you'll start seeing that red color in the central core of that plant. Sylvia has a question. If a tree has dried out too much, how do you transition it back to health? If a tree has dried out too much, first and foremost, you have to rehydrate the tree, right? Second, when you rehydrate a tree, so you thoroughly saturate it, I would wet down the entire trunk branches, et cetera. You're trying to stop the loss of water, which if a tree dried out too much, its guard cells are already closed, and the loss of water has been stopped. But you can rehydrate a tree through the physical tissue of the pore. It's the porosity that exists along the branches in the trunk. OK, I'm going to tilt it up on angle after that first hydration and try to get rid of as much excess water as possible so that I get oxygen. I get water into the system, and then I get the excess out, and I get as much oxygen into the system as possible so I can start compartmentalizing any lost tissue and damage that occurred from that drying out. Because you certainly are going to lose root tips, and you want to stop those root tips from continuing to decay. After that, most people tend to put those trees in the shade, and a lot of times we're trying to overcompensate by keeping them too wet. Worst thing you can possibly do. Put the tree in morning sun, afternoon shade. Allow it to continue to have the battery of light to keep it photosynthesizing through the branches, trunk, et cetera, if it's lost all its foliar mass. And then really focus on water in, thorough hydration when it's absolutely dry, up on an angle, excess water out, so that we are continuing to get the most rapid water-oxygen exchange. It's the best thing you can do. Cross your fingers. If the tree's going to make it, that behavior is what's going to give it the best chance of pulling through. All right. Danny is up next. Ryan, I've heard you lecture about this over the years, and I understand the greater majority of it. Thanks for continuing to share your knowledge. First couple of times I heard this, my head exploded. I did not get it or grasp that much of it. I'm asking for those who are maybe not asking this question of how all of this translates into growing, developing, and creating bonsai at the highest level. Sure. So I think we covered a lot of it in terms of, OK, primary, secondary, tertiary stages of development. We build a tree from the inside out. We've been talking a lot about nutrition and the root tip, as well as the health of the roots in the bonsai container, having sort of this understanding, the shoulder being that piece that we're trying to consistently transition and build before we fully remove a primary piece of branching or root mass. Understanding the vascular structure. Zane asked about the air layer. The air layer is probably the most important part. Probably the thing that we've diagrammed most over the course of live and forum Q&As in the past seven years of Mirai Live. I can't even tell you how many times I've diagrammed this and talked about it. And yet I still don't see people able to air layer with a high level of success or doing it on large trees and creating fantastic material. I'm not saying it's not happening. I'm just not seeing it. We do it here at Mirai on an annual basis. We cultivate grafting whips. We cultivate. We take really flawed pieces of material that are price point accessible and use air layering to create very expensive pieces of material out of them because we can see the potential. We know the technique and we understand the physiology. But I think in terms of also understanding water mobility in a tree, the cohesion tension theory, when you have a canopy and you're losing water and it's in a bonsai container, how do you strike the balance of water and oxygen? What does that mean? What does oxygen do? Where does that water do? How does all of that work out? How does that work out over the course of time? How does that work out in terms of trees that have central heartwood? What does that heartwood do? Where did it come from? How does it impact the vascular behavior? How does the leaf and needle work? How does the water move through it? How does photosynthesis occur? Understanding all of this, when you cut the terminal tip of your plant, what happens? When you cut a branch off, what happens? If you don't have this backbone, then you don't know what happens to your plant when you enact or perform an action on that plant. By understanding all of this structure. It gives you the capacity to not only understand the hierarchical build, but understand what is exactly going on inside of the tree with these different elements of vascular conductivity and structure that explain the plant's response. That answer the why that we're all going to have when we see something work or here's the bigger issue. When it doesn't work, when my plants dried out, how do I respond? Right? Right. When a tree that's experienced something negative, how do I improve it? All of those things, to me, are paramount. If you want to know just the very base bone nitty-gritty, had I gone to Japan and studied with Mr. Kimura without having this information, Murai would not be here today. I can almost guarantee it. I would be just like every other bonsai professional that doesn't ... I'm not saying that every bonsai professional doesn't understand plant physiology. But I can honestly tell you there are not very many bonsai professionals that understand plant physiology enough to explain all of the different things that are happening. I went to Japan with this knowledge, rudimentary, fundamental, and not applied to bonsai. But when Mr. Kimura would do things at different times of the year and I would sit there and say, hmm, why is he doing that right now? I could reason through it physiologically. Mr. Kimura was also trained in plant physiology. Yeah. He had an apprenticeship. He went and he went to night school for five years studying with one of the most profound plant physiologists in the world at that time, teaching at the university he was studying at. He had a flower shop in the interim. Mr. Kimura, his cutting edge technique was derived from his knowledge of the horticultural system. This is the jumping off point for innovation. This is the fundamental backbone of foundation. This is everything. This is everything that you need to know to be able to think about why and how you continue to evolve and advance your bonsai practice. If you're not thinking about the physiology of the tree, then you're missing one half of the bonsai application. It's horticulture or science and aesthetics and design. If you don't have this, this is just a hood ornament. Tribute to Steve. Are there, shall I say, lubricants? Yeah. Are there lubricants that plants produce to reduce the friction between water and molecules in the cell walls in the water conductive tissues? That's a good question. I don't know, but I don't think so, because the lubricants would affect the cohesion of the molecule to the cell wall. That cohesion is what allows those water molecules to continue moving without gravity pulling them off. All of a sudden, if you start to lubricate that. Are they able to still maintain their cohesive nature? I don't know. There is certainly lubrication at the root tip. This is beyond a shadow of a doubt. There's a cap that protects. It's like a really firm tip that allows the root to move through soil without being desiccated because it is such soft tissue. But there is also an excrement that is produced that allows that root tip to flow through that. And that those, that excrement and that lubrication is often defined. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And that's also defined as exudates. Exudates also happen to be a lubricant that feed the expansion of flora. The expansion of flora as biology, which expand surface area for water and nutrient uptake and deliver it to that very sensitive and highly conductive tip is where mycorrhiza becomes a very beneficial component of plant cultivation. Right? So there's like a, you know, the trickle down of all of this. Again, this is broad brush stroke stuff. We want to dive into any single one of these. We can get super funky, super quick. all right zane is up next can you comment on how trees are impacted by less and less sun over the colder months some of my trees are only going to get an hour of direct sun starting in the fall and winter and they seem to be okay but i'm wondering if they will struggle long term um so with the decrease in temperature and daylight length the plant puts less priority on for your growth obviously but more more than that puts less priority on photosynthesis right because the rpms of the engine are not turning over as much and so the plant is now building all of the things that are setting itself up for that time when light and temperature are going to start to expand again which is you know when we when we cross the uh winter solstice that's your trigger point for when the plant immediately starts to sense that things are changing and that spring equally equinox is is a big one we don't put enough you know in bonsai yeah people say oh happy equinox but like does anybody actually know like daylight and night night and day are exact same on the at the spring and fall equinox and like that's such a trigger and then the summer and winter is the longest and shortest like that's a major trigger like these are monumental moments in a plant's life on an annual basis that i don't think in bonsai we explore enough anyways regardless right and if you look at those time frames for the behavior at those times like oh yeah we're repotting here or we're you know we're we're sort of like looking at a third year needle drop uh plant shedding its energy system where they're using more than they're contributing like these explain everything about plant behavior um but no i don't think that you struggle as much at a point when a plant is not needing the energy to continue driving growth with less light over the fall season would it be ideal to continue giving it sun would you have better nodes better adventitious growth a greater vascular productivity absolutely you would um but you can get away with it right you can get away with it over the course of time you know when you talk about uh cold shelters in complete dark in the far north regions of North America uh I have known that system to create meltdowns should the conditions you know not be right or over the course of time the energy system does get depleted but I don't think you have much to worry about all right Grace is up next do branches have any sort of finite lifespan as the original vascular connection sinks further and further to the trunk can a tree move the shoulder down the trunk as the trunk expands indefinitely uh they're okay so a branch so a branch born you know so this branch maybe was one of the original branches and it was born on the interior here and as this continues to accumulate does that shorten this branch's lifespan uh not to the best of my knowledge in fact that primary structure is probably the strongest connection and the strongest most most viable most uh durable most um uh resistant structure right I think it's the branches that start farther out in the tree that have a lot more susceptibility um over the course of time and you might be saying that because you're saying what you're saying the heartwood here is continuing to expand so wouldn't that at some point consume a branch that is born deep in the tissue well think about this the heartwood is expanding just like the structure of the tree up into these elements so that heartwood is continuing to expand not just in the singular system of the primary trunk but it is moving out into these systems and expanding and your xylem is paralleling that so with the continued expansion of that embedded Branch the vascular structure is continuing to play into that okay and what was the second part of that the second part was can a tree move the shoulder down the trunk as the trunk trunk expands indefinitely tree can't move the shoulder what happens at the shoulder is as as you as you continue to add girthier your trunk is adding girth your branch is adding girth your trunk is adding girth your branch your trunk is adding girth, your branch is adding girth, your trunk is adding girth, your branch is adding girth. You do see the transition zone appear as if it is dropping. The tree is not moving anything. The tree is just continuing to add layer upon layer of growth every single year. If it's not adding growth, it's a real problem, right? If a tree isn't growing, it's dying. That addition of growth, even if it slows down, you know, in periods of drought, we've got one millimeter of growth a year, and this is what makes junipers so profoundly fascinating. The thicker they are, the older they are, it's sort of a false statement, but you know, there's some truth to it in some regions. Okay, but that's where you see that change of aesthetic of a branch seemingly shifting, but a tree can't just float this piece in the vascular system down lower and change its position over time. You know, and think about this, your roots are continuing to add a layer of growth. This is all a continual system. So does it get to a point where this branch shoulder and the top of this root appear as though that branch has actually reduced its height? Absolutely, but you have to understand how that mechanism took place, right? And if you understand this mechanism, then you understand how a bonsai will change over the course of time as it matures and ages. And that is a major, major thing to understand when you're selecting, is this a long enough internode between this branch and that branch? It's gonna be long enough for this period of time, but over the course of 10, 15 years, those branches are eventually gonna grow together, and I'm gonna have to choose one of them, and I'm gonna have to rely on that to make the choice before we form a big ball or a structural flaw. That's your most immediate juvenile thought process in terms of this, or live vein reduction of a juniper, I'm gonna get the expansion of the living vein, and I'm gonna come back, and I'm gonna continue to thin it, and I'm gonna continue to get the expansion, I'm gonna continue to thin it, I'm gonna continue to get the expansion. I'm gonna be able to develop that fin-like deadwood artificially in a juniper if I pursue this over the course of time, or let's just say the movement I put into this, I know it's gonna continue to thicken, thicken, thicken, thicken. If I put the wrong movement into it, the wrong bend, the wrong place, the wrong branch, et cetera, I'm gonna get an inverse taper forming by the expansion based on the movement that I put into this whip 10 years ago, right? And the trees, through all of these variables, when you see a bonsai tree that is incredibly old, has been handled beautifully, and has no flaws, that's the anomaly, that's the anomaly. That's what adds the value to a tree like that. We've got, let's see, one off-topic question pending, so we'll get that one knocked out. Treebeard Steve, my American larch lost about 60% of the foliage in a particularly hot and dry episode. Any advice for winter care? The tree has continued to grow just fine since then. No, no, strike the balance of water and oxygen. I mean, it's the best thing that you can do, you know? And if we have ultimate health in a tree, adverse conditions are a minor factor. Adverse conditions are a minor factor. Adverse conditions are a minor bump in the road. Adverse conditions are a minor bump in the road. If we lack ultimate health in a tree, adverse conditions can be the beginning of the downward spiral, right? But when we have a tree that suffers, oftentimes our response to that inclement condition is to overly pander or care for that tree. And that's the last thing that that tree wants, right? Because the only way that it survives is having its location of cultivation meet its needs. is having its location of cultivation meet its needs. is having its location of cultivation meet its needs. Which means if it's in too hot of an area and it suffers and you don't move it, it's gonna continue to suffer, right? But if it's in too hot of an area and it suffers and we move it and then we focus on balance of water and oxygen and we do the things that are necessary for the tree, it shouldn't be an issue at all, right? And it's within that balance of like, I need to react. Ideally, I would proactively have solved that problem before it suffered, but we all know, right, that you, you can never be perfect in this, so I need to react and respond appropriately, but I need to avoid overreacting, which I would say more bonsai are damaged by overreacting than underreacting to a situation. And that's all we've got for today. Oh man, so, you know, if I'm just being totally transparent, the bonsai anatomy is one of these things that, you know, as bonsai practitioners, we have to have an expectation that, that bonsai people know this stuff. I do, I do. I do because we live in a world where all of this information is immediately at your fingertips and you can look it up on a whim at any point in time, right? I looked up cellular structure right before I started the lecture and I was like, you know, I don't really wanna talk about the mitochondria chloroplast, the plasmodesmata, and all of that stuff. that stuff. Like, we'll talk about that some other time. I'm going to keep it centric to the tree. It gets a little far out there when we get into cellular structure. You know, to be better at bonsai and think like, okay, I'm going to get better at bonsai and I'm going to, I'm going to go to a workshop. It's like, okay, well that's the most minimally applicable amount of information that you could ever accumulate about bonsai, honestly, right? I'm going to be better at bonsai. I'm going to learn about the physiology of a plant and how this stuff actually works. The problem with it all is, is bonsai is on an island and the motherland of horticulture does not cross the rickety bridge that leads to the island of bonsai. And so this island is not different than the motherland of physiology, agronomy, horticulture, and biology. And so it's not the same as the motherland of physiology, agronomy, horticulture, and biology. And so it's not the same as the motherland of physiology, agronomy, but it is unique. And what we need to know to do this and how this information from the motherland needs to be translate to speak fluently in this odd far land of bonsai is really where Mirai has continued to be a translator of the languages that exist inside of the science of this endeavor. And we'll keep working on it, but, you know, we knew there was a path towards a greater cultivation methodology. I thought it was in the soil. It was not. It was in the nutrition. And that has changed everything. And we'll find more of those. There are more of those out there. You know, the plant, the tree, when I started my studies in horticulture at Cal Poly in San Luis Obispo in 2000, I went there 2000 to 2004, I took the capstone plant physiology course. It was a 300-level course with a freshly graduated Ph.D. from Cornell. And his name was Professor Knight. And he said there are over 27,000 known physiological responses in a plant to stress, and we know 1,200 of them. There's 27,000 responses to stress, and we know 1,200. That was in 2004. To think that we understand the complexity of plants and trees is to way overestimate our intelligence, but we can try. And a lot of this stuff forms the current backbone of what we know to be true, all right? So it gives you guys a boost of information that allows you to understand your bonsai just a little bit better, and every little bit helps, all right? Love you guys. Thanks for showing up on a Saturday. I still think the lecture series is the best thing that we do. Forum Q&A used to be it. This is number one now. I love it, all right? Hopefully it benefits you. Have a great rest of your weekend. Enjoy the Monday holiday, and we'll see you next week on the stream. 
