Super Tuesday guys! Oh that's another production by Mirai. What we're going to do today is going to be just unwiring some trees and some various techniques that we use to actually unwire trees. And so the first technique is going to be just kind of going over the actual start to the finish of completely unwiring a tree. Second approach is going to be that of removing wire that is so so badly bit in that what's the techniques that are used to actually remove the wire without damaging the bark around it. And another technique what we're going to go over with is when a tree is actually completely wired but you may have just a couple branches that are somewhat bitten in, how do you approach that as far as removing the wire and adding more wire onto that? So we'll be doing that to another tree later on. But first of all we're going to start with this branch right here. This is a large that needs to be completely rewired. You can see here that the wire has been bit in from various different sites from the gauges, from the from the tertiary all up to the structural wire throughout the entire tree. And so what we're going to do is we're going to talk about how we actually start this process. So do we start with the structural wire first? Do we go with a thinner wire? How do we do this? Well what we're going to do is we normally will start at the very tip and work ourselves to the trunk. You don't want to damage buds. You don't want to damage branches while you're trying to remove that wire. And one of the cases I've seen most often is is when people try to save the wire to reuse it for another purpose, which that is the topic I won't get into. But if you want to ask me about it sometime over drinks, I'll tell you what my viewpoint is on saving the wire. But in the case when they do remove the wire, I see them always knocking off buds and branches that they've worked so hard in developing just so they can save like 10 cents worth of wire, which doesn't make sense to me. So anyway, so we're going to take it from the tip all the way up, making sure that we keep our eyes on the branches, on the buds, so we don't damage any of that in the process. So let's get started here. You'll notice that with this tree, at the tips of all the wires, you see there's just a little piece that's left over pretty much on every branch you'll see that. And the reason for that, you know, it's two reasons, basically. One is that you can actually present the bud in a position that you want it to be so you actually have control of it. The other purpose is that you can actually grab it and actually start to unwire it when you need to. So it kind of serves two purposes there. The main purpose is that of presenting the bud to the viewer, but it really helps out nicely when you need to be able to remove the wire too. So as I'm taking this, as you see, I'm using the approach of my two fingers on the end right here. I'm not just free just doing this because the chances of me actually cracking this branch are greatly great if I do that. So I'm going to support the branch. And Ryan always talks about the pinch method when you're actually wiring the tree. So I think the pinch method is also should be used when you're actually removing the wire too at the same time to avoid damaging the branch in the process. So as you can see here, I'm just pinching it and taking it back. And I'm trying to avoid all the buds here on this larch. Kind of work myself through and of course the body movement is always important too. You kind of like dance around the tree as you do this. And when you get to the point where it's a little bit too long for you and it gets a little bit too dangerous to get because we're getting too close to other buds, just trim it and you move on. This is copper wire. So most of you probably know that copper is recyclable. So we normally take all of our copper wire and after we get a number of buckets full and take them and recycle them. So when my fingers aren't able to kind of grab a piece of wire, I'll take my wire cutters and I'll just kind of allow myself to be able to grab it a little bit better and then I get my finger in there and move it out. Now let's talk about if you wanted to cut the actual wire out. So here's a case where the wire is pretty well exposed. It's not dug in like the other side was. So I'm just going to go on the top here, take that out, and just move it around. So now I'm going to take the wire and just kind of line it up a little bit. And I'm going to take the wire out and then that is one way you can remove the wire and the way that the cutters are designed you there's not much worry that you're going to damage the bark okay so now we've come into a section here where you can see where the wire is really badly bitten in so what's the process here for this well the only process would be very gentle with this because we don't want to damage the branch so we're going to kind of work ourselves through the same direction that the wire was put on we want to try to take it off the same exact way because if we don't what's going to happen if it's in any other angle you will end up ripping that that cambium off so let's be very easy here on this so so again I'm supporting that wire so that when it comes up it's not going to come in the back here and rip the cambium out. I'm going to support it so it only goes to this point right here. There, there it goes. I can now grab it from the top here as I support the wire and I now have more control over it. So being gentle here I'm straightening the wire out as best I can as I try to thread it through that that section where it's really badly bit in. So you can see how I straighten out the wire. It doesn't have the the angle to it anymore. So now I can put a little bit of a twist on it just a little bit at a time. And I'm still with my fingers holding this back here bringing it up. Again you're wanting to be very careful with all these buds with where your arm is where your fingers are. So now I'm going to come back here and I'm going to hold it very tightly so I can bend this down. And you know what you're basically all about? So here's another situation where we've got the wire that's pretty badly dug in. And what we're going to do like I said is like support the branch and then bring the wire around. and then what I like to do is you can see how the wires got all the all the angles in it at this point what I like to do is I like to be able to bring that wire up and then try to straighten out as best as I can so that I'm coming into that removal process with a straight wire so now I am in control of the direction that the wire is going and not the angle that's in the wire that's going to control my direction so here we go so I'm coming through being very gentle with this and again here we are I'll bring that through and there we are no damage to the bark that branch will survive to live another day so I've decided to cut this wire off here only because this branch is kind of delicate and for me to try to unwire the take the wire off of it I could damage the branch so I'm just going to just cut it off instead of trying to unwire the entire length of that piece of wire I can't bend that piece of wire up it's a little bit a little bit too thick for my fingers available move so I'm gonna use my pliers to give me a little bit of a leverage on it and get my finger in there and then take it the rest of the way so I kind of rocked the wire back and forth a little bit to kind of loosen it up so I can get it through because sometimes the sap and so forth will kind of keep it somewhat in place cased so like this right here is kind of freerefined there's a little bit of を well that'll figure that out later on so I'm removing the structural here only because it's going to be in my way as I continue on here so I've already removed the wire from this branch here the structure was left on it some removing that as far back as I can and I still say consistently inconsistent, so there's never going to be any consistency with me. So I may say do it one way, but you may catch me doing it another way. That's okay. I'm fine with that. But I will always support the branch. Protect the buds. There is no deviating from that at all. And sometimes you'll catch this, that when you get a wire that's dug in, and the wire that is next to it is a wire that was stabbed, it's like, well, why isn't that coming out? Well, you have to, oh, it's been stabbed. That's what's going on. And trying to, just to yank that out, you could actually do some damage. So what I've found is you've got to remove the wire that it's stabbed into before you go any further. Now, I'm unwiring some of this wire, not to save it, but because it's dug in as I get further towards the, towards the top of the branch. So that's the only reason why I'm wondering why I need that tail to be able to continue to unwire it. So if I clip it all the way through, I'm not going to have anything to, I'm not going to be able to grab the wire to pull it out of the, out of the area that it's bit in. So very delicate branch right here. I can actually cut the wire on the branch without unwinding it and perhaps damaging the branch. So I'm just going to just clip it off. And just as a, as a way of being just thorough in your work, try to remove all the wire. Sometimes you can see some people's work and you'll see pieces of the wire still left on just because they probably overlooked it. They've cut it, it's been released, but they never really just completely just removed it from the branch itself. So again, this is a situation where I cut it short and you can see back here how it's, how it's dug in. I don't have the strength of my fingers to actually remove that, right? So what I'm gonna do is I'll just use my cutter. Here's to give me a little bit of an angle on it so I can get my finger inside there to, to open it up so I can get some leverage to unwire it. So give a little bit of a twist. Not very much because if I give it too much, then the chances are I might end up damaging the bark around it. So I want to be able to have some control over it. So, so here I'm, I'm going to bring it up. I'm going to protect it. There's a bud. You can see right next to it there. So I'm going to straighten the wire out as best I can. Okay. So I go around that bud. So I go around that bud. There we go. So one thing to kind of keep in, keep in mind here, you probably see how I've, I've placed my tools on the surface of the pot here as I'm doing the unwiring here. I'll use my, my tool catch. I'll use my batty. I use the surface of the pot. It doesn't really matter. As long as you're very careful with how you set your tools on the, on the surface of the pot, because you definitely don't want to damage the pot by placing the tool on there too hard or too heavy. So just be careful with that, with that aspect of it. So, but anyway, so now we've completed this, this branch here. We're going to, we're going to continue on removing the entire wire from this entire tree, but don't want to put you to sleep in the, in the process of having you, have you watch that. This is kind of just recap. What we've done here as far as when we do the entire unwiring of a tree, we start at the tip, we protect the buds, we protect the branches by supporting that branch. As we unwire the, the wire from there, when we have wire that's bit in, we take our time and we, we unwire it, unravel that wire in the same angle that it went on. So that means that we're not going to take that wire in a, in an angle like this and try to unwrap it because that's going to definitely tear that, that cambium away from that branch. And we don't want to do that. So just be careful. Now that we've done this technique, as far as the entire removal of the wire from the tree, the next technique is that of wire that is completely dug in that you can't even see it. How do you remove it when you have that situation? Let's kind of work through this one here. This is pretty bad right here for, even for me, this is pretty serious right here. So let's just work through this and we'll just take it one, one turn at a time until we finally remove it from this, from the apex of this tree. One thing that I have noticed here that what wire is biting is, is the, some of the secondary wire here. So what I need to do first is remove, of course, we're going to remove all the small gauge wire before we get to that, because it seems like to me that the smaller gauge wire is actually still, it's also embedded in with the, with the larger size. So that brings on some other difficulties. So let's just do a little bit of time here. So as you can see, as I'm moving this wire around, my thumb is protecting it. So it's not going to go past this point here and do any damage as it, as it starts to twist off because I've got all kinds of pressure right there, keeping that wire from doing anything. So I can move this around without doing any sort of damage. Because it's already been removed from the, from the front part of it. It's just the back part hasn't been removed yet. If I can get this wire to rock back and forth, that means that now I can clip the one end straight and I can pull it through without doing any sort of damage, trying to unwire it through that, through that bally bit in area. But I'm not there yet. I'm almost there, but I'm not, I'm not, if I try to pull it out at this point, I will do some damage trying to drag it out. So I just want to try to get this a little bit further down so that I can have that ability to thread it out. Oh, there we go. There we go. Can you see how it's moving? So what I'm going to do is I'm going to cut this as straight as possible. So with my ply plier here, what I've done first is made sure that the wire is actually straight. There's no bend, no kink or anything. And it, it is straight. So now with it being straight, I'm going to cut it as close as I possibly can to the branch. Okay. Now it's straight. And the thought is that, that, that if it's crooked and you try to pull it through there, that little, it's going to catch that, that cambium and just completely just, just, just tear itself through there. We don't need to do that. So now I've cut it straight. And so at this point I can just kind of just gently thread it out. There we go. It's out. And with no damage to the branch. So now that we've successfully removed that, that wire that was so badly bit in by doing the threading method. I don't know if that's a name for it, but I kind of like that. Threading. So now we're going to continue on with the other wire that's still badly bit in. We may end up finding more situations. Where we'll need to cut the end flat and we can pull it out. So we'll see what happens here. Again, this is really bad. So just stick with us here and we'll get through it. So some of you may be wondering how long this wire has actually been on this tree. I really don't know. I don't know when the tree was actually wired, but there is no really set time as far as when wires should be removed. Other than. The visual signs of it biting in are doing any sort of scarring. That's the time that tells you it's time to remove it. Just to recap here, we gone over the technique of actually taking the wire out when it has been completely just engulfed by the bark. Or by the cambium. And that's that threading technique where you end up straightening out the back end of it. Cutting it as flat as you can. So you can actually pull the wire out without doing any damage to the cambium whatsoever. And that's just one of the techniques here that you can use when it's really badly embedded in. The rest of this apex right here is so badly bit in that it's going to take some time for me to actually get through it. And I don't need to put you through the whole process of watching that. So our next technique we're going to move on is to the partial unwire. So we're going to do a partial unwiring of a branch and adding wire back to it. You see this ponderosa here that we're looking at in front of us here? The only wire that's biting in is just at the apex. That is it. So there's really no reason to go through the entire tree and remove the wire just so that we can rewire the top part right here. So we are going to apply the techniques we've already learned to this apex. So we've got biting in wire. As we can see as I pull back the foliage here. You see the wire is all bit in. To the back side here. The front side here. And so what we're going to end up doing is removing the wire in this section right here only. And that's only going to be the wire that's bit in. Because as you can see here the structural wire is not biting in. It's just the secondary wire. So now the technique is going to be removing that secondary wire. Adding new wire in its place. And at the same time avoiding the scars that are existing. When I'm doing this we're removing this wire here. I want to be very careful. Now we're working on a ponderosa or any sort of pine for that matter. You don't want to bend over the needles. That's one thing you do not want to do. You want to avoid that as best as you can. This wire has been stabbed. Was the other one spliced? Was that the other word that we were using? Spliced? So I like stabbed. I like that better. So we're going to take the wire that's been stabbed out. And the reason why we're having to remove that is because we need to remove the other secondary wire that it was stabbed to. So it has to come off. We can't leave it in its place. So now the wire that's really biting in is the one we want to remove next. Alright, now we've removed it. Now we'll add the new wire back into its place. So as you can see here, you can see where the wire was dug in. So when we put the new wire back on, we want to make sure that we avoid those scars. So now we're ready to put the new wire back on. We're going to avoid the wire scars altogether. And let's do it. Let's do it directly on the wire that was in the previous one. Alright, now we're ready to put in the new wire. It's coming back to the base. So let's do it. Now we'll remember, as I said, we wanted the wire to be visible. Alright, so now the wire was out. So what we're going to do is add a new wire back into our wire that we just removed. So we can see that the wire is now visible. So it's going to be visible. And now we're going to remove the wire. It's just going to be visible here. When we remove the wire, we don't want the wire to be visible. So now that we've replaced the wire, we've avoided the previous wire scars, and the reason why we don't want to put our wire back in those same scars, and sometimes it's very easy for the wire to go back into those channels, we want to avoid that because we want those areas to heal up. So we replaced the wire with the previous wire that had bitten in, and as you can see that we were able to avoid those scars that were left by that last wire. This is going to allow those areas to heal up and create a healthier branch. To recap here, we've covered three different techniques of unwiring a tree. First technique was that of actually removing the wire from the entire tree, and the different things that we may encounter with each one of the branches as far as the wire biting in. The second technique was that of where the wire was actually so badly bitten in that you can't see it, and that was a technique of actually where we cut the end off one, we thread it through the other, making sure that that wire is as straight as it possibly can as you remove it. The third technique was what we see right here that's in front of us, is that is the partial remove of wire that has been bitten in, and then adding new wire on top of that. Again, we want to ensure that we avoid the scars that were there, and not putting the wire back in those same areas. All of this is going to improve the health of the tree, and also make the tree look very aesthetically pleasing. 
