What's going on everybody? Saturday lecture series from Mirai. Welcome, welcome, live and in studio. It feels like this is such an appropriate season to be having the discussion of water based on the fact that we really are settling into the time in the year where our plants' water necessities are stabilizing, but beyond that, our plants' water necessities are also changing. So when we say it is stabilizing, they're changing into a behavior that ultimately has tremendous impact on the health of our trees. If we get it right, over the course of this period of time in the year, handling watering correctly and striking the balance, our trees continue to accumulate water. So we're going to have a lot of water. We're going to have a lot of water. We're going to have a lot of water. We're going to have a lot of water. We're going to have a lot of water. Energy resources gain further productivity. Vascular tissue production will begin or those incremental additions of vascular tissue will begin. And that means that we're really going to be starting to see in some of our species that respond a little bit earlier and a little bit more of an aggressive fashion to the growth that ensues over the summer season with more root production with more root production. And so if we miss that, we miss our opportunity to look at our most after-aka. So if we miss that, if we miss that option, should we hit that mark correctly? But if we miss it, if we don't understand all of these nuances of water, and I have a healthy list to talk to you about today, this is really the time in the year outside of amidst watering when trees need it or cold, heat, wind, which can like secondarily involve water. But if we miss it now, if we're not quite clear on watering practices and the considerations of watering practices, this is This is when we lose trees, right, is when we settle into this sort of prolonged necessity to really lock in on what we're trying to accomplish and the significance and importance of water. So this is the big one. And I've prepared for this significantly because water as a concept of bonsai has grown beyond something that is wet to something that has far more of an impact on our trees. I've got Ira on the mic today. Good morning. And Jesus producing the lecture series. When we discuss water, we first of all have to understand the characteristics of our water and where that water is coming from. So we say, listen, before we ever get to the function of water in bonsai, where does our water come from? And we look at the sources of our water because the sources of our water have a lot of indicators that can help us. Now, you cannot understand your water unless you test, right? You've got to know the characteristics. You need to know the pH. You need to know the hardness. You need to know any of the potential contents of that water that might have implications in the cultivation of your bonsai. But the source of the water and the considerations of the source of the water might begin to inform you or change the criteria that you're considering. And so we say, listen, most of us are going to be functioning off of a municipal water source. And when we start to talk about a municipal water source, not always. Not all municipal water sources are created equally. But municipal water sources do tend to have certain similar characteristics just in the nature of needing to treat pathogens and make it potable, consumptive water for human beings to safely consume and exist with. And so we would say, listen, municipal water sources typically are going to have a slightly higher pH in order to be able to preserve any of the metal pipes, to be able to reduce corrosion. And just in general, to sort of hit that sweet spot of consumption, we're going to be talking at a pH. And when we say generally a higher pH, we're saying a pH in excess of 7 as a general concept of municipal water sources. Municipal water sources are typically going to have the involvement of a sterilizing agent, oftentimes that is chlorine as a gas. Municipal water sources do typically tend in some areas to have fluoride additives or other additives as a, you know, back in the day, a way to provide fluoride as a dental health measure. I don't know if that was the only use of it, but that is my understanding. And fluoride and fluorine can have a significant impact on plant cultivation. It is toxic to some plants in terms of their ability to process that and deal with that as an addition of that water resource. OK, so when we start to look at this, we're already, you know, thinking about this information and saying, OK, well, we can off gas some of the chlorine. If we have a base. And we can compensate for that gaseous toxicity by running it through potentially a charcoal filter or some of these things that help to purify. But we do still have this pH slightly alkaline in nature above 7, which will come back to pH and how that affects things. But it might be something that we need to modify. Right. And modifying that through a dosatron, adding some sort of acidifying agent like a vinegar at an appropriate proportion can be very minimal step in making a municipal water. OK, so that's one of the things that we need to do to make sure that our source really appropriate and functional for bonsai cultivation. OK, the second resource for a lot of water is well water. OK, and when we start to talk about well water now as a resource, well water across is across the board. Yeah, I've seen at Mirai we get our water out of a well. We do not filter it. We do not treat it. It comes straight out of the ground. It is one of the best water wells that I have ever seen. OK. OK. I've seen, heard of and wherever we've had it tested, the comment has been we have not seen water this pure, right? It is a very it was one of the reasons that I exist at Mirai was because of the quality of the water here. Now, I've learned a lot about the water here and how that impacts cultivation in a bonsai container because it's not necessarily you've got good water. So you don't have to worry about anything. My water has a neutral pH right around 6.2, 6.5, maybe even leaning slightly on the acidic side of things. And that causes certain availability. And that causes certain availability of nutrients to be present and offers some cultivation challenges, right? Even though it's so good, it offers cultivation challenges. But knowing that allows us and empowers us to be able to make decisions. OK, so well water. And I've seen well water that has a tremendous amount of contaminants. I've seen well water that's dangerous in terms of lead, in terms of arsenic, in terms of these things for human consumption might not have the same kind of implications for plants, but recognizing that well water is a common resource. And if we don't have it tested, we are. And we are completely in the dark about what we are dealing with as the most consistent input to our bonsai. We have to be understanding the characteristics of that water in order to be able to meet our trees where they're at. Gave them the third source. That's worth talking about, because I think a lot of us, you could say distilled water. When I was a young kid, I used to go buy jugs of distilled water because I read it in a Bones. I want to one book that that was a better resource. I spent copious quantities of my allowance on distilled water. To. cultivate bonsai at 12 years old. And ultimately, distilled water is water created through evaporating the water out of a basin and capturing the condensation of that evaporated water, which is void of now all of the contaminants that are left behind through that evaporative process, okay? I don't know how much different distilled water is from our third talking point, which is reverse osmosis or RO water, but I think that it probably still has a few more impurities than RO water. And RO water is a water that is put through a process where it is both run through a membrane, but it is also put through an osmotic pressure system that pulls all impurities out of the water system and leaves you with just hydrogen and oxygen and no dissolved solutes, no mineral content in that water, okay? So we're talking about here having a pH that might be compromising, having some gaseous, you know, sterilization. agents, and we probably also have a significant amount of dissolved salts and minerals, okay? When we're talking about our well, we might have pH issues. We might have dissolved salts. We might have mineral content in abundance. We have no idea. When we talk about RO, we have nothing. We have nothing in the water. And this is a very different thing, right? Our RO consumption of water really leaves the human body without any of that. So we're talking about a very different question here. How many of that mineral content that we derive from that water resource, when we think about the presence of dissolved solutes, assuming they're not heavy metals, but we're dealing with calcium, we're dealing with magnesium, we're dealing with some salt content that actually is favorable in terms of human consumption to have some of that mineral content. That's favorable for plant consumption as long as we understand its content and we can sort of work with that content to balance that content that's getting into our plant with the pH. that's present, etc. But when we talk about RO, we're stripping that all out. And you say, when would I then go with an RO system when you have so many dissolved solutes and toxicities in terms of overly hard water? pH is an issue. Contents and contaminants are an issue. And you say, listen, it's going to be best to strip all of this out because I have no other option to purify this and then to add back in the mineral content that's necessary for that to be a consumptive water resource that continues to be beneficial to our tree. And an RO system demands that we be very on point with our nutrition that we're delivering as a result of taking out all of that mineral content. RO also typically acidifies the water, which can create a little bit of a pH issue that we've got to be aware of. But more than anything, it's that depletion of that mineral content that we're delivering that's necessary for that to be a consumptive water resource that continues to be beneficial to our tree. And an RO system demands that we be very on content, which again is the lesser of both evils. Too much of the bad stuff, we take it all out. Now we have nothing. We've got to add the good stuff back in. Might be the lesser of the two evils of we can't deal with all of this bad stuff and this is the better option. Okay? But just looking at the sources of water and understanding that our water as the constant input in bonsai is a very major influential factor that is constantly applying pressure on our tree. And that's what we're looking at here. So we're looking at the systems of our soil in this small confined environment. Over the course of time, your water will change that system. We say, listen, clay particles, akadama as a clay particle has a high buffering capacity. A buffering capacity means a high resistance to changing its behavior. Akadama as an analyzed soil particle has great characteristics. Pumice as an analyzed soil particle has great characteristics. Lava as an analyzed soil particle has great characteristics. But when you apply a bad characteristic like a constant input of water with poor pH, high dissolved solutes or very hard mineral content, all of a sudden you can alter the state of that system and akadama will say, hey, I see you're hitting me with all of this. I don't like it. I'm not going to change. Nope, nope, nope. But that pressure over time, akadama will start to wear out. Bear down its capacity to resist taking on those negative characteristics. And we can walk ourselves into a corner if we're not confronting the water quality issue where all of a sudden akadama takes on over the course of time that negative characteristic of that accumulation of toxicity. And now we have that behavior ingrained in our containerized environment. Okay, now this is not to be fearful. This is not in any way a fear-mongering conversation. This is, let's understand this. Let's understand this so that we can confront water, its source, its quality, make the best decisions for our collection. But we can be adding a consistent input on a constant basis, watering multiple times a day in an aggregate situation of a small containerized environment. We need to know that the water that we're giving our plant is something that is both benefiting it and something that we're managing the negative characteristics of through nutrition or adjusting the quality of that water so that the inputs we're giving our trees are positive. Okay? So that's one of our resources. And, you know, throughout most of my bonsai career, I mean, Mr. Kimura created, Mr. Kimura operated off of a well with very, very high-quality water. We operate off of a well with very, very high-quality water. But when I was in Colorado, after I got past the distilled water phase and realizing that I was not going to have any money left to water my bonsai, I moved to the municipal system. And it completely changed my trees in terms of their growth and the issues that I dealt with. with. So these things, you know, and I've seen several students change over to RO systems and we've had to really adjust our cultivation of the collections just based on the fact that that mineral content is now void. But there is always a solution to water. There is always a solution to improving your water and it can be very, very effortless. All right? Water sources to begin the conversation. You're saying, I thought you were going to teach us how to water today. I am going to teach you how to water today, but we've got to talk about the issues that nobody talks about, which is not all water is created equal. Okay. Water characteristics. Okay. Water is wet. When water comes out of the ground, it's cold, right? When water has the appropriate amount of dissolved solutes, it tastes good. Those are your characteristics. Let's move on. No, I'm just kidding. Okay. When we started to talk about characteristics, let's break off the big one first, pH. Okay. pH. So when we talk about pH as a water characteristic, we have this scale of, you know, a typical essentially, let's just say, uh, one to nine as a, as a pH scale. Okay. And typically when you start to talk about pH for plant cultivation, plants are capable of being cultivated between six and 7.5 as a general range that allows the cultivation of your maximum breadth of plant species. Now, obviously there are nuances in this. Obviously some species are going to function better. At six than 7.5 or at 7.2 than six, but we recognize this is kind of your sweet spot of your pH range, your acidity, alkalinity, right? In terms of cultivatable plants. Okay. Now when we start to move towards the acidic side of things, the acidic side of pH water applied to the bonsai container, all of a sudden we have availability, availability of aluminum and manganese. Okay. And this happens regardless of the bonsai container, regardless of the Akadama aluminum is the most available soil particle in the Earth's crust. Manganese is right, right up close to it in terms of being a very abundant metal that is present in soils. Particularly soils that are experiencing the pressure and action of cultivation and the application of water. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. changing the availability and typically aluminum and manganese are minimally available and not water soluble until we start applying an acidic water solution to those components and when we look at Akadama we recognize Akadama although it has a great nutrient reading as a neutral soil particle we look at lava we look at pumice great readings as neutral very low contamination content when we put them under acidic conditions we unlock the aluminum and we unlock the manganese and these are two metals in that acidic condition that can cause some real issues the other thing that happens as we drop into a more and more acidic solution is we reduce available phosphorus okay we reduce available phosphorus and that can be a real problem as well because phosphorus is the central component in terms of nutrition of energy ATP the stored form of energy the product of respiration or the plant breathing over the course of the dark period night time and when we start to see phosphorus becoming unavailable the plant cannot create the energy long term stored energy that allows it to grow and have the capacity to metabolize and go through all of the processes that allow it to continue to maintain its health one more thing that happens with acidity reduced biology all of a sudden we start to talk about like come here and look at this little group of we love anything twenty artifacts89 about with reduced acidity we have less and less microbial activity making nitrogen available and all of a sudden when we start to lock up the nitrogen now obviously the chlorophyll the green pigmentation in our plants that capture the sun's energy break the molecular bonds of water and carbon dioxide and form glucose glucose or the food that keeps our plants healthy and allows us to create sugars allows us to create new tissues is no longer possible right and that is a very major consideration to lack biology is to start to create some of the nutrient unavailability that leads to deficiencies okay now let's go in the opposite direction we move in the alkaline direction and all of a sudden when we start moving into the alkaline direction we lose the availability of our trace elements okay all of a sudden we start to say listen we get to alkaline and we lose iron we lose molybdenum we'll we lose cobalt we lose zinc these pieces these trace elements that allow for all of these metabolic processes to continue to happen and happen in the correct proportions and to balance the plants internal nutritional system are tied up in that alkalinity they're pulled out of soluble suspension and that means we see those deposits on our bonsai container of high alkaline water dropping out the calcium carbonate and leaving behind those resources without that availability and interestingly enough when we get super alkaline we also reduce phosphorus availability for that energy system on both sides of the equation okay now does it do we have aluminum and manganese toxicity do we have iron toxicity absolutely not in fact we have complete locking up of all of those acidic components that become more available when our pH is in that neutral or slightly acidic range when we move into that alkaline environment. And this is where you see pHs that are more basic or a higher pH reading of the 7.5, of the 8.2. This is where you see chlorosis as an inevitability. Magnesium is now locked up, iron is now locked up, and magnesium and iron are the two molecules that play into that chlorophyll and that ability for a plant to show and express that green coloration. So pH is a big one. And ultimately, if we understand, listen, if I had my ideal pH, I would love to be between 6.2 and 6.7. That is my personal sweet spot right there. And ultimately, the modern horticultural model says 6.5 is neutral. It used to be 7. They recognize 7 is not neutral. 6.5, more of the accepted neutrality in pH. If you make that your target, that is going to give you the broadest availability of dissolved solutes or nutritional compounds in your water while also maintaining microbial activity and the ability for the organic system to function, okay? And that is of utmost importance to maintain our microbial activity inside of our system. And I've seen this meltdown in both directions at Mirai. I've seen it meltdown in both directions, okay? We want to try and maintain the water that we're putting into our plant at that neutral pH to make sure that we sit in that sweet spot. Thankfully for us at Mirai, we sit around that 6.2 to 6.5 range, so we don't have to do a whole lot of work. Again, how would we adjust that pH? I'm going to continue to push people into, if you need to acidify your municipal water source, a Dosatron with over-the-counter vinegar, appropriately proportioned to get your water coming out of your hose at a 6.5 pH, absolutely doable, very low cost, very, I would say, low lift in terms of setting the system up, and it will change your bonsai cultivation practices entirely. I think of all of the things that we do in bonsai to monitor and manage our water, adjusting the pH is your number one focus. So that's pH in a nutshell. Very basic overview. Could we go deeper? We could absolutely go deeper. Are we going to go deeper? We've got to go deeper. We've got to go deeper. We've got to go deeper. We've got too much to talk about. Okay, number two, let's talk about hardness. Hardness is, okay, dissolved mineral content, the quantity of dissolved mineral content in your water. So we say, listen, soft water has low quantities. Hard water has high quantities. High quantities of what? Mineral content. As water passes through, limestone, gypsum, chalk, moving through the environment and then is harvested from the ground and brought back up, there's a tremendous amount of carbonates, bicarbonates, sulfates, all of these different components of the geology that the water moves through that fill that water with mineral content and alter its behavior or its reading of hardness. Okay? And so when we start to look at this, some of those components could potentially be toxic. components might not be available so they're not toxic and at a different pH may become toxic and so we start to say okay do we do we soften our water do we harden our water do we filter our water and this is really when we start to get into that assessment of too many dissolved solutes in our water system in an alkaline environment oftentimes mean the most toxic of those elements the metals are not available and then you say but I've been told to acidify the pH will all of a sudden when you acidify the pH back to that neutral or slightly acidic stage now some of these metals do become available and we say okay the hardness of my water at this pH makes these dissolved solutes or mineral content available and now I do have an issue where that is a toxicity or potential toxicity to my plants and this is where the balance of pH and hardness come into really managing your water system with a lot of thought a little bit of pressure and then the water becomes more and more toxic and little bit of potential professional input. Again, I'm going to encourage everybody to test their water through apical and see what they say about improving your water conditions. The most effortless way to manage that dosatron and slight acidifying agent, but if you've got a tremendous amount of metal content in your water, I would be very careful about over-acidifying that because those things can then become available and slightly toxic, okay? So we say, all right, well, what about softening it? What about removing some of those toxicities? A water softener puts salt into the system. Salt binds with these components and locks them up so that they're no longer a problem in the hardness factor, removes them. But salt in itself is another issue that we start to deal with, and we're going to confront that in the next characteristic. So you want to be careful about watering your plants with water-softened water, okay? Because that in itself can create other issues. But , hardness is not a good thing or a bad thing. It is a thing to be understood. What makes the water hard, and is that going to be an issue if I free up that nutrition or I free up that mineral content for my plant? If I'm heavy in iron, am I worried about that, freeing that up? I would say iron is probably one of the things that I'm least worried about. But if I've got arsenic, I've got lead, I've got some of these other things in there, am I worried about freeing that up? We would probably want to really consider filtering that system to remove some of those toxicities, okay? That's hardness, dissolved mineral content. Okay, this is the one that nobody talks about, okay? And this is not necessarily a characteristic of water. This is what comes from saturated paste tests, the engagement of water with soil with plant, okay? And we call this EC. Let me get that right, EC. This is electrical conductivity. This is not something... This is not something that anybody in Bonsai is talking about. It's something that we need to understand though, and we hint at electrical conductivity as a soil characteristic, but we have to understand that EC is also an internal plant system mechanism that needs to be considered, okay? Electrical conductivity discusses the quantity of dissolved salt. In our solution, okay? And in terms of our solution, our solution is soil plus water, okay? So when we start to talk about that quantity of dissolved salts, let's just be very clear here. Magnesium, potassium, sodium, and chloride. Those are your four salts. And when we start talking about your electrical conductivity, the accumulation of these salts in your soil system... Containerized environment, I've got my tree here. My tree is happy when I have a very low EC in my soil system, okay? Because if I have a low EC, and we're talking about EC I believe it's like 1.2 to 2.6 as an ideal EC in your soil system. What that means is, I have a low quantity of salt accumulation in my soil system. now when we start getting EC in excess of five what ends up happening is that means we've got salt here water is binding to the salt and this plant mr. sunshine coming out always having a good day is causing this plant to transpire and sweat and try to cool itself and the plant wants to take in that water but there's an osmotic pressure gradient there's an uneven distribution of salts I've got more salt in my soil than I have in my plant and as a result water always wants to move towards the higher concentration of salt I need water as a plant to cool myself but there's salt in the soil and actually the water is moving out of the plant in the most extreme circumstances or is unable to move into the plant because it creates that osmotic pressure that holds the water in the soil to balance the salt content between the soil and the plant. the plant's root and the soil particle. So this EC, electrical conductivity, quantity of salts in the solution, is a major consideration. And if you just think simply, you've probably been educated that you should not fertilize in the heat of the summer. This is the exact reason why. Now there's an entirely different line of thought of why we don't fertilize in the middle of summer with certain fertilizers, and why we should be fertilizing in the middle of summer, or let's just say nutritioning our trees in the middle of the summer with other nutrient components. Because so many of our fertilizers are animal byproduct, and animal byproduct inevitably comes with high salt. Whether it's a fish emulsion, whether it's a composted chicken, or cattle manure, these animal byproducts have a high salt. We use them in the summer at the heat in this middle of the summer, and we don't want to fertilize in the middle of the summer. So we're going to stop those. Don't do things like that. The EC doesn't exist in the soil. It's just a minimal confined environment of the container. The plants are trying to cool themselves through water mobility, and the salt is preventing that from happening and creating a high EC that prevents water from moving through the plant effortlessly, okay. This is the first one. If you go online and you look at EC, it will talk all about plants, what they need specific to the soil system. If you go online, and you start to research this, you read in books, and you research this, the plant is okay and when we start to talk about this think about the fact that if my ec inside of the plant and the foliar mass itself is higher than the ec that exists inside of the soil mass i have a higher salt content inside of the plant than outside of the plant naturally i'm going to be driving water through the plant because the water wants to move from the soil into my tree to balance out that concentration gradient okay but if i have too high of an ec i get way up here and i have a tremendous amount of magnesium potassium sodium or chloride which in bonsai cultivation i would say that on inevitably with the continual input of potassium all of our plants have a very high ec when we get into this period of time that super high ec salt content on in our plants leads to abnormal burning leads to abnormal sun expression or heat intolerance in our trees and it also leads to insect issues because the plant is saying hey i gotta get rid of this and insects are saying i don't want your sugars i want your salts i want those salts those are yummy they taste good i like a good salted steak i need that flavor filled yumminess out of your vascular system and this is really when we see spider mites scale adelgids everything root aphids this is your moment right now salts boom and all of a sudden we start to have those problems okay so recognizing electrical conductivity is an expression of the quantity of salts recognizing that these are your four salts and understanding that in common nutrient application these two things are in abundance these three things are a are a can continual input of animal by product fertilizers allows us to start to be able to understand how these problems evolve and what their repercussions of evolving are in terms of bone site cultivation these impact watering water mobility water function and plant health more than it's ever been discussed in the cultivation of bonsai now you are aware of it ec inside of the plant measurable through your apical sap tests in the soil those emissions are everyone's first priority but also I think we shouldn't be wrongrock the of permaculture is one of our best surprise quality um because we think when you take in a prophecies you'll always be uh easilyapoable after one or two bags or three months i don't really think the roentgen enhanced the symbiosis is gone baby overall if you're just finger pounding Swe persianosure is best for stimuli you've just been measurable through your soil tests, water characteristics, holding salt content, also a very major informational piece to allow us to begin to understand the constant application of pressure on our trees. EC has been one of the recent, recent breakthroughs for me. I learned about it in college. I didn't fully understand it. Had a Japanese maple that had astronomically high potassium levels, and consequently even keeping it in the shade prematurely turned into a bright red color in the heat over the past several weeks. And I'm saying, why does this maple do this? And then all of a sudden it's loaded with salt. I don't know how it got there, but we need to figure that out. And I see this plant expressing this behavior that is really, really challenging. High EC in the soil, how do you reconcile that? How do you reconcile it? That's why we have to water so thoroughly, to flush the salts out of our system. Flushing with every watering is how you decrease the EC or the electrical conductivity that otherwise would be pulling water out of your plant or preventing water from moving into your plant, okay? That's the necessity of thoroughly watering your bonsai comes all down to EC and reducing EC or the electrical conductivity that's preventing free water mobility through your plant. Okay, here we go. Function of water and bonsai. This is actually what you guys thought you were here to learn today. We had to, I had to get through that other stuff because we have to set the foundation to understand water, its implications, the characteristics, what we're aspiring to and what we need to be watching for, okay? Function of water and bonsai. Number one, let's just go through this. 85% of all H2O goes to the act of transpiration, transpire, transpiration, the plant sweating. And we can say transpiration is the act of a plant cooling or air conditioning itself. Okay? 85% of water, again, broad brushstrokes. This is completely debatable, but it just gets us in the realm of understanding how much water is being utilized by a plant to cool itself. A plant cannot move. A plant is sitting there taking on tons of solar radiation. It's got to deal with that somehow. And the way that it deals with it is by moving water through its system. So, what this is, this is, this is, this is, this is, this is, this is, this is, this is, this is, this is, this is, this is, this is, this is, this is. And what this looks like is we have this confined environment. We've got Mr. Tree here. Tree is happy. Mr. Sunshine, always having a good day, okay? And we've got these roots down into the soil here, right? This whole system, okay? Now, we have to think about our water, our water as a chain of molecules, okay? Because when we think about, Okay? Because when we think about, Okay? Because when we think about, Okay? Because when we think about, Okay? Because when we think about, Okay? Because when we think about, Okay? Because when we think about, xylem as the water conductive tissue, if we just dissect our plant right here, the xylem moves up through the middle of our tree and connects to all of these little areas through these straws. It's a series of straws, one next to another, next to another, next to another, okay? Xylem as the vascular tissue that conducts water, water moving through this system. Now, on the outskirts of xylem, on the exterior, there is a sieve plant. There is a sieve plant here that allows us to filter water and impurities. We get impurities that accumulate on the sieve plate. The plant uses resin to lock those up. The resin moves through these lateral pores in the side of xylem and sticks it into the heartwood, the center of no longer water conductive, resin-filled structure, you know, sort of resistant to rot, resistant to insect consumption. This is the heartwood that we value as a building product out of old growth, trees, particularly redwoods, but also pines and any other coniferous material and ultimately locks up the impurities that accumulate in these sieve plates in that heartwood, okay? But xylem is moving here, water is moving here, okay? H2O up through these pieces. Water also has the capacity to move laterally, especially in younger trees. The older trees get, the more that lateral movement is impacted, okay? And that's all happening through the central portion of our vascular system, okay? Now, when we have molecules of water moving through here, I'm going to take this out and I'm going to say, I have these molecules, H2O, and these molecules have a very strong bond to each other. They also have a very strong bond to the wall of this xylem tissue, this vascular tissue that's conducting water, okay? And so as a water molecule gets to the leaf edge on our leaves, we have these, and this is a very poor maple, we have these, and this is a very poor maple, we have these, and this is a very poor maple leaf, but just bear with me, on the bottoms of our leaves or on the needles, we have these little holes. These holes are called stomata. This is where gaseous exchange occurs. This is where carbon dioxide goes in. This is where H2O evaporates with Mr. Sunshine or the wind and leaves, okay? And through those pores, we have this chain of water out that stem running up that vascular vein, and we have that water molecule sitting on the edge there. Now, that chain connects through the tertiary to the secondary to the primary branches. That connects to the internal vascular system and xylem of the trunk. That connects to the primary, secondary, and tertiary rootlets in our container. And at the very tip of that root, we have that root tip, which is a very primordial sponge-like material that's taking in water, very thin barrier, so that water freely flows. And that molecule, inside that root, is still bound to the molecule of water that's held on the soil surface of our soil particles outside of that root. This is a continual chain and a continual system of water. It's called the cohesion-tension theory of water mobility. If you want to study it, take a look at it. Cohesion. Tension. Theory. Okay, and this is largely accepted. I believe this is irrefutable at this point as the mechanism by which evolved trees move water through their system. Okay? This water molecule turns into a gaseous state through heat or through wind. And as it's leaving, that cohesion to the next water molecule that it shares, and we see this, you pour water on a flat surface and it puddles up as a singular sort of puddle of water. That is water molecule cohesion at its best, right? It even forms this odd little cusp. As it contours down to the surface, that's because the molecules are holding together, right? And they're forming that shape against gravity. They don't just, right? They don't just disappear. They're there. That's cohesion, okay? So he's leaving and his buddy's saying, no, don't go, don't go. And he's saying, I can't. I'm turning into gas, right? This physical change from liquid to gas. And as he's leaving, it's like the cliffhanger. He's like, oh, buddy, come on. To gas. And then his friend, is pulled into the same, right on the edge of the stomata inside of the leaf, like, whoa. And then the sun and the wind and all of a sudden he's like, I'm changing to gas. And his buddy's like, don't go. And he, you know, and as he leaves his gas and pulls the next one in. And what that does as that leaves is it puts tension on this chain, right? Because one molecule is leaving and it's resisting letting go and it's pulling. And putting tension on this chain and that tension, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom is felt throughout that chain. Okay. Now, these water molecules are bound to the wall of that xylem. Otherwise, they would just kind of be freely floating and not organized. And, you know, the risk of an embolism or a break in that chain, very, very high. So they're stuck to the wall here and they're moving up sort of in order. And it's like, you know, hi-ho, hi-ho. It's off to work. We go, you know, just kind of like moseying their way up because of the evaporation that's happening at that stomatal opening of that leaf surface. Okay. So all of these things are happening at once. And what's happening down here is they're like, hey man, we're partying. We're on the surface of our soil particle, right? And like the size of the particle determines the surface area. And then the porosity determines how hard the soil particle holds that water molecule. But we're using high plant available porosity. Soil particles in our bonsai container. So those soil particles give that water molecule to the plant pretty effortlessly. So this guy's like, hey, we're on the soil, we're partying and then all of a sudden gets sucked into the root. And you know, the other molecule that's still on the soil surface is like, hey, where'd you go? Where'd you go? But they're still holding hands. He's like, I feel you, but I don't see you. And he's like, I'm in the root and it's like I'm on the soil. And then he gets sucked in right in his buddy. And it's like, oh man, now we're both in the root. That was crazy. And it's like, right? And this is just continuing to happen this chain of mobility. Moving through this system. Okay. As they move through the system. Whatever portion of this system is accumulating temperature, right? I'm getting very hot because I'm being contacted by the sun. The sun is contacting the root base here of my vascular system and it's warming up and water is moving through that and that water is taking on that heat. Water has a high heat retention capacity as a substance and it's absorbing that heat. So I'm gaining that heat. I've got coolness in the water that's both applied here. And one of the things we need to think about is potentially shading having a canopy that keeps our container cool or doing something to maintain the ability for our plant to cool itself in this confined environment of the bonsai container. But this cold water moving through grabs that heat holds that heat. And when it releases, there let's go of that heat right completely releases that heat energy as it evaporates and turns into its gaseous state that heat energy is put back into the universe and all of a sudden we say oh that's transpiration. That is the cooling process happening to seize this accumulated heat. That's happening in the plant system to bind it to the water molecule to move through the plant on this chain that's experiencing tension and is adhesive to the water molecule and to the wall of the xylem to maintain the organization. And this is happening on a continuum as plants take on the energy from the sun throughout the course of the day. 85% of your water is cooling your plant, right? So when we talk function, this is your number one function of water is cooling your plant. Okay transpiration now, it's necessary to understand that. This process of transpiration and this entire chain and system down into the bonsai container is a big driving force that determines the soil particle types that we use in our soil composition the sizes that we use it determines how we decide whether we water or not on any given day based on the factors that are removing water from the foliar mass of the tree the size of the reservoir the health and addition of growth. That's how we consider the process. By which we strike the balance of water and oxygen in the watering process. Okay, so that's function number one transpiration. Cohesion tension theory. Let's get rid of that. Okay, function number two. Metabolism. Okay, and I'm going to say metabolism just as a general broad catch-all for cellular. Functions and most importantly when we start to talk about metabolism, we talk about sugar starch. Production and I think it's pretty easy to say if 85% goes towards cooling the broad brushstroke 15% goes towards sugar starch productivity in terms of the hundred percent of water consumption. Or utilization in our plant now follow me. I've got my plant here. Okay, my Mr. Tree and he's happy. Okay, and he's in his confined environment, which controls the amount of energy but doesn't change the fact that a plant is a self-feeding system, right? And this energy this sunlight here stimulates this very beautiful green pigment called chlorophyll inside of the leaf. That chlorophyll is a series of chains of mitochondria where this energy starts to cause this sort of chain to vibrate and get all excited, right? And we have this chain of water moving up through here. That's cooling the plant and what that water chain puts in place is it puts in place a hydrogen and an oxygen. Okay. Now at that stomatal opening again that gaseous hole right here where the water leaves H2O leaves. This is also where carbon dioxide enters CO2 and we recognize that now we've got H2O and we've got CO2 present in this system with this energy moving through this tubular or this. Column of mitochondria that are being really stimulated in this energy, you know, like somebody that's had way too much caffeine is like I gotta do that. I gotta do something with this. I'm kind of freaking out here and bam bam that energy breaks those molecular bonds. Now breaking a molecular bond is a is a major major force major happening, right? This is a phenomenal system. That photosynthesis is capable. Of performing this action to create a self-feeding organism. Okay, but that bond of the hydrogen and oxygen is broken. That bond of the carbon and oxygen is broken. And now all of a sudden we've got hydrogen. We've got oxygen. We've got carbon. Those are reformed C6H12O6 most fundamental form of glucose or sugar, right? This is your immediate energy system and self-feeding food. Food resource for the plant happening through the process of photosynthesis, which we have coined as a metabolic process. Okay, so 15% of water in a plant is going towards supplying the hydrogen and the oxygen that become a part of glucose. The food that a plant creates for itself through the process of photosynthesis, the carbon coming from. CO2. And what do we know about plants is that they off gas that pure oxygen, which is how they sequester carbon and carbon dioxide and create an oxygen positive existence that purifies our ecosystem. Okay, this is how this all works. So this C6H12O6 is imperative. Breaking. The bonds is the only way that we're able to generate this type of resource. And this is really, you know, as far as we're concerned carbon is the building block. Of life. And when we start to talk about the function of plants in this floating marble in space that we all exist in and depend on clean air and temperature control. This is really where the the degradation of the rainforest and these very major carbon sinks is of, you know, critical importance for us to consider preserving. I digress though understanding that water is the food source, right? And we think fertilizer is food. No, fertilizer is a vitamin that supplements the plants ability to perform as metabolic actions and the metabolic actions require magnesium and iron in the chlorophyll along with nitrogen to keep it green and they require calcium in the cell wall to be able to monitor this transport of all of these things. Think about the calcium almost as like a like a passport checkpoint, right? A customs officer. It's like, what do you what do you bring it into the cell today? And it's like I got a little bit of oxen some hormone from the root tip. I picked up some nitrogen and some phosphorus on the way and it's like, oh very good. We need that nitrogen phosphorus have fun on your way to the tip oxen, you know, it's like that kind of monitoring and phosphorus is like let me in there. I want to create energy like we got to store this thing. It's like the battery backup for all of this energy. It's like let's let's let's get in there. Let's figure out how we keep this to use tomorrow. We need to get our energy systems up, right? These are all of the ways that these components feed this continual self-perpetuating system. Okay, so metabolic process is 15% function of water to create sugar, which ultimately equals energy and we'll walk you through that process. Okay, and the last one do which just needs to be mentioned is transport. Okay, because on that water molecule and it's not like the water is like, hey, come on, let's go, you know, it's not like that. It's water soluble charged. Ionic particles are capable of hitching a ride. Hormonal content is capable of hitching a ride on this chain of water. That's moving through the system primarily driven by the necessity to cool and the transpiration process out of the leaf and when that water molecule gets to the tip of that leaf, it deposits. That nutrition at that growth point for that plant to benefit from that enhanced capacity to perform its metabolic activities, but we do need to recognize that without water movement. We do not have transport and that is one of the most challenging things when we're dealing with a sick plant when we're dealing with a health and battled plant because now a plant that is struggling a plant that is suffering a plant that has a declining root system a plant that has had its foliar mass overly reduced. Can't move without that foliar mass transpiring. It cannot move resources through the tree. And if you can't move resources through the tree bad things sit they they cause embolisms. They cause toxicities. They cause stagnation. They cause bad biology to to bloom and to occur, right? You want your plant moving resources. That is how it cools itself. It's how it. Functions of how it consistently continues to refresh to get the bad out to get the good in and that transport component is a byproduct of transpiration and metabolism, but is nevertheless the way that we have got to utilize the vehicle of driving good resources getting into a tree. One of the things about the nutritional experiments that I've recognized on a on a grand scale is a larger live vein on a juniper will inevitably. Show more rapid recovery and response to nutritional changes than a smaller live vein. This is a direct discussion of nutrient transport hopping on the chain of water, right? Smaller live vein or I see a portion of my tree is weaker and I see a portion of my tree is stronger. That is not moving as much water to be able to allocate the resources that change the condition of that region in the tree. These are really strong communication tools that our plant has to. To give us a clue about what's happening inside of its internal system. Okay. All right. So. I want to talk. About one more function here that is not immediately involved in watering. But is the central concept of why striking a balance of water and oxygen is necessary. Okay. And this is that process. Of respiration. Okay. So when we start to talk about respiration to respire means to breathe. Okay. And we talk about respiration primarily in the root system of our plants respiration occurs during the nighttime. The dark it's oftentimes called the dark cycle or the Krebs cycle where we are not using water through photosynthesis. We are not the sun. The sun is not stimulating the mitochondria to have the energy to break the molecular bonds that reform glucose and quite the opposite. The cells themselves on a cell by cell basis are breathing right and through that process of breathing that C6 H12 O6 or what we call glucose or sugar right and there's other forms of sugar sucrose glucose can becomes all of these things. Let's just keep it simple. Okay. So sugar right is moved through our phloem and cambium our vascular system on the outside of the tree xylem is in the middle here phloem and cambium is on the exterior here that sugar is moved down into the parts of the tree where growth needs to be occurring and our root system is constantly growing just like our foyer mass is growing the spring and our branches are are producing vascular tissue over the late spring summer and fall and our roots are taking over. We're taking on some of that resource of that expanded foyer mass to be growing as well. So this is let's just say transported down to the root. Okay, and we say listen, what is necessary? What is necessary in terms of the components of respiration to allow and when we say to breathe in a plant, this is really where we turn sugar. Into usable. Energy. Okay, it's where we turn the food into the active growing energy. Okay, and what we need here is we need oxygen to be present with that sugar and through that cellular process of respiration. We take that phosphorus molecule and we mix it with that oxygen through that process and the byproduct of that is ATP the central energy molecule. Right, this is the driving force of plant growth cellular division and the creation of tissue. If we do not have respiration in the roots, we do not change sugar into a burnable form that allows our plant to grow. And that is a problem striking the balance of water and oxygen. Water has to be present to hydrate and cool the tree oxygen in our root system has got to be present. present to allow the product of that metabolism with that water in the foyer mass to be turned into energy that allows the plant to grow so that oxygen present here the byproduct of respiration is h2o water plus co2 carbon dioxide plus the energy molecule because phosphorus was contributing to that entire cycle and so what you're saying is wait the plant produces carbon dioxide at night and produces oxygen during the day yes and over the course of a plant's life it's going to produce far more oxygen than carbon dioxide but this is exactly why you never spend the night in a greenhouse with closed doors because the carbon dioxide can rise to a degree where it'll actually kill you very very common and unfortunately it's very common and unfortunately it's very common and unfortunately it's very common and unfortunately it's very common and unfortunate circumstance that occasionally happens particularly in hydroponic tomato growing operations over the night time workers being inside not enough ventilation and suddenly they get more and more tired they lay down to take a nap and they never wake up it's something that happens periodically in the in the AG world because that carbon dioxide production is significant water production have you ever asked yourself I watered I my plant was dry or kind of dry when I last checked it and I decided to not water it and the next morning I came in and the soil was moist how did that happen how in the world did that happen now that's a product of several different things that's capillary action raising the water from the bottom of your container distributing evenly through the soil column that is potentially condensation from that temperature change but that is also water as a byproduct of the respiration process in the root system itself but this is happening across every living cell in our tree respiration over the dark period having this capacity to produce this usable, storable form of energy. And you say, why do I have to strike the balance of water and oxygen? It's not for the daytime activity. That water is necessary. It's for that nighttime activity of allowing the cells to breathe and turn that sugar into usable energy where oxygen is necessary. And we would say, listen, we need 7% to 10% oxygen in the soil system. It's not a lot. We're still talking primarily water as the major resource in the soil system. 7% to 10% oxygen content to facilitate respiration to a healthy degree is what we're after. That is manageable for us. That is manageable for us, okay? Respiratory. Not a function of water, but directly related, okay? Now, let's dig in to the real nitty-gritty of this whole thing, okay? Watering application in bonsai, we say, listen, balance of water and oxygen. How we achieve balance. Ultimate health, okay? Now, health, okay? Now, I just want to quantify real quick. What is health? If I asked you all what health is, most of us would say our plant is green and our plant is growing. Okay, those are pretty low bars for health, honestly, because a plant can be completely sick and still be green and still be growing. It can't... A plant can be completely weak and still be green and still... Ultimate health actually equals resistance. Resistance. Resistance to disease, resistance to pest, resistance to heat, resistance to cold, resistance to drought, resistance to applications of bonsai, pruning, wiring. Repotting. Repotting. okay all of the things that we do in bonsai resistance the ability to be to res to respond right to damage to impediments to imbalances in the foyer mass root system energy system of the tree and so if we say listen green and growing low bar resistance high bar where does that resistance come from that resistance comes from a root system that has enough energy to sustain the current foyer load and enough energy to add that resistance comes from the root system that has a symbiotic relationship with biology and where that biology connects to that root system we get enzymatic responses that are able to fend off invasions of pests and disease trying to penetrate the outer structure of our leaf or tissue right that resistance comes from the ability to control the stomata that pour on that leaf close it when we're lacking water open it for mass maximum gaseous exchange because our salt contents are balanced and in order to be able to develop this resistance we must have the energy in the system where does the energy come from energy comes from photosynthesis plus respiration with the help of microbial activity okay photosynthesis needs water respiration needs oxygen microbial activity needs the sugar starch excrement in the root system to build the flora that creates those enzymatic contact points that respond to invasion and through that balance of water and oxygen that we strike on a continual basis our plant needs water we thoroughly hydrate as I say these six these six shades After we thoroughly hydrate, we allow oxygen back into the system. The next time we come and check our plant, we weigh out all of the factors that contribute to our decisions of do we water or do we not, knowing that we need water and we need oxygen. And those things help us build biological or microbial activity. And all of those components combine to create that concept of resistance or ultimate health in our plant. So it looks like this. And I'm going to come back and I'm going to put that balance of water and oxygen back on the top here. Because this is a process, do I water or do I not? What are my considerations for watering? If we know that transpiration is water being moved through the leaf mass. First and foremost, do I water, do I not? How much foliage does my tree have? First thing you've got to ask yourself, how much foliage? Number two, how big is the reservoir? How much foliage is transpiring? Let me come back to here. Number three, how much foliage, happy tree. How much foliage, happy mists, mists of sunshine, always having a good day. How much foliage is losing water? Number two, how much water is held in the device that acts as the reservoir to supply this tree? OK. Number three, what factors are acting on my tree? What factors are affecting my tree? Let me talk about this. Number three. And we would be talking about sun, intensity, heat in terms of temperature, relative humidity in terms of water content in the air, and wind as a product that causes further evaporation. Higher humidity, less water being lost automatically. This is where in the summer season in Japan, when relative humidity is 80, 85 degrees, we get a full summer dormancy. The plant cannot transpire and cool itself. A swamp cooler, right, cooling through water doesn't work in humid environments, only works in arid environments, low relative humidity. Because the water is already so saturated that losing that molecule with that heat is no longer possible. The air already has too much of that water holding that. The heat as it exists already, I can't cool myself, I'm going to slow down my metabolic processes, I'm going to go dormant, okay? So a high relative humidity region is going to have a completely different water mobility, water necessity, and balance of water and oxygen over those high heat environments than an arid environment. You talk about Denver, Colorado in 90 degrees and South Carolina at 90 degrees. That is going to be two completely different behaviors to strike the balance of water and oxygen, okay? But we've got to be considering, first and foremost, I'm not looking at the soil and whether it's wet or dry. I'm looking at a tree every time I approach it and I'm saying, gosh, this tree has got a tremendous foliar mass. It's continuing to grow. Its reservoir is small. I've got a lot of sun. I've got a low relative humidity. I've got wind today, maxing out the factors that would encourage me to water it. I look at the soil. That soil is dry. I'm obviously going to thoroughly hydrate that soil, okay? That soil is moist. I'm going to think about wind. When is the next time I can come back and water this? I'm leaving for the day. It's going to be six hours. I have to water it even though it's moist, right? I have the ability to be around today. It's the weekend. I'm not working. I can let this go ahead and dry out. I'm going to come back in an hour. I'm going to hold back on that, right? That's an action that establishes a balance of water and oxygen. But if we don't consider these, right, and we'll say here, number four, is it growing? Because that adds that extra 15%. Okay. 15%, right? And number five, let's see. Number five is soil moisture. And number six is when can I check slash water next? This is your list of questions in order of priority that allows you to decipher. Do I water right now or do I hold back? Okay? And if you go through this on every single tree and you're saying, well, this is going to add forever, usually I just touch the soil. If it's dry water, if it's wet, I don't. Yes. But what about when it's moist? Because it's actually the moist time that determines your balance of water and oxygen. And let's just be very clear. Our balance of water and oxygen is a situation in our tree that occurs over time. A tree is not going to drown because it has too much water over the night. It's not going to drown because it has too much water over the night. Okay. And can't respire in a day. A tree is not going to starve to death or run out of energy because it stayed too wet for two or three days. But a tree is going to start to suffer when it can't turn that sugar into usable forms of energy and storable forms of energy if we apply that kind of pressure over seven days, 14 days, 21 days. And a plant can't cool itself. If we're not watering it, a plant can't metabolize through photosynthesis that sugar and starch if it doesn't have that water present. That's the central portion of that molecule, right? And so we see, okay, my plants need water. In fact, water is the most important thing they could have. But my plants need that oxygen. And in fact, oxygen is imperative for this energy system of this self-feeding organism. And between this need for water and this need for oxygen, which oppose each other in the containerized environment, I have to make sound, stable decisions each time I water that take into consideration the factors that inform that decision. Boom. How much foliage? How big is the reservoir? What factors are acting on my tree in terms of sun, heat, humidity, and wind? Is it adding growth, that extra 15% of water utilization? What is my soil moisture having considered all of these things? And when can I check next if it's damp? Do I let it dry? Do I let it dry out today? Maybe not, because I'm going to be gone. Maybe not, because it's the work week. When do I let it dry out then? When I'm home on the weekend. When I have the ability to come back and check in an hour. When I can re-empower that system to fill with oxygen, to compartmentalize any decay, to stimulate the oxygen-water balance in the containerized environment that facilitates growth and production of tissue. That is when I am going to strike that balance to be able to cultivate my bonsai on the broader spectrum of balance. Balance of water and oxygen over the long run of cultivation to meet that tree's needs. This is the concept of balance in watering. Knowing how water works through our tree that allows us to achieve the health that empowers our tree to respond positively to the bonsai process. Okay? All right? So if you're just, you know, if you're taking this at face value, yes, soil moisture is important. Right? And a tree with a minimal amount of foliar mass in a heavy, in a large reservoir might benefit from becoming drier, not might, will benefit from becoming drier as opposed to wetter. Right? And a tree with a heavy foliar mass in a small reservoir is the riskiest tree to cultivate. Pushing the aesthetic but having to really dial in that horticulture so that we keep that plant cooled. We keep that plant metabolizing. And we allow that plant. We allow that plant to have the capacity to thrive in that confined environment. Okay? Balance of water and oxygen may be the best that's ever been stated right there. Okay? And I'm not breaking into, I just want to say this discussion of transpiration, mobility of water, and then getting into the idea of respiration requiring oxygen, and then using that to piggyback into the balance of water and oxygen, first time I've ever done it. It's made sense from the very beginning and is of utmost importance to dissect the relationship and then give ourselves the looking points, the touch points in that quest for the balance of water and oxygen that allows that root growth to occur because that energy was able to be transitioned from sugar into long-term storage as ATP. Okay? Necessary to ask ourselves these questions and find the moments that we can strike the balance that give us health in our tree. Okay? All right. Application of water. Application of water. Okay. This is important because, especially when we start to talk about beginners, okay, we've got the drench, which I would say is the most common. We've got submersion. And then we've got mist. Each one of these has a very, very different function. Okay. Drenching. We're saying, listen, we're watering the top of the soil. We're letting the water thoroughly percolate and hydrate every single square millimeter of our containerized environment as a bone-sized subject. If you are going to water it, you're going to water it. You're going to water your tree. There is no light watering. There is no, I'm just going to water the surface. That is not functional for your tree. Okay? If you're going to water, water. Water it thoroughly. Leave no doubt. This is how you strike the balance of water and oxygen. We are thoroughly, thoroughly hydrating via, and I'm going to say, I was going to say through again, but it's under through, via topical application. Okay? We don't want to wash the soil away. We don't want to change the contour of our surface. We don't want to disturb the top dressing because we know if that soil is moving, root growth is being impacted. Stable soil, top dressing, containing and stabilizing that soil, creating immobility, evenly distributing water through the column, right? These are all very, very important things that allow us to have that capacity to hydrate that soil column, grow roots throughout the entirety of our container. Think about this. Here's our bonsai tree in this confined shallow environment, which creates a very odd water dynamic. Okay? And we say, when we talk about the soil, the bonsai environment, a nursery container is very, very deep. Okay? It's deep for a reason because we have the height of the column and we've got the force of gravity acting on that column. Okay? The greater the distance, the more gravity acts on that column, the more excess water leaves that container. Okay? And that's where we get the oxygen back into that container more rapidly for that respiration process. Okay? When we talk about the bonsai container, the bonsai container is not designed to grow a big, strong, healthy plant that's going to get bigger and bigger, quite the opposite. A bonsai container is there to constrict. It's there to confine the energy. It's there to control the energy. It's there to slow down the growth, the opposite of a nursery can. And when we reduce the height of that gravity column. We have less gravity acting on that column, which means when we water, the water stays in the system longer. And typically the water stays in the bottom of the system longer. Okay? And we get to the evening time and we've top dressed this piece so that we don't lose too much water through transpiration at the surface. And as long as that soil is immobilized, and as long as that is kept dark, and as long as there is a retention of moisture. We go ahead and we get this water. Okay? H2O moving through capillary action from pore to pore across our soil particles until we have an even distribution based on the top dressing of moisture throughout the entirety of our soil column. During the day when we water, it's water heavy. Too much on the bottom. In the middle, just right. At the top, not enough. Over the evening time, that too much moves through the just right. Moves from the just right to the not enough. And we get in the evening time, just right across the totality of our soil column. This is where we really have the capacity to distribute that water and allow respiration to occur throughout the totality of our root system. Okay? But top dressing is mandatory to achieve that gravity, changing the game, which allows us to control the energy as one of few mechanisms in the bonsai container to get shorter internodes, smaller needles or leaves. And recreate this notion of nature in miniature through the reduction of proportions. Okay? This is an aesthetic quest that changes the horticulture. But when we water, we need to thoroughly hydrate the totality of that soil system. We do not just treat the surface because you don't know what's happening in here. I water from the top. I water until water is running out the bottom of my container. If I'm going to water, I'm going to take it to that degree. This is very important. We talked about that concept of EC, electrical conductivity. The way we get salt accumulation in the container, the way that we raise EC is by watering a little bit, but not thoroughly saturating and causing water to run out. Remember water molecules, cohesion. If we water a little bit, the water molecule will actually bridge the gap of the holes in the bottom of our container. And it will stay inside of the container. Okay? It will stay cleaner through that cohesive nature. It will say, no, don't go, don't go, there's not enough water. We haven't filled the column up to where it breaks the force of gravity and now gravity is causing us to flush out. The salts accumulate, EC rises, water moves out of the tree, but the soil is wet. Are you kidding me? This is a dynamic that is very real. When you water, water thoroughly. It washes out the salts. It flushes the system. It lowers the EC that allows your plant to take in that moisture. Okay? That's what you're seeing as your common number one watering application technique and style is of utmost importance. Upmost importance. Okay? So, then what's this submersion? Because now we're saying, listen, submersion says I'm going to have a tub of water, and I've got my tree here. And I'm actually going to dunk my tree into this tub of water. And I'm going to let all the air bubbles and all the oxygen spaces off gas here, so that I know I've thoroughly hydrated my water. Okay? soil system okay submersion is a very important technique to understand and to utilize at the appropriate period of time when do we use submersion when our tree has gotten so dry that the soil actually becomes hydrophobic or resistant to water percolating through the system we cannot get the soil to take in water you water it from the top you scrape away the surface and it's bone-dry just below the surface you say what the heck I'm gonna water that and then you scrape away and it's still dry and you water it and you scrape away and it's still dry and you say oh my gosh this thing is bone-dry it's hydrophobic how do I handle it you got to submerge and you leave that plant there until the oxygen stops percolating out of the root system and that means that we've thoroughly rehydrated the soil system we take the tree out of that system we tilt the tree on an angle so that we allow the excess water to leave that system and now our tree is sort of in that state of recovery rehydration cooling itself relieving the tension on the chain created through that transpiration submersion is a is a watering technique that is utilized in emergency situations to rehydrate and that is the only time that we would utilize submersion as a watering technique not after we repot first time after we repot from the top down flush the impurities flush the dust flush the broken soil flush the impurities out hydrate your tree submersion is hydrophobic soil situations and rehydration okay now we're to mist and this is the one I really wanted to get to because I think a lot of people feel good we feel good misting our tree right feels great I love misting I'm giving you something I too want a little mist it's hot today la la la la la right that isn't really experience-based for the tree in the same way that we experience that the trees not like you know doesn't love being misted necessarily necessarily okay so when would we missed and when would it be effective there's three times that we missed and misting is effective first of all number one to ease the tension on the chain ease the tension on the chain okay follow me here I've got my tree my tree has freshly been re potting and it had a challenging repot we lost maybe more roots it's got a big healthy foyer mass in our tree is saying I've got this chain here to all of this foliage but I don't you know I've got chains and chains and chains and chains of water but I only have a few roots that I can take that water in through and so I'm losing this water. I'm losing this water, but I can't take in enough water to replace or relieve the tension on the chain. And we say, hey, hey, hey, hey, fear not, fear not, fear not. Because I'm in a mist. I'm in a mist. And what that does in terms of that leaf mass, I've got that pore, that stomata. Remember that gaseous opening? What that water does is that water coats that stomata. And it closes that stomata for a minute. And it stops the loss of water. And all of a sudden, with the stopping of that loss of water, this tension was getting so tight. Oh, it's going to break. I don't have enough roots. I don't have enough conductive roots. I'm losing so much water. And we miss the tree. And we stop that loss of water for a moment. We increase humidity around the exterior canopy. We cover the stomata. And that tension, ah, ah, whew, whew, right? We release. We relieve that tension on the chain. It has the time through the minimal amount of roots or the containerized system. It has time to, ah, shit, jeez, you know? It's like when you're bench pressing. You're like, ah! And then somebody comes and helps you get that last. And then you set it down. And you're, whew, just totally relieved, right? It's a way to ease the tension on the chain for a tree that's having a hard time keeping up. You feel the foliar mass. It's sandy. You see the foliar mass wilt, right? These are the ways that we can stop that loss, hydrate the tree, and relieve the tension on the chain. Okay, number two, cooling the leaf surface. And now, super hot day, arid conditions. Things are dry. We've got wind. Our tree is taking up a ton of water. I'm having a hard time keeping up the, the, the, the, the tree is expressing stress. Ease the tension, but more than anything, reset the surface temperature of your leaf mass, okay? And this is not something, again, you don't want to, every time the leaf mass gets warm, you don't want to cool it down, okay? A plant is not a human being. A tree is definitely not a human being. We're very close, but let's just be really honest. We are soft-bodied, weak, very fragile organisms as human beings. Our tree is far more durable. They love the heat. They love to photosynthesize. They need the sun's energy, okay? But sometimes a tree has an impediment to keeping up with this radical increase in solar accumulation, and we can use misting as a way in these really warm days as a break to ease the tension on the chain, but to change the surface temperature of our plant so that it just gets a little bit of a breather before it goes back to the battle of enduring this warm weather condition, okay? Number three, washing off dust, debris, and insects, okay? Listen, spider mites, from this point forward, temperature is increasing. Maybe we've got a little too much salt in our tree. Spider mite infestation, best control. Hose down your foliar mass, right? We've got to obviously protect the balance of water and oxygen in the containerized environment. We live next to a dirt road here at Mirai. Dust accumulates when cars drive up it. Wash the debris off of your plant so that it can effectively photosynthesize and breathe, right? We're building benches or monkey poles. I'm pouring concrete into the holes. I'm trying to keep the dust down, but the dust accumulates, and I've got trees all around the garden built. Come back and wash all of that debris. I'm trying to keep the debris off of the foliar mass of my plants. Don't allow it to set up and mar the photosynthetic capacity so that our trees can clearly capture the sun's energy and produce the sugars that they need to feed themselves. These would be the three reasons that we would utilize misting, okay? Easing the tension on the chain, making sure that we're cleaning the leaf surface or cooling the leaf surface. But when we mist, if our misting disrupts the balance of water and oxygen in the containerized environment, that is catastrophic. And when we mist, we stop the photosynthetic process because we limit gaseous exchange occurring through the stomata and transpiration occurring out of the leaf. That is how the plant truly cools itself. That is how the plant truly feeds itself. That is how the plant photosynthesizes. Misting too much is the same as withholding food from your plant, and this is why we have to use it as a minimal tool, not a consistent cultivation technique. To maximize the quality and effectiveness of our cultivation strategy in the bonsai container, all right? Three methodologies for water application that have very specific nuances to their application, pitfalls to their application, and purposes to their application that if we utilize them effectively can greatly enhance the health of our trees. Now that we have all of the functional components, let's dig into seasonal nuances because there are, there certainly are, seasonal watering behavior, and we've got to understand these. And let's start with spring because we just came out of spring, okay? Now, what is happening in spring? In spring, plants are producing foliar growth. Okay, foliar growth is an expenditure of energy. So if we look at energy in our plants, when we get to the spring season, we're at a maximum stored energy. We've actually been storing energy halfway over the course of winter. Okay, we hit this point in spring and we're at a maximum stored energy. When a plant starts to grow, it spins that energy, okay? This is foliar production. This is producing new leaves or new needles. Spins that energy, okay? And in order for that foliar mass, the stored sugars and starches and the ATP, the long-term energy, to equal cellular division and the expansion of our solar panels, our plant thinks it's going to get bigger. We're going to let it think that, okay, it's going to spin that energy and maintain that proportion and all that stuff. But we have to let our plants grow, okay? And it's going to spin that energy. In order for that leaf to be able to go through the developmental process, there can be no substance inhibiting expansion. Okay? There can be no substance inhibiting expansion. This is a primordial state of growth. This is a soft, susceptible, succulent state of growth, okay? And as a result, we're not only cooling ourselves, but we're also supplying that metabolic 15% to continue generating sugars and starches, and we're cooling not only the older foliar mass, but we're also cooling the new leaf mass. Now, we know the roots that are conducting that water that determine the growth in the spring, right? Because we're expanding. We have our old foliage plus our new foliage in coniferous or evergreen trees, okay? So we're supporting what we had and adding that means that the roots that support spring growth had to have occurred last fall. Trees don't have credit cards. They don't grow foliage and then figure out how to hydrate it. They have the roots to hydrate what they produce, okay? So when we start to think about this, I've got the conductivity in the containerized environment to support the growth. The tree is already taking care of that. I don't have the protection to stop that growth from losing water because it has to be able to expand. I don't have the cuticle that decreases the loss of water out of that new growth. Because of these factors, I'm spending energy. I need to supplement the production of energy. I need to cool an otherwise incapable and unprotected piece of growth plus the leaf mass that I already had. The mentality of watering in spring is when in doubt, when I walk up to that tree it's kind of dry. I'm not going to be here. Is it going to be okay? That moment. Not whether it's wet. It's wet, I don't water. It's dry, I do water. But it's damp. It's moist. I don't know if I'm going to make it back in time. I don't know if I'm going to be able to check. I don't know if this plant is going to take an hour, two hours, three hours under these conditions. When in doubt, water. When in doubt, water. This is a general mentality when new foliar mass is being produced and we are at that crux of trying to decide our balance of water and oxygen. Do we water? Do we not? It's moist. It's not wet. It's not dry. And I think about all factors. Sun, wind, heat, relative humidity, foliar mass, reservoir, etc. And I am still up in the air about the correct and appropriate action to take. Am I going to be here? Am I not? When in doubt, water. And that's important because sometimes we just have to simply lean on that. I don't know if it's right or not right now, but it's the spring season. New growth is emerging and Ryan said at this time of year when I'm in doubt, I should just water. Abide by that. That's what we abide by at Merai. That's a part of the spring season. Now, does that mean you can't overwater in the spring? Absolutely not. Because next time that you get to that circumstance, hopefully, you don't have that same sort of conundrum because you know you are going to be there and you're going to let it properly dry out and you're going to water it and you're going to observe how this plant's watering necessities are behaving under this moisture condition that last time you didn't understand. Now you're going to obtain the understanding, you're going to observe, you're going to educate, and that's going to give you the ability to balance that further in the future. But for that time that you don't have the ability to gain that information and observe and watch and be present for that, when in doubt, water. Spring. Once that foliar mass hardens off, okay? And hardening off means cuticle formation, okay? That waxy covering forms. There's no more expansion. Your leaf is open, your needle is formed. We see it darken, we see it harden, and we see it become firmly attached as a photosynthetic foliar piece of productive tissue, okay? When that cuticle forms, we start to see energy increase because now we're not spending energy creating that growth. Now that growth is a solar panel that's returning that energy through the photosynthetic process. This is a major marker that we have now transitioned into summer, okay? And summer, as marked, not by a date, not by a week, not by a month, okay? Summer as marked by cuticle formation means we have to understand that we are no longer 85% cooling, 15% growth. If your tree is done growing, technically that 15% growth is off of the table, okay? And that's not, this is a broad brushstroke. I know they're still growing. Oh, what about my junipers? Yes, they're continually growing. Listen, our trees are growing in the wintertime, right? When we say they're dormant, they're not dormant. Trees are always growing. But recognize that that big surge of that production, that's not happening anymore. The cuticle is formed. We don't have this constantly bleeding sort of sieve of water leaving our plant. But, day length, boom. Temperature, boom. 85% for cooling and the temperature is going up. Are we actually going to see a change in watering behavior in the summer season when the cuticle forms? Yes, we will. Yes, we will. If we are observant of our trees, if we are top dressing our trees, if we are acutely aware of that physiological shift where that waxy covering covers the leaf to decrease the water loss and your tree's expenditure of energy is slowing or stopping and now it's in the regain mode, there is a major change to the behavior of your tree and drying out. We will see it sit, not in the wet and not in the dry. We will see your tree sit in that moist state of conundrum in terms of the balance of water and oxygen for far more of the time. And now you're looking at it and you're saying in the spring season if it was this moist and I knew I was going to be gone, I would water because when in doubt, water. Now when we get into the summer season, strike the balance. Strike the balance. And this is the most infuriating thing for me to say to you. Strike the balance. What does that mean, strike the balance? It means that maybe you're going to be gone and you're concerned and so you water. But the next time that you come back to that tree in that moist circumstance, which is going to become far more of the predominant experience that you have assessing your tree's water needs, you've got to hold off. This is not the time of year to mess around. Why is it not the time of year to mess around? Because the heat is driving higher metabolic activity. And with higher metabolic activity, you have a greater necessity to perform the act of respiration. Your tree is using that energy. If you're not creating that energy when it's using it to this degree, your tree is going to suffer. And with that higher degree of metabolic activity, you also have a higher degree of biological activity. I've got heat stimulating bacteria. I've got bacteria ready to jump on anaerobic conditions, oxygen-less conditions. So I have to focus on if I overhydrate one time, I've got to let my tree get oxygen back into the system the next. And this becomes the continual conundrum that we fight from the moment the cuticle forms until the moment the temperatures break and we start to enter the vascular production of fall. Summer season is when bonsai die. Whether you see it die then or whether you see the issues arise in the fall or the winter or next spring, you can be very sure and very clear that probably the damage that occurred to your tree is from the moment the cuticle formed to the moment vascular tissue growth began. Okay? This is your wheelhouse strike the balance or forever hold your peace with your tree season of the year. And it comes not when it's wet and not when it's dry, but when it's moist. And you've got to make that decision. And you've got to compensate for missed watering applications by correcting your wrongs the next time, right? You have to. That is what it is all about. That is the striking of the balance of water and oxygen over time. And it's right now. We are in that season. Okay? So we come back to that list of criteria, right? What's the size of the canopy? What's the size of the reservoir? What are the conditions acting on my tree? Is it actively growing? What's the moisture in the soil? When do I get to come back and check? I've got to make the best possible decision. But if I make that decision, you water it thoroughly, right? And you come back and the next time you're in that situation, you've got to make a different choice. You've got to be able to supply the tree with what it needs or we start to get ourself into this respiration energy deficit, this biological bloom and this anaerobic sort of trickle-down effect that starts the process of overwatering as a very detrimental action in bonsai. Okay? That is summer. This is the tough one. This is the tough one for Ira and I watering the garden at Mirai. This is the tough one that Troy and I used to wrestle with a tremendous amount. This was the point as an apprentice of Mr. Kimura where I started to get very anxious about watering on a daily basis and really had to confront these situations on a continuum to try and dial in this system to give my tree that ability to have ultimate health and resist all of the pressures of cultivation in the confined environment. Okay. Fall. Temperatures break. It's literally the best day of our lives. First fall rains. Hallelujah. Amen. Praise the Lord because this is when the pressure is taken off, right? It's just like, oh my gosh, we made it. I'm going to put the hose down, coil it up, and I'm going to go have a beer right now. You know what I'm saying? Like, we fought the good fight over the summer season. There were trees we didn't understand. I saw things start to go wrong, and I was able to tilt the tree up on an angle, remove the excess moisture. I was able to fix the situation, get oxygen back into the system. I was able to nutrition correctly. I was able to curb the spider mite infestation or the scaleless issues, and I didn't see any root aphids, and I cleaned all the surfaces of compacted soil and allow that oxygen to breathe through the system. I top dressed everything. I did what Ryan said. Doggone it. I'm exhausted. I'm exhausted. You know, I love watering in the spring. I hate watering by the end of the summer. This is what we're all going to experience on an annual basis, right? The gladiator marathon days of bonsai cultivation striking the balance over summer, and we hit fall, and we say, thank you. Thank you. Okay? Now, day length. Decreasing. Temperature. Decreasing. Now, I know there's some anomalies to this, right? You're in Southern California. You're like, dude, October, Santa Ana winds. Like, people talk about fall, whatever. I don't know what that is. Okay, cool. You're an anomaly, right? We got to deal with that. You got to ante up. You got to continue on the horse of appropriate watering. Most of the world, come the fall season, shorter day length, cooler temperatures, we enter a period of vascular growth. Vascular growth. Okay? Now, we have to understand. Listen. Listen. When you talk about a seedling, a seed, when we cultivate a seed, what comes first? The cotyledon, the primordial leaves, or the radical, the primordial root? And inevitably, what you'll realize is the radical always comes first in the seedling in terms of developing an organ that sustains the life of the photosynthetic portion of the tree. Now, I understand seeds germinate in the spring, and you're like, well, this all happens in the spring. I'm not trying to get into that minutia. It's a statement of the plant will always build the vascular tissue, number one, and then create the photosynthetic tissue, number two. Vascular growth equals the highways of xylem and phloem through the branching, the highways of xylem and phloem through the trunk, and the conductivity of water through the root system. That is feeding the foliar mass I want to build next year. So what we produce in terms of vascular growth supports and determines how my tree will grow next spring. And from that perspective, if we recognize that growth must have oxygen to respire and create the energy of ATP that facilitates the cellular division and the creation of vascular tissue, when we get into the fall, not when it's wet or dry. Wet, we don't water. Dry, we do. I'm sitting in that moist situation. Do I water? Do I not? When in doubt, hold back on H2O. Complete transition of strategy. I'm not telling you to let your trees dry out. I'm not telling you to keep your trees on the dry end of things. I'm saying, listen, when it's dry, you have got to water and water thoroughly. There is no light watering. Thoroughly saturate. When it's wet, there's no reason to water. But when your tree is in that situation where thinking about all factors, the canopy, the reservoir, the environmental, sun, heat, wind, relative humidity, is it growing, soil moisture, when am I coming back? I don't know what to do. Withhold. That's your action. At that moment when you truly have no other option but to lean on a fundamental principle, when in doubt, hold back. Oxygen is what allows the vascular tissue to be built over the fall season. Yes, we need water. Trees still photosynthesize. In fact, that photosynthesis creates the sugars that build that energy that you're trying to capture. That fuels that cellular division. You still have to have water to photosynthesize, to cool the plant. It's not like we stop. But in that moment where we don't quite understand or we don't know quite what to do, hold back. That's the action that strikes the balance that produces the vascular tissue that fuels growth next year. We build those highways. We build those roots. We build those tubes of xylem. We build those tubes of phloem. We build all of that tissue that has all that potential. Guess what else the plant does over the fall? We get to this fall season right here. Now watch what happens. Fall. Energy. Boom. Right there. Right there. Okay? That's when our energy, we create the cells, we create the tubes, we create the roots, and then guess what we do? Like Santa Claus stuffing a stocking. We load that thing full of sugars and starches and we store all that energy. We said, listen, we built you to support the foliage next year. Hold on to this for us. We want to make sure we've got this available. You keep that right in your vacuole of each of those cells that we created stocked full of sugars and starches. That's the potential. You create the space. You fill the space with the energy. And we hold on to that as a component of winter tolerance until we get to next spring and then let's release the beast and produce some more foliar mass. Right? Every year a plant has got to exceed, has got to exceed the energy that it started with or your tree is starting a process of failure. Even in the bonsai form, you have got to understand your tree has got to grow and your tree has got to get bigger on an annual basis. It doesn't mean we can't alter that. It doesn't mean we can't aesthetically manipulate that. And it doesn't mean that we're not trying to slow that process down. But you have to accept on an annual basis that your tree has got to increase the energy in the system or your tree is on the path towards failure. Okay? Really interesting to grapple with that and learn the aesthetics and the techniques that allow you to manage that energy and capture that aesthetic, which is the reason we perform bonsai. Horticulturally, the energy system has got to continue to increase. If a plant is not growing, it is dying. Right? Wintertime. Now, winter is a very subjective discussion because we start to say, listen, the tree is dormant. I don't have to do anything. Right? No. Wrong. We get frozen root systems. We get high winds, et cetera. We can completely freeze dry a tree. Right? We've got to protect from those overly. What can you say? Overly aggressive elements acting on the moisture of our foyer mass. Okay? I've got a tree that's constantly getting hammered with rain. Periodically, we need to pull it out of the rain. Allow it to dry out and get oxygen back in the system. And then we can put it back into the rain. We're constantly cycling our trees through environments to allow them to dry over the winter season. We've created structures that create shelter from rain. Now, does that mean that I'm hesitant to leave my trees out in the rain in the Pacific? In the Pacific Northwest? Absolutely not. Because the temperatures are low enough that biology is not developing at a rapid pace. That respiration and photosynthesis are happening very, very slowly. And it takes a long time for a tree to starve. It takes a long time for a tree to drown without breathing. It takes a long time for a tree to suffer without photosynthesizing when the temperatures are low enough that metabolism is not taking place at a rapid pace. And that's where biology is not being driven to attack or degrade our tree's root system. So the winter season, we have a high buffer. We have a very high buffer. But it is of utmost importance that we continue to check our trees over winter because it is shocking. I've had years where we've had consistent rain for 30 straight days and I pull a tree into my greenhouse and we start to repot it. And the sheen of that tree is bone dry, hydrophobic. How dry it is. We have to continue to be aware that trees do photosynthesize. Trees do continue to metabolize. And water will be used, granted at a much slower pace, but will be used over the winter season. And the one place that it's used the most is when we put our trees into a greenhouse over the winter season. Because root growth continues when ambient air temperatures are above 42 degrees. We put a tree on a heat bed. The root growth is motivated to increase and ramp up metabolic processes. So the winter time, albeit a break, still demands that we maintain a clear perspective on our tree's water utilization. And again, I would echo the sentiment that we have in spring of when in doubt in the winter, you should water. Because the repercussions of watering in the winter with lower temperatures and less biology active are far less severe. And we can't really get a great understanding of the activity inside of our containerized environment in the winter. Because the foliar mass in the above ground portion of our tree is really not showing the same indications that we see through the foliar production portion of the year. Okay? That's all I want to say about winter. Oh my gosh. Okay, now. I was going to go through species nuances. I don't think we need to. I don't think we need to. I think keeping watering and the quest for the balance of water and oxygen as simple and as straightforward as possible gives us a tremendous amount of clarity in the discussion of watering. We've talked about the characteristics. We've talked about the things we need to address. We've talked about the behavior of our plants over the course of time. We've talked about how water moves through the tree, the delivery mechanisms and our strategies and techniques behind there. I feel like we did enough for today. All right? I'm going to open it up to questions here. We'll see if we can get you guys answered and on your way. Hopefully that was really effective. I'm very proud of that lecture. I think that was a good one. We've got a bunch of questions, so let's get started. Marty has the first one. He says, where does rainwater fit into this discussion? Isn't that amazing that I'm talking about sources of, you know, sources and I'm not talking about rainwater? I think rainwater is one of the very best, if not the best resource as long as you can capture it cleanly and contain it cleanly. Because when you talk about rainwater, a light starved environment where there's no light getting to the water is the only way to keep stagnant water from souring in terms of its biology and potentially creating a bacterial nightmare for your trees. We've got a jet black water storage container, 3,000 gallons. It's running over a composite roof who we set up the rain collection system after we gave the roof two years to bleed off as much of the petroleum product as possible. And we tested the water after we started capturing the rain to make sure we didn't have toxicities leaching into our catch basin. But if you go through the pain of properly collecting and storing rainwater, there is no better water resource. All right, Danny, what would you do differently from what you did when the heat dome hit Portland several years ago? What did you learn from that experience? And how should we stay prepared for weather like that, which has been inconsistent? Yeah, I mean, first and foremost, I mean, we did perform a major action, which was expand our shade offering at Mirai by a significant degree. I agree with the new shade structure. That was completely in response to the heat dome. We needed to be able to shelter more trees. We've already utilized it this year a couple times in really high heat events. So I think having an adequate environment in your garden that can hold, you know, a vast majority of your trees, honestly, in events that are of that extreme. And a lot of people have said or asked, do you think in the heat dome, if you had set up a misting system, etc., that you would have been able to protect the trees? I don't know that that would have changed things, because what did the damage in the heat dome in these high heat events was actually the physical tissue itself, not having the capacity to move enough water through it before the tissue itself burned. Would water have cooled that? Would I have added too much water to the containerized environment? And that high heat with that highly saturated condition caused more issues. So many questions still remain. Would it have been too dramatic of a transition of temperature on the leaf? You know, I don't know, really. But I do know that having more shade cloth means I don't have to ask all the questions of shock and trauma to the foliage. Could I cool the plant tissue enough to prevent its degradation? You know, would I have kept the containers too? Just put them under a shade structure and I don't have to worry about it. That would have been the biggest change. Now, as we add new spaces to the garden, and new structures, all of them are being added with the consideration of shade as a component of the facility. Ricky D. So I use a combination of rainwater and an RO system. Could developing toxic buildups in Akadama be remedied with purging with the use of RO water? Or do the toxicities lock up in the Akadama fully? So the toxicities are held in Akadama on the surface area, and they're held by the electrical charges, cation and anion, positive and negative charges in the cation exchange sites. And I think thorough water application in terms of the top-down drenching to wash out salts is of utmost importance when we water, especially as we water more and more over the summertime. But ultimately, the flushing of the system with pure water is going to help the appropriate application of nutrition and the appropriate application of water that's not adding negative inputs are the two biggest solutions. So would RO water help? Yeah, absolutely. If you have negative characteristics to your water that you're constantly adding and you use a water that doesn't have those negative characteristics, that's going to help. You're not adding that negative input on a continuum, but it will not be the thing that fixes whatever toxicity your Akadama has accumulated. That has to be fixed through the application of appropriate nutrition that replaces those pieces in the soil system over time. The use of carbon, the use of calcium, the use of phosphorus, the use of calcium silicate as a root available purification component, and then handling the foyer mass appropriately on the other end. Kim asks, Considering calcium is deficient in most bonsai, what is the calcium content range that is ideal for watering with? So, it's not the calcium content range, because the calcium that's available in most of your water is not plant available calcium. It's locked up as a carbonate, typically, typically. And it's really interesting. I looked at, Aaron Packard and I were looking at the Pacific Bonsai Museum. He's done some testing. He's realized some things. And his water test and his soil test and his nutrition, like fertilizer test, all said you've got enough calcium in the soil, you've got enough calcium in the water, you've got enough calcium in your fertilizer. And yet, all but one of the trees that they tested was calcium deficient as far as producing positive plant growth, right? And this is one of those weird things where it's like, but calcium is here. Yeah, but that calcium is not plant available because it's tied up. So, we are forced, even in an alkaline condition, even in a high calcium condition, we are forced to apply calcium as an essential plant nutrient to supply our trees with plant available calcium they can immediately use. And ultimately, it's not the amount of calcium that needs to be available in soil, water, or fertilizer. It's the amount of calcium the plant needs to balance its ratios inside of its foliar system, okay? And what that is is a two or a three to one calcium to magnesium ratio. That is, you know, a specific calcium ratio. And that's a specific calcium to potassium ratio. And that's a specific calcium to phosphorus ratio. My greatest ambition is that David is going to be willing to do the nutrient lecture next month. If he is not, I will at least have a significant consultation with him to do the nutrient lecture and provide the information that has been lacking to this point, which are those proportions. Danny, if we're using an RO system, what type of minerals should we be adding, if any, to our trees? Well, I think you've got to be adding all of the essential nutrients that a plant needs, both macro and micronutrients, right? Because now you don't have a resource for those outside of the soil system. Now, one of the byproducts of RO is that it typically acidifies the system. And when you acidify the system, it typically makes those aluminum, manganese, magnesium components highly available. And those are the pieces that we have found in books and in bonsai to increase in toxicity and really cause problems. So I would naturally lean on calcium. I would naturally lean on phosphorus. I would naturally lean on needing to supply nitrogen. I would naturally lean on, you know, supplying potassium in a very calculated and moderated level in order to give that plant what it needs based on the fact that our water doesn't have this natural additive that we're offsetting through other forms. Now we are responsible for the entire nutrient panel. Rich, so what do we ideally use for summer nutritioning? Summer nutritioning. We want to use nutrition that has a limited, if not completely void, quantity of sodium, chloride, magnesium, and potassium, right? And what we typically are applying to our plants over the summer season is high potassium fertilizer. High magnesium fertilizer. And that's not to say, I've had, you know, discussions with students where they're like, hey, listen, you're talking about this nutrition in a way that makes magnesium bad. No, magnesium is essential. Potassium is very essential in an abundant quantity. But we are applying too much of these things at the wrong time of the year, and it is counterproductive at times for our trees. And so learning that means we can moderate those applications In the summertime, we apply carbon, we apply calcium, we apply phosphorus, and we typically apply light doses of nitrogen when and if appropriate, but we really lean on phosphorus, calcium, and carbon as our summer feeds that continue to purify, that create the building blocks of growth, that supply the plant with energy, and will foyer on some of the trace irons, mollies, cobalts, zincs, molybdenums, and get sort of the system what it essentially needs. Kim, at what temperature is the tree cooling itself at for a necessity? So if you had to just, like, try to pigeonhole, and obviously there's a gradient, right? Higher alpine, we talk about stewardia, we talk about beech, we talk about Japanese maple. High water mobility, higher alpine elevation, cool climate trees. We talked about this with the potentia. We talked about this with the aspen tree. In terms of the broadleafs, those species are probably maxing out their metabolic capacity between 82 and 87 degrees Fahrenheit, right? That's their wheelhouse. And even in the hottest portions of the afternoon, that 87 might be too intense, okay? But you start to get into a pine, you start to get into a juniper. All of a sudden, these more arid environment, more sun-tolerant species are maxing out their metabolic capacity between 85 and 95 degrees Fahrenheit. Right? And you're saying, okay. And then you go to the alpine evergreens, like a spruce, like a subalpine fir, like a hemlock. And you're saying, okay, now I'm going to go back to that 82 to 87 range. Right? And we get into a trident maple. We get into a wisteria. We get into these more heat-tolerant broadleafs. And you say, okay, now I'm moving back to the 87 and 95 degree range, or an elm. You know, so the wheelhouse is right in that mid-80 to mid-90 degree range with some nuances based on tolerances of those individual species. But that's where a plant is really, if you say energy in to energy out, is maximizing its energy positive accumulation at those temperatures. Negative fill. Are the Pacific Northwest conifers always transpiring water to varying degrees, or are there times of the year when transpiration stops? Transpiration, I mean, that's an interesting discussion, because it's like, okay, well, you know, transpiration in the wintertime where rain is keeping the foliar mass soaked and the stomata are relatively closed and the soil system is hydrated, are they transpiring? I'm sure there's probably an argument out there that even then they're still transpiring. But it's probably so minimal or potentially not even measurable, and so you could say maybe that's when they stop. But transpiration, spring, summer, fall, you know, and I'm talking, like, there's probably two months out of the year where you could say transpiration is at an immeasurable level in the Pacific Northwest, and otherwise, ten months out of the year, there's probably a device that could actively answer that question and say, yes, they are in fact transpiring. That would be my guess, but that is hypothetical at best, right? Treebird Steve, can you give any pointers on how to determine the water and oxygen balance that's best for a given species in a given location? So I want to be really careful with this because where a plant occurs in the native environment does not mean that's what its wheelhouse conditions would be. It means that's where that plant was able to outcompete other plants, right? And so to say a plant occurs in a desert so it doesn't like water is inaccurate. A Rocky Mountain juniper is a high desert juniper, it loves water, right? A California juniper is a high desert juniper, it loves water. But when you start to look at where a plant occurs in the native environment, there is a significant amount of concept you can take for the tolerance of conditions from that, and that's where we see a ponderosa pine needs more oxygen in its system because it moves water more slowly, occupying south-facing, middle elevation, rocky, arid hillsides, right? Like a Japanese white pine. So we want to let them dry out a little bit more, right? Whereas Japanese black pine is a coastal pine and has more consistent moisture and that determines the soil composition, particle size, and the manner in which we water. It is still a pine, these are slower water mobility trees compared to a broadleaf, so we need to let a pine dry out to be able to produce the vascular tissue in terms of the roots and respire and do all the things we just said. But that environment suggests that a black pine needs a little bit more water than a ponderosa pine, right? A Japanese maple needs a little bit more water than an elm. A spruce needs a little bit more water than, say, gosh, I don't know, I'm running out of examples. But hopefully that helps you understand that the environmental conditions and their tolerances do not tell us how to treat them. But it tells us where they exist as far as nuanced behavior on the balanced water and oxygen scale. Gary, can you please discuss how the stage of development affects watering? For me and my bonsai practice, I did not include stage of development because I don't ever try to use watering as a growth control mechanism. I know that a lot of people try to use it. I know that a lot of people try to reduce needle length in pines by withholding water. I have found over the course of time that that is counterproductive in cultivation because, you know, if you withhold water, technically you can weaken the tree. Weakening the tree as a method of reducing proportions is unsustainable. So whether you're in development, primary, secondary, or tertiary, I'm using the same criteria to establish the balance of water and oxygen across all three of those developmental phases, which is on a more oxygen-heavy necessitating tree like a ponderosa pine, I'm going to let it thoroughly dry out before I thoroughly hydrate it again, whether it's in development, secondary, or tertiary. So I don't have a change of water practices as far as those stages are concerned. I have a change of nutritional practices. I have a change of foyer management practices. I have a change of cleaning and technical practices. I have a change of aesthetic expectations and practices. I have a change of, you know, potential repotting concepts and practices of container selection. But I don't have a watering shift as a result of that developmental stage. Sylvia is up next. My quichu juniper has a mild infestation of spider mites, which I wash off on a daily basis. Is this okay to do based on today's lecture? I mean, I think that's the... the most sustainable and smallest, you know, toxic impediment. If it doesn't take care of the spider mite situation, and they do continue to feed on your foyer mass over time, it could weaken your tree. So I think the answer to your question is, if you continue to perform the water washing methodology, your tree does not show continued decline, and the spider mites eventually wave the white flag and say, we're leaving, we get it, then that is effective. If you continue to be there, your tree continues to show stress or decline, then you may have to take another action. Ultimately, though, if your trees show spider mite, it is a really beautiful indication that your plant is telling you, hey, I have a toxicity, nutritionally, because spider mites are, believe it or not, spider mites are called to the plant, by the plant, to puncture the plant's tissue and relieve it of gaseous pressure. Now, is that gaseous pressure of excessive ammonium? Is that gaseous pressure due to excessive chloride content? I don't know. But a simple foyer test from Apical could tell you what that toxicity is, and changing nutrition will help you create a less susceptible plant in the future to that potential problem. Alex is up next. If a California juniper is suffering, losing foliage, color fading, and I'm trying to get the water-oxygen balance right, is it okay to add Epsom salt? Our tap water is alkaline hard water, and for reference, it's the California juniper he posted in a recent forum. No, you got to, you got to, so if you have an imbalance of water and oxygen, the last thing you want to do is keep doing more, adding more, trying to, now, Epsom salts, you're just going to watch that tree die if you start putting stuff on it. It's not, and if you're saying, well, but you said salt would actually pull water out of the plant tissue, the oxygen in the root system to compartmentalize the decay that's happening and facilitate respiration that builds the energy to start regrowing roots is not there. Adding salt doesn't add the oxygen, right? The best thing you can do, tilt it up on an angle, clean off the compacted surface as we talked about, allow the tree to thoroughly dry out between waterings, and mist the tree's foliage once or twice a day to reduce the tension on the chain so that it's able to hopefully rehydrate in between these periods of letting the root system dry out. Treebeard Steve, to your knowledge, does a tree use enough water for cellular maintenance as distinguished from new growth to affect our understanding of water use? Well, a plant has to be using water for cellular maintenance. If a tree doesn't have enough to sustain its current foyer load, it can't add foyer load, so if it's sustaining its foyer load, the water is cooling it and also performing all of the actions of metabolic sustenance and maintenance, which again, most of that cellular maintenance occurs in breathing and respiration during the nighttime, where cells repair themselves, where cells turn sugars into usable forms of energy and stored forms of energy, etc. But the byproduct of respiration is carbon dioxide and water, right? And then that water gets funneled back into the system. Now, interestingly enough, you know, the time that we've spent in the giant sequoias with the Ancient Forest Society looking at and talking about their vascular research, giant sequoias are moving water through their system through different compartments of their system in different directions at all times of day. You know, where does respiration and how much water does it contribute to all of this activity to sort of offset and describe? Where does capturing, you know, condensation in the foyer mass of a redwood or a giant sequoia offset or contribute to the water system? I mean, these are all the wonderful discoveries, but the good fundamental science suggests that plants are taking care of themselves as long as we do not impose our comfort level on the plant and we meet the plant where it's at and with what it needs. Alex is up next. Any specific types of fertilizer for what you were talking about for the summertime needs? I've only used BioGold so far, but I think other fertilizers are used during different times of the year. Yeah, I mean, here's the thing. Is bone meal, which is a phosphorus, calcium, and very small amount of nitrogen, is bone meal a great supplement for this summer season? I would say if you had to take an available, over-the-counter remedy, that's probably a potential solution, right? That has historically been present in farming and agronomy across the world for time eternal, okay? Does that potentially, and do animal byproduct fertilization components have the capacity to up the salt content and change some of the behavior? Beyond a shadow of a doubt. And this is really where agronomy to get a plant to grow versus a native plant in its environment sustaining itself over time eternal without human intervention. Where did the nutrition of that plant, where do the bristle cones get their nutrition? Where do the sequoias get their nutrition? Where do the redwoods get their nutrition? They're not getting it from animals crapping on them, right? They're getting it from the aggregate and the biology breaking down the aggregate into the cleanest forms of nutrition, and there is no toxicity that comes with that, right? So when you start to, when we start to talk about this shift that we're making at Mirai, the nutrition that we utilize is nutrition derived from the agronomy and the same aggregate that has shown sustainability in the native environment, how mother nature was meant to work. When we move to agronomy, to trying to supply a soil system with nutrition, because aggregate nutrition historically in underdeveloped farming scenarios is difficult to capture, you can't go mine it, grind it, and apply it, but you got this animal that craps it out, right? That's where animal nutrition has provided that intermediate but it is a high salt content nutrient resource, and that ultimately becomes a potential issue for insects and disease in bonsai cultivation because of this confined environment with the reduced gravity column, the behavior of Akadama over the course of time. I'm not saying you should change. If you don't have issues, don't change. I'm just saying, listen, if you have issues, there's ways to test, there's forms of nutrition that are different than what we historically have been fed, as the best or only resource available, but if you're just looking for an immediately available potential solution, I would say bone meal is probably one of those time-tested pieces that has given calcium phosphorus and a minimal amount of salts to the system over the summer season. Colin's up next. Would water requirements be a consideration or a strategy in organizing or grouping trees on the benches and throughout the garden? Certainly sun tolerance and shade requirements are a grouping strategy. Plant by plant, container by container, tree by tree behavior makes it difficult to group species of water requirements together. But if you're going on vacation, if you lean on a drip irrigation system, it's almost mandatory that you group not necessarily species but water utilization. Maybe you've got a pine in a shallow container and there's more water than your other pines, and you're going to set it next to your maples or something like that. I could see that for automated systems. If you're hand watering, though, you're looking at every tree each time you water, going through this checklist that you're training yourself to process in the quest for a balance of water and oxygen at this time of year. Rich is asking, haven't heard you mention sulfur. Can you comment on the need for it or the danger with sulfur in fertilizers? Yeah. It's an acidifying agent. Ammonium-based fertilizers and high organic content fertilizers are also acidifying agents. I have gotten myself into situations at Mirai where I've done soil tests, and even though our water pH is 6.5, the soil test shows a pH of 4.2. And that was the worst I've ever seen. And it was on a juniper that died. And I didn't realize that applying an ammonium form of nitrogen can over-acidify the soil. I didn't realize that a heavy abundance of organic material can over-acidify the soil. And you talk about field soil of trees coming out of collection and the transition of yamadori as bone-sized subjects, that organic material can highly acidify the containerized environment. The ammonium-heavy biogold nitrogen source can heavily acidify the environment. For most of us, using an alkaline municipal water source across the majority of North America or Europe, where limestone is the predominant aggregate that the water percolates through and we do have a basic circumstance, that's a positive thing. That's of great benefit. But it also can come back to bite you, especially when it starts to accumulate. Sulfur is another one of these that can acidify the environment. Sulfur is an essential element in a macro form, which means it has a fairly significant role in plant cultivation. And sulfur really empowers the utilization and uptake of nitrogen as just sort of its fundamental vehicle and purpose in the macro system of essential nutrition. So we can't go without sulfur, but absolutely too much sulfur both acidifies the environment and too much sulfur can be very, very toxic to the plant. It's another one of the many nutrients that we have to balance. If you're talking about sulfur in regards to the application of gypsum, applying gypsum as a calcium resource and as a purification methodology to scrub the soil does leave behind a high quantity of sulfur and can have radical implications to the pH in your soil system. There are areas that have alkalinity where gypsum can be a great additive and it doesn't have any kind of devastating impact, but I can tell you at Mirai there was a time where we were contemplating gypsum and because we have a slightly acidic water system, had we applied that gypsum, we probably would have killed a majority of the trees here. So, you know, sulfur, gypsum, all of these things, there's a chemistry to bonsai cultivation that is very much a necessity to consider. And this is where unless you test, unless you test, and because we have the ability to test, unless you test, it's all hypothetical and you're rolling the dice every time you apply something. Tree bird Steve, it says, bonsai ranging in size from Mame to 40 plus inches high, what might be done to simplify watering chores? Any tips offhand? I know it's a broad question, hope it's not too vague. I mean, I think, you know, ultimately with Mame and Shohin, if you have a life at all, particularly with Mame, it's pretty tough, you know, and this is where people use humidity trays, you know, where there's moisture immediately slowing down transpiration around the trees, not necessarily submerging the trees in that tray, but potentially working out a system where you have some supplemental moisture or humidity around the tree. Beyond that, I really do tend to find the decrease of environmental factors as the way that you can adjust watering requirements, okay? And that is decreasing sun intensity, reducing wind evaporation, and really heavy windy areas through windbreaks. And I'm not saying you don't want wind. You need airflow to both cool the environment, you need airflow to move that heavy water-laden, oxygen-rich transpirational air mass out of your canopy and bring carbon dioxide in to the interior branches of your tree. But like heavy wind, heavy evaporation is a tough thing to fight. Heavy intense sun is a tough thing to fight. Intense heat through the use of shade cloth and wind barriers really alters your watering practices and brings everything down a few notches in terms of the volume of intensity. Environments in your garden are the biggest way you improve your bonsai cultivation outside of altering your water quality for the better. Alright, Phil is up next, trying to figure out if I over-watered or under-watered my western red cedars Thuja Placata this past winter. Please tell me how often you watered your comparable cedars. How often do you water your species over the winter? Well, in the Pacific Northwest, Thuja Placata stays outside and just gets environmental rain. And I really didn't think about it between the months of November and April. So I'm not much of a help. But Thuja Placata being a temperate rainforest species over the winter season is tough to over-water unless you're in a winter area where you have temperatures 50 degrees Fahrenheit or above consistently where biology would also be active and where over-watering could become an issue. But in cooler temperatures over the prolonged season of winter, it's typically tough to over-water Placata. And I'm almost wondering if it may not have been under-watered as an issue. Colin, this is slightly off topic. Have you noticed less water requirements being listed on some nursery trees that get planted in the ground with some root escape? How could this be addressed at this time of year as to water requirements? So, when you think about the root escape methodology and the roots go into the native soil mass, they're obviously going to be supplying the tree with watering necessities in a greater abundance. But our focus in the root escape methodology is to only use that to increase growth rate on a seasonal basis. And we don't want the tree to abandon or abort the balance of water and oxygen and the root system in the containerized environment. So if I'm seeing a plant need less water in the containerized environment and I've let it root escape, I might check the root escape method. I might put a stop to that and refocus the tree on utilizing the water in the container for its hydration necessities so that I don't lose the root system in the container that I'm going to be leaning on as the sole sustainability of that plant over the course of time. And that's where the root escape method has to be checked. You can't just let it run rampant. Any time that you relinquish control, you're subject to the whims of the tree and the environment. And if that in-ground environment is missing, and the environment is more hospitable, which it inevitably is beyond a container, your plant is going to put its potential there. And that is really dangerous to lose the containerized environment of roots. And he kind of added on, I'm not sure if this will impact your answer, Colin said, should I be trying to cut back the roots in stages? He's trying not to lose all the fine roots in the pots like you alluded to. Yeah, I think you do cut it back in stages. And I think that's... 50% reduction and giving the tree four weeks and then doing another reduction and watching how the water conductivity in the containerized environment changes as a result of that reduction. That's all the questions we have for today. We did it. We did it. Watering. I don't know that it could be done better. Maybe. Maybe it could have. I could have said rainfall as a resource. That certainly would have been one thing to improve the quality of. I can't... You know. I've been spending a lot of time thinking about this. I've got a copious amount of notes. I didn't go through capillary action except for to just briefly mention it. But that's, you know, another mobility component of water. But big time. Big time consideration right now. This is when you got to lock in and refine your watering skills. Hopefully this helps. Hopefully this builds your knowledge. Hopefully this starts to answer some of your questions and empower you to make the decisions that fuel your trees. All right. Happy Saturday. Love you guys. Mwah! 
