We've talked about some of those specific wiring techniques in terms of the preformed hook as it applies to structural wire and how we solve one of those problems of not having another branch to be able to pair to a structural branch and how we utilize the preformed hook to tackle that issue in structural wiring. Today we're going to be digging into how we tackle that same scenario of having a secondary or tertiary branch that doesn't have another branch to pair it to and how we use the wire splicing technique to be able to use a single piece of wire properly anchored to be able to wire that secondary or tertiary branch that doesn't have a mate. We've got a ponderosa pine here that we're working with and we've wired out almost the totality of the pine, but there's a few pieces in here that simply didn't have a mate of the same size or in close proximity to that branch. To pair it to, in order to minimize that quantity of wire that we put on the branch, the structural piece, and make it more aesthetically pleasing, we're going to be diving into that splicing of wire in multiple scenarios to show you guys how to compensate for that lack of a mate. Here we have a ponderosa pine that has a few different branches we were unable to find an appropriate pairing for. As you'll see, the clean bottom of these branches, really nice needles cleaned and branches propped to give us that quintessential pine sort of essence and nuance to the aesthetic, but you'll see that we have a few smaller branches whose needles are hanging down into the canopy, or branches whose lines we would like to change to really enhance that density and the stylistic form of that branch, but we didn't have an accurate mate to be pairing that branch to. We're going to show you guys how to properly splice wire to use a single wire to wire a single branch to deal with this secondary-tertiary scenario that we commonly encounter and have to deal with. So here we have a scenario where we have a structural branch that has wire all the way out to the tip. It was very thick at the tip and we needed that gauge of wire to be able to control that branch all the way out to the tip. We had a perfect pairing of two smaller branches that had the same diameter, same size, and same necessity for wire gauge, yet we have this one smaller branch that exists that needles are hanging below that sort of line and that area of definition in our pad. In order to be able to create organization but still preserve that interior foliage and that finer ramification that's going to enhance the tree, I need to be wiring these needles up to clean up the bottom of that pad, give that branch direction, and continue to enhance the structure of the branch. This is where that wire splicing really comes into effect and becomes a super important tool. Now I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to move two of these branches out of the way so that you guys can see what's going on. I'm going to take this smaller guy and just take it off. of my wire underneath it so that I move those needles out of the way and I'm going to shift this branch out of the way as well so that you guys see sort of this clear region that allows me to get access to this smaller wire. Now when we're splicing wire, the area of function that gives the wire splice its ability to hold the movement we put into the branch is by splicing that wire between the structural wire and the branch so the compression of the structural wire with the branch holds that loose end. This is only one piece of wire going to one branch. We don't have two branches being wired together with an opposite rotation that applies tension to that system and gives that wire function. Therefore we do have to use that contact of the structural wire and the branch to hold that loose end of the wire. Now I'm going to show you sort of the strategy first and then I want to come back and show you how not to do it or how this is commonly attempted and applied where it loses function in an inaccurate way. So let's take a look at how we do it correctly first. Now when we're splicing wire into a branch, again we're looking for a location that's in a relatively close proximity to the branch we're trying to wire. My branch that I'm trying to wire is right here. I want at least a turn and a half of that single piece of wire on the structural branch until or prior to it intersecting and starting to wire that finer piece of foliar mass. Now I notice that I have just a little bit of space, just a small amount of space. Right here where I applied that movement to the secondary branch, I'm going to use that space and the contact of that wire in that branch at that point to anchor my loose end of the wire. Now when I'm applying this wire into that space, I always want to be applying the wire on the back side or the base side or the trunk side of that wire. Top and bottom. Bottom and bottom. Top and bottom. wiring, we're always sitting at the front of the branch. We know on structural wiring, we're sitting to the side of the branch. So if we're orienting in that secondary tertiary wire and we're sitting in front of the branch, we're always going to be splicing on the back side or the farthest side of the wire. And I will explain why, but let me show you what that looks like, okay? I'm going to take advantage of that space. I'm on the back side of the wire here and I'm going to find that little piece of space. Now if we're doing this properly, we may have to take a few different stabs at this to get this between the branch and the wire, knowing that that contact exists. Now you're going to see my wire poke out right here, where I find just that little piece of space. It's going to poke out nice and straight, okay? To have that contact and that compression of the branch and the structural wire is what is needed to hold that loose end of the wire. So we do want to have to kind of force that line. We want to force that wire into that junction so we know we've got a good hold. Now that it's placed on the correct side of the wire and it's effectively being bound by that structural wire in the branch, I can start my application, okay? I said we want at least a turn and a half to be able to get function. Here's one turn where my wire was spliced here. I've now come one full rotation. When I come around again, I'm going to have that extra half a turn prior to entering the shoulder of that smaller tertiary wire. So I'm going to have that half a turn prior to entering the shoulder of that smaller tertiary branch. I know that I've now achieved function in terms of that wire splice to have that bound between the structural wire and the branch as well as to have that turn and a half that gives it solidarity and stability to be able to anchor that tertiary branch. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to follow through on the wiring of this to show you guys what this looks like. Same principles apply. If I'm turning in my clockwise direction in terms of the direction of turn following my structural wire. I want to maintain that same clockwise direction. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to wire this as if it were being paired to any other smaller branch so that I achieve that same application. Excuse me. Slight rotation. Same application I'm going to support. This is just the same as any other application of wire would be on a smaller branch on the tree to be able to give function to that tertiary branch in the wire that we're applying. Carrying it all the way around underneath the needles. Stopping across the bottom. I'm going to go ahead and I'm going to prune off that bottom piece of wire and then I'm going to use my hands to give it that nice upward orientation of those needles. Now we see that those needles have been removed from the bottom profile of the branch. Again I want to come back and I just want to go through what's just been done so that you guys accurately understand how to use and apply this technique. Then we'll go to another section where I'll show you all of the ways that you can do this incorrectly or all of the ways that people tend to abuse this technique. Again I chose this location a turn and a half behind where the branch that I wanted to wire occurred. I found a good location where my structural wire and the branch have really solid contact. I started on the back side of that wire, the side of the wire farthest from me. I stuck one end of the wire through that point of contact so that that wire is now anchored between the structural wire and the branch. I applied a turn and a half to get the function of that wire being applied to that structural branch and I maintained the same direction of turn as I carried it out onto the smaller branch that I'm using that singular wire to give shape and direction to. Now that you guys have seen that I want to come back and just adjust these pieces that I displaced. I'll cleanly sever this wire right here. No hooks. No tying to the structural wire. Just a straight tip. Cleanly cut. I'll replace this smaller branch that was wired in tandem here. I'll readjust this here and now all of a sudden we see that real clean bottom. Those needles that were hanging below and distracting from that aesthetic have been picked up and that wire and branch that did not have a mate have now effectively been wired in a way that's both beautiful and functional. So we saw how we take that one smaller branch that didn't have a mate, didn't have another branch of the similar gauge and we splice a piece of wire in to be able to effectively control the shape and position of that branch. We're going to move to another situation that we commonly encounter on trees where we have branches that although we could pair them, they're a significant distance apart and as opposed to applying more wire to the branch and really accumulating a lot of visual mass from the wire on the branch, we're going to use the splicing technique to be able to illustrate how we can wire two branches at the same time. We're going to use the splicing technique to be able to illustrate how we can wire two branches at the same time. We're going to use the splicing technique to be able to illustrate how we can wire two branches at the same time. We're going to use the splicing technique to be able to illustrate how we can wire two branches at the same time. We're going to use the splicing technique to be able to illustrate how we can wire two branches at the same time. We're going to use the splicing technique to be able to illustrate how we can wire two branches at the same time. We're going to use the splicing technique to be able to illustrate how we can wire two branches at the same time. We're going to use the splicing technique to be able to illustrate how we can wire two branches at the same time. We're going to use the splicing technique to be able to illustrate how we can wire two branches at the same time. We're going to use the splicing technique to be able to illustrate how we can wire two branches at the same time. pieces of wire to minimize the amount of visible wire on the branch. When we look at this tree, we've got this defining branch that's giving us a really beautiful movement to the right. This branch creates the tension design that anchors this tree and really holds the visual weight of that movement to the left, pulls that visual weight back, and gives that design stability. In that design, however, we've got this really visible line of the defining branch that exists in the front of the tree. The more wire that we apply to this really long visible line, the more it's going to look unattractive, the more of the hand of man we're going to see, and it's going to be very, very difficult to combine the two branches that we're trying to combine aesthetically in a pleasing way, as well as functionally to get that wire to act the way we want it to. We're going to be splicing wire on two branches here to minimize the quantity of wire on that visible line, as well as to give function to the wire that we're applying to those two branches. I'm gonna pull you guys in so that you guys can see closer. Okay, in order for you guys to be able to see this, I'm just going to shift this branch up and out of the way so that we have clear exposure. I'll move this branch back when we're finished, but I'm going to go ahead and open up this space so that you can see exactly what we're talking about. Now the two branches that we're dealing with are this longer branch that's up near the base of this structural piece. This is a very important branch because we've got so much open space in here and it's going to give us some needle quantity that allows this defining branch to really anchor the design. Extremely important. Now the second branch that we're going to be wiring is down here near the tip. It's kind of sitting in this space overlapping some of the smaller buds that we'd really like to get sun exposure to and build the health in on this smaller branch. We're going to pick this branch up and we're going to move it off to the side over here. Now you'll notice that these branches, the one up near the base and the one down near the tip, are similar size and would require a similar gauge of wire. However, that distance, one, two, three full turns on our structural wire would be a significant distance to try and carry a smaller wire, maintain a really nice contact of that smaller wire with the bigger turns of this structural. We've got smaller buds that are sort of independently distributed through that branch that that smaller wire could damage. So we're going to splice a wire onto this upper one. And wire it as an independent. And we're going to splice a wire onto this bottom one and wire it as an independent. Let's take a look at how we go about approaching that correctly. Let's look at a lot of the flaws or the the ways that have been applied to date with splicing wire that are ineffective. And then let's go back and again do it in the correct way so we understand the pitfalls as well as the appropriate measures to take. Okay, so typically over the course of my career in bonsai, one of the big mysteries, how do I apply wire to a singular branch? I don't have another branch to combine it with. And a lot of times what we see people do is we'll see people apply a piece of wire to this branch and then wire it and wrap it down the trunk. Maybe one, maybe two, maybe three, maybe four turns, but they never actually anchor the tip of that wire. They're hoping and they're leaning that contact running down the branch as being that point and that focal point of anchoring the movement. Now there's several flaws that exist in this strategy. When I just go and gently move this wire, one thing that you guys will be able to see is that the tip of this wire that has no anchor is moving with the branch as I shift the position of the branch. No matter how accurately we wire this, if this loose tip of wire is not anchored somewhere, then this wire that's applied to the branch will not have function and we won't be able to accomplish what we want to accomplish. The other thing that you'll experience if we try to apply a singular piece of wire in this fashion, over the course of styling and wiring, this will get looser and looser. It'll start to create gaps. It'll start to separate from the structural wire and it'll become very aesthetically unsightly. This is one of the techniques that has been utilized that we absolutely without a doubt are going to use. Another common technique that we often see when we start this kind of application of wire is the desire to wire this branch that's on this structural piece to a smaller branch on another structural piece. Now in this instance, the other structural piece that exists in the background here already has all of its branches paired out perfectly and all of those problems have been addressed. There is no option that exists there and if we think about trying to minimize the amount of wire that exists on the tree, the more wire we carry from one branch to another after we've applied that structural wire, the more accumulation of wire we get on the most visible structural components of the tree. Once we've applied a structural piece of wire to a branch, we need to start considering that branch as one singular component, one singular unit, and all of your secondary tertiary wiring that's done should be linking branches on that specific structure. To try and combine this branch with one of the smaller secondary tertiary branches on another structural branch is not an option when we start effectively applying wire to get that maximization of function as well as aesthetics and this is really where aesthetics is compromised. Let's avoid that. So now that we've established, okay Ryan, we understand that we've got to absolutely anchor that loose end of this singular piece of wire when we're splicing or when we're wiring one branch by itself. We get that. We get it gives us function and we also understand that we don't want to be combining secondary tertiary branches from one structural branch with the secondary tertiary branches of another structural branch because we're going to accumulate wire in visible areas and decrease the quality of this aesthetic, right? I'm going to go ahead and splice wire. I believe what you're saying and I'm going to execute it. I'm going to tell you guys this is probably going to be the point where although you believe in the technique you may misapply it and I want to drive this point home and show you the incorrect way that we could follow this technique and then go back and reinforce the correct way. Okay, now we said as we're sitting at this branch that we're wiring when we're wiring secondary and tertiary branches we're always sitting in front of the branch. Okay, the branch is facing us all of the ramification is laid out. We understand we need to be splicing on the back side of that structural wire or the farthest side of that structural wire. So as I put this wire in here we see it's on the back side or the trunk side, whatever you use to orient yourself in terms of the terminology or verbiage to describe that side of the structural wire. Okay that's what I'm looking for, now let me show you where the front side is just so we can clarify. So with this wire currently I'm on the back side of that piece of wire. If I orient on this side this is the front side of that wire. This is the incorrect side to be splicing from. Now what a lot of us are going to be motivated to do in the future is to find out the where that wire is. is we're going to be motivated even though we aspire to splice on the back side we can get a little confused in this system and end up splicing on the front side of the wire I want to show you why that's not ideal and why that's not correct okay and I'm gonna I'm gonna pick a location here that allows us to sort of see that loss of function so when I'm looking at this branch I recognize that I need to splice I'm looking for that turn and a half that exists right and I have this very wonderful sort of space here where I get a really nice sort of solid clamping between the structural wire and the branch right and if I were to splice correctly I would be splicing on the back side of the wire where my wire is now what a lot of you guys are going to be tempted to do is actually going to be tempted to splice on the front side let me show you why this is not ideal when we splice on the front side and we carry that wire over to start that rotation around our splice we're going to have a lot of space here where I get a really nice sort of solid structural branch, all of a sudden we don't have that guide of the thick structural wire to be able to control the shape of our secondary tertiary wire. And notice how much more visually unattractive this is. Now there's more to it than just the visual though, because functionally now we don't really have any stopping point and as that wire is applied to that branch, as you just saw, as we continue to wire, it's not, there's no stopping point, there's nothing in the way of that wire dislodging and that wire unthreads itself, becomes loose and loses all function, as well as has that aesthetic sacrifice. We want to avoid, as much as we can, splicing on the front side of that wire because it doesn't give us that function and it does lose its aesthetic. Always focus on splicing on the back side of that wire. Let me show you how it's done correctly. Again, I'm going to splice on the back side of this wire. I've got that beautiful space to be able to insert that wire into and give compression. Now notice as I apply this wire, notice how the secondary tertiary wire is following the structure, shape, and guide of that structural wire. There's no big loop and as I continue to wire, that secondary tertiary wire is being pulled into that structural piece, so it can't dislodge. It can't separate. We don't see any loops in the wire. We maximize our visual aesthetic and now we can continue to carry this out onto the branch as if it were being paired with another mate to give us that really nice function. All the way out to the tip, across the bottom of the needles, we can separate that wire and now we have total mobility within that, total function within that, in a very beautiful aesthetic. Where we don't even see that combination of that individual wire pulling away from that structural piece. We've accomplished what we wanted to accomplish and it looks attractive in the process. This is the technique to being able to splice wire and independently wire with a single piece one branch in our secondary tertiary structure of the tree. We've taken a look at how we do it improperly in a multitude of ways and then we've come back and we've seen that appropriate approach. So now let's continue to apply that to this branch that we need to give shape and position to. I want to come back and I want to remind you guys the reason that we're splicing on on the upper branch of this tree as well as the lower branches we did not want to carry wire all the way down that structural branch and see that quantity of wire start to accumulate. Now that we're here we've got this wonderful branch it's sitting over the top of these smaller buds and we're gonna shift it off to the side to better distribute our foliage mass. Ultimately this bud has a great shape it's already dented well but when all of those branches are close together sometimes we wire just to spread and distribute not necessarily to make big moves. We still want to use a gauge of wire that gives us total mobility and total function to be able to position that branch. Now I'm going to apply the exact same technique to this branch to be able to wire it and I have a beautiful space right on the back side of this structural wire where it contacts the structural branch right in this location. I've got this wonderful little spacer just a little pocket of space and notice as I push that through notice that it did sort of scratch the bark slightly absolutely not an issue and this actually shows us that we have the compression between that branch and that structural wire that's going to give us a good solid hold to this spliced to loose end that we're going to be using to anchor the movement of this tertiary branch. I'm going to follow it on that backside same turn of the structural wire. I'm going to follow it on that backside same turn of the structural wire and I'm going to follow it on that backside same turn of the structural wire. rotating in my clockwise direction. Now notice that I'm gonna come away from my structural wire right here to maintain the same directional turn, that clockwise rotation. I'm gonna hold that entry into that shoulder with my offhand and again I'm gonna follow the same practice as we apply to every single secondary tertiary piece of wiring to be able to appropriately maintain same angle, same spacing, no gaps, finishing right across the bottom of that bud and all of those needle mass to be able to now control the movement of this out into space, control the orientation of that bud, and now we see that those smaller branches have all of that beautiful light and exposure, our foliage is more better presented spacing wise. I'm gonna come back and I'm just gonna snip off that tip. A lot of times you'll see people hook that wire on top of the structure or if this is done correctly and that contact between the structural wire and that branch is good so that we have that nice solid hold, I just cleanly cut that so that it's flush with the structural wire and visually we'll never see that it was spliced. Now we notice when we look at the length of this structural branch that we only see one location where there's two wires at that point where we wired this last piece of that spliced scenario. it improves the quality. Each of these branches has a very functional application of wire and aesthetically we've maximized the quality of the tree. This technique is priceless, absolutely priceless for all of those situations where either aesthetically we don't want to apply more wire or functionally we've got that one branch that doesn't have a pair and we need to use one piece of wire with a loose end to be able to wire it and give it shape. Wire splicing is your secondary tertiary technique to be able to functionally and aesthetically accomplish that at the highest level. Now you can see how much cleaner the bottom of this branch is to give definition to the shape. You can see how much more density we've added with the distribution of these smaller branches on our defining branch to give a little bit of body to the depth of this branch as well as to organize some of that interior structure. All All of those areas where we had that necessity for a single wire to be applied to a single branch, we've tackled with that same consistent execution of how we properly splice in a single piece of wire. I hope this technique gives you guys another tool in your toolbox to be able to address all of those unique scenarios that we constantly encounter on every tree that we work on. This technique is a universal technique, whether we're talking about deciduous, whether we're talking about pines, junipers, spruce. It's a very, very effective technique on the secondary-tertiary level to be able to wire one single branch with one piece of wire. I hope you guys apply this and use it well. Make sure you pay attention to the function and the aesthetics of every technique you utilize in your bonsai. If you do that, you're only going to get better and better and make more beautiful trees. Good luck, apply it wisely, and we'll see you guys next time. Thank you. 
